CITY CODE
of
IVINS CITY, UTAH
2007
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-13, passed 6-5-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Ivins City, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-13, passed June 5, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-02
An Ordinance of Ivins City, Utah, Amending City Code Provisions Governing
Publication of Newly Enacted City Ordinances
WHEREAS the city council for Ivins City (the “City Council”) is authorized by
law to exercise its legislative powers through ordinances as are necessary for
carrying into effect the duties and powers of the City Council and as are
necessary and proper to provide for the safety and preserve the health, and
promote the prosperity, improve the morals, peace and good order, comfort, and
convenience of Ivins City and its inhabitants, and for the protection of
property in Ivins City;
WHEREAS the City Council has investigated and considered how newly enacted
ordinances should be published.
WHEREAS the City Council finds that newly enacted ordinances should be
published by following the provisions of Utah Code Section 10-3-711, which
require a municipality to publish a short summary of the ordinance as a class A
notice under Section 63G-30-102 of the Utah Code.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of Ivins City as follows:
Section 1. Amendment to Sections 2.01.305 through 307 of the Ivins City Code.
Section 2.01.305 through 2.01.307 of the Ivins City Code are hereby amended as
follows:
2.01.305: REQUIREMENTS AS TO FORM; EFFECTIVE DATE:
   (1)   Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be signed by
the mayor, or if he is absent, by the mayor pro tempore, or by a quorum of the
city council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be
void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated sections 10-3-704(1) through 10-3-704(4).
   (2)   Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication,
or thirty (30) days after final passage by the city council, whichever is
closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become effective at an
earlier or later date after publication if so provided in the ordinance.
   (3)   Ordinances which do not have an effective date shall become effective
twenty (20) days after publication, or thirty (30) days after final passage by
the city council, whichever is sooner.
2.01.306: PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES:
   (1)   All ordinances, except those enacted pursuant to Utah Code Annotated
sections 10-3-706 through 10-3-710, before taking effect, shall be deposited in
the office of the city recorder and a short summary of the ordinance published
in accordance with section 10-3-711 of the Utah Code.
   (2)   Any ordinance, code or book, other than the state code, relating to
building or safety standards, city functions, administration, control or
regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further publication
or posting, if reference is made to the code or book and at least one copy has
been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city
recorder prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the city council.
2.01.307: RECORDING, NUMBERING AND CERTIFICATION OF PASSAGE:
The city recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose,
all ordinances passed by the city council. The city recorder shall give each
ordinance a number, if the city council has not already done so. Immediately
following each ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the city recorder
shall make or cause to be made a certificate stating the date of passage and of
the date of publication. The record and memorandum, or a certified copy
thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and
publication of the ordinance or codification. Failure to comply with this
section shall not affect or render invalid any ordinance of the city.
Section 2. Severability. If any section, clause, or portion of this ordinance
is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall
not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 3. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately
upon passage and publication.
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE IVINS CITY COUNCIL, STATE OF UTAH, ON THE 16TH DAY OF
JANUARY, 2025. ALL COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT VOTED IN FAVOR. TWO COUNCIL MEMBERS
WERE ABSENT.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-05
An Ordinance of Ivins City, Utah,
Amending the Subdivision Ordinance to Remove Requirement for Installation of
Secondary Water Systems on New Development
WHEREAS the city council for Ivins City (the “City Council”) is authorized by
law to exercise its legislative powers through ordinances as are necessary for
carrying into effect the duties and powers of the City Council and as are
necessary and proper to provide for the safety and preserve the health, and
promote the prosperity, improve the morals, peace and good order, comfort, and
convenience of Ivins City and its inhabitants, and for the protection of
property in Ivins City;
WHEREAS before the City Council can pass an ordinance regulating land use the
planning commission for Ivins City (the “Planning Commission”) must consider
the regulation and conduct a public meeting regarding the proposed land use
regulation;
WHEREAS after conducting a public meeting regarding this ordinance on March 4,
2025 the Planning Commission recommended that the City Council approve this
ordinance;
WHEREAS the City Council has investigated and considered the fact that the
Washington County Water Conservancy District has changed its water supply plans
and has determined that it is more efficient to construct a treatment plant to
convert the water from Gunlock Reservoir/Santa Clara River into culinary grade
drinking water, and that there are enough developments with irrigation lines to
serve the reduced supply;
WHEREAS the City Council, in the exercise of its legislative authority, finds
that it is prudent and reasonable to remove the requirement to install
secondary/irrigation system main lines in new development, that the zoning text
amendment set forth herein is consistent with the Ivins City General Plan, and
that it is in the interest of the general welfare of the city and its residents
to approve the zoning text amendment set forth herein.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of Ivins City as follows:
Section 1. Amendment to Section 15.05.101 of the Ivins City Code. Section
15.05.101 of the Ivins City Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety as
follows:
See Exhibit A
Section 2. Severability. If any section, clause, or portion of this ordinance
is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall
not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 3. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately
upon passage and publication.
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE IVINS CITY COUNCIL, STATE OF UTAH, ON THE 20 TH DAY
OF MARCH, 2025, BY A UNANIMOUS VOTE. ALL COUNCIL MEMBERS WERE PRESENT AT THE
MEETING AND VOTED IN FAVOR.
EXHIBIT A
 
15.05.101: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The following improvements, utilities and services shall be provided by a
developer of a subdivision, condominiums, or any development that requires that
public services be provided to serve the development in accordance with the
general requirements listed above:
   (1)   A public street system including curb, gutters, sidewalks, street
paving, landscaped buffers and other necessary appurtenances in accordance with
the transportation master plan and other city ordinances. Private streets may
be alternatively provided where appropriate in accordance with the
transportation master plan. Access to the development shall be in accordance
with city adopted fire code.
   (2)   A culinary water system, including the mains, valves, blowoffs, fire
hydrants, pressure reducing valves and service laterals to each lot or parcel
in the project.
   (3)   A public sanitary sewer system, including the mains, manholes, and
service laterals which must be extended from the sewer main to each lot or
parcel in the project.
      (a)   When allowed by section 10.03.302 of this code, a developer may
require each individual subdivided lot to provide an advanced on site
wastewater treatment system in lieu of providing a public sanitary sewer
system.
   (4)   A subsurface water drain system shall be provided when deemed
necessary by site conditions to lower or remove shallow groundwater on the
site. The system shall be inspected and approved by the city and shall become
the responsibility of the homeowners and/or developer. The city shall not be
responsible for the maintenance or failure of the subsurface drains or for
damage resulting from inadequate, clogged, or defective drains.
   (5)   A storm drainage system and detention basins shall be installed as
required by the city. The drainage shall comply with drainage studies,
downstream facilities and capacities, and shall conform to the general plan and
the city's storm drain capital facilities plan. All developments are required
to provide safe and adequate drainage for the existing flows occurring on, or
passing through, the project.
   (6)   Provisions for other franchised utilities such as power, phone, gas,
and cable TV as necessary for the project. The developer is required to
coordinate the installation and maintenance of these utilities.
   (7)   Permanent monuments shall be furnished, accurately established and set
by a certified Utah licensed land surveyor at such points as necessary to
define and establish all lot lines and rights of way within the project.
   (8)   Street signs shall be installed in conformance with city standards.
   (9)   Streetlights in conformance with city standards shall be installed at
all street intersections, school and pedestrian crossings, and on public
streets at intervals and locations specified by the standard specifications.
   (10)   Fencing shall be provided where required in accordance with this
chapter and all other city ordinances.
   (11)   Extensions of off-site utilities and other facilities that are
necessary to provide services to the proposed project in accordance with
standards as required by the city.
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-08
 
An Ordinance of Ivins City, Utah, Amending Title 14 of the
Ivins City Code Entitled “Buildings and Construction”
 
WHEREAS, the Ivins City Council last adopted various International Codes by
Ordinance No. 2020-05; and
 
WHEREAS, the Utah legislature has adopted newer versions of the International
Construction and Fire Codes; and
 
WHEREAS, the Ivins City Council desires to update Title 14 of the Ivins City
Code entitled “BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION to also adopt these updated
versions;”
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF IVINS CITY, STATE OF
UTAH:
 
SECTION 1. Chapters 1 through 7 of Title 14 of the Ivins City Code are hereby
amended to now read as follows:
 
 
Title 14
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
 
CHAPTER 14.01
BUILDING CODE
14.01.101 International Building Code Adopted. The 2021 Utah State Building
Code, as adopted by the State of Utah, regulating and governing the conditions
and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for
human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building
Code, is hereby referred to and adopted as the Building Code for Ivins City,
together with the additions, insertions, and changes specifically set forth in
this Chapter.. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.01.102 Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Section 1612.3: Insert: Ivins City; August 23, 1982. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.01.103 Appendix J Adopted. The 2021 Appendix C and Appendix J of the
International Building Code entitled “GRADING” is hereby adopted as part of the
Building Code for Ivins City. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
CHAPTER 14.02
RESIDENTIAL CODE
14.02.101 International Residential Code Adopted. The 2021 Utah State
Residential Code based on the 2021 International Residential Code, Including
Appendix AE and AQ, as adopted by the State of Utah, regulating and governing
the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one and two family
dwellings and multiple single family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three
stories in height with separate means of egress; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code, is hereby
referred to and adopted as the Residential Code for Ivins City, together with
the additions, insertions, and changes specifically set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 2016-29, 2016)
14.02.102 Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section R101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Table R.301.2(1): Insert: Ground Snow Load 21 lbs. Roof Snow Load - 15 lbs.
Wind Speed (mph) - 100. Seismic Design Category C/D as per geotechnical report.
Weathering – moderate/severe. Frost Line Depth - 12 inches. Termite - moderate
to heavy. Decay - none/slight.
Section P2603.5.1: Insert: 12 inches; 12 inches. (Ord. 2016-29, 2016)
CHAPTER 14.03
ELECTRICAL CODE
14.03.101 International Electrical Code Adopted. The 2023 edition of the
National Electrical Code, as adopted by the State of Utah, is hereby adopted as
the Electrical Code for Ivins City. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
 
CHAPTER 14.04
PLUMBING CODE
14.04.101 International Plumbing Code Adopted. The 2021 edition of the Utah
State Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Utah, regulating and governing
the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of plumbing systems; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code, is hereby referred to
and adopted as the Plumbing Code for Ivins City, together with the additions,
insertions, and changes specifically set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 2020-05,
2020)
 
14.04.102 Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
 
Section 101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Section 106.6.2: Fee schedule deleted.
Section 106.6.3: Fee refunds deleted.
Section 108.4: Insert: Class B Misdemeanor; one thousand; six (6) months.
Section 108.5: Insert: one thousand; five hundred.
Section 305.4.1: Insert: 12 inches; 12 inches.
Section 903.1: Insert: 8 inches. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
 
CHAPTER 14.05
MECHANICAL CODE
14.05.101 International Mechanical Code Adopted. The 2021 edition of the Utah
State Mechanical Code, as adopted by the State of Utah, regulating and
governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Mechanical Code, is hereby
referred to and adopted as the Mechanical Code for Ivins City, together with
the additions, insertions, and changes specifically set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.05.102 Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Section 106.5.2: Fee schedule deleted.
Section 106.5.3: Fee refunds deleted.
Section 108.4: Insert: Class B Misdemeanor; one thousand; six (6) months.
Section 108.5: Insert: one thousand; five hundred. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
 
CHAPTER 14.06
FIRE CODE
14.06.101 International Fire Code Adopted. The 2021 edition of the
International Fire Code, as adopted by the State of Utah, regulating and
governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards
arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials
and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy
of buildings and premises in Ivins City and providing for the issuance of
permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code, is hereby
referred to and adopted as the Fire Code for Ivins City, together with the
additions, insertions, and changes specifically set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.06.102 Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Section 110.4: Insert: Class B Misdemeanor, $1,000.00, six (6) months.
Section 112.4: Insert: five hundred; one thousand. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.06.103  Appendices. The following Appendices published with the 2021 edition
of the International Fire Code are hereby adopted as part of the Fire Code for
Ivins City:
Appendix B, entitled “FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS;”
Appendix C, entitled “FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION;”
Appendix D, entitled “FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS,” except for the requirement
for fire lane signage. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
 
CHAPTER 14.07
FUEL AND GAS CODE
14.07.101 International Fuel Gas Code Adopted. The 2021 edition of the Utah
State Fuel Gas Code, as adopted by the State of Utah, regulating and governing
fuel and gas systems and gas-fired appliances; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code, is hereby
referred to and adopted as the Fuel Gas Code for Ivins City, together with the
additions, insertions, and changes specifically set forth in this Chapter.
(Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.07.102 Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Section 106.6.2: Insert: Fee schedule deleted.
Section 106.6.3: Insert: Fee refunds deleted.
Section 108.4: Insert: Class B Misdemeanor; one thousand; six (6) months.
Section 108.5: Insert: one thousand; five hundred. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
 
SECTION 2. Severability. If any section, clause or portion of this ordinance is
declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall not
be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect.
 
SECTION 3. Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective immediately
upon passage.
 
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE IVINS CITY COUNCIL, STATE OF UTAH, ON THE 3RD DAY OF
APRIL, 2025, BY A UNANIMOUS VOTE. ALL COUNCIL MEMBERS WERE PRESENT AT THE
MEETING AND VOTED IN FAVOR.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ivins City
 
Annexation Policy Plan
 
 
Adopted as an Amendment to the Ivins City General Plan
 
Ordinance 2025-09
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adoption Date:
April 17, 2025
 
 
 
 
 
 
Addendum to the General Plan
 
Ordinance Number 2025-09
 
 
Ivins City Annexation Policy Plan
 
WHEREAS, the State of Utah has enacted legislation that requires communities to
develop and adopt Annexation Policy Plans before annexing unincorporated lands
into their incorporated boundaries (10-2-401.5 UCA; and
 
WHEREAS, Ivins City desires to plan for the future expansion of its boundaries
in a manner that is consistent with its General Plan and in coordination with
Washington County; and
 
WHEREAS, Ivins City wishes to direct and manage growth in ways that will
preserve the future quality of life now enjoyed in Ivins City; and
 
WHEREAS, Ivins City is willing to consider annexation of surrounding lands that
are within its designated annexation areas to receive municipal services; and
 
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission and City Council have held duly noticed public
hearings according to Utah Law.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of Ivins City as follows:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1- General Considerations
 
Statement of Purpose.
 
This document is written to provide Ivins City with a growth plan that shall
guide the development and expansion of the municipal boundaries through
annexation in a manner that is consistent with the General Plan of Ivins City
and the laws of the State of Utah.
 
It is the intent of this Annexation Policy Plan to protect and enhance the
private property rights of property owners within the municipal boundaries and
in the unincorporated areas surrounding Ivins City. It is further the intent
that the regulations contained herein shall encourage sound planning practices
and reduce the major sources of problems usually associated with the annexation
process.
 
This plan is not a declaration of intent to annex any land. It is a proactive
planning tool that allows Ivins to retain a voice in what occurs around its
borders, protect its character and prepare for future requests by property
owners who may seek annexation. The plan identifies land where annexation could
be considered if requested by the property owner and if it aligns with City
goals.
 
Legislative Policy.
 
The following statements are reflected in the State Law governing annexations
and are included as a part of this Annexation Policy Plan:
 
1.   Sound development within Cities and Counties is essential to the continued
economic development of the State of Utah;
2.   Municipalities are primarily created to provide urban type governmental
services essential for development and for the protection of public health,
safety and welfare in residential, commercial, and industrial areas, and in
areas under-going development;
3.   Municipal boundaries should be extended, in accordance with specific
standards, to include areas where urban-type governmental services and
facilities are needed and can be provided for the protection of public health,
safety and welfare, and to avoid the inequities of double-taxation and the
proliferation of special service districts;
4.   Areas annexed to municipalities in accordance with appropriate standards
should receive the services provided by the annexing municipality consistent
with a planned extension policy;
5.   Areas annexed to municipalities should include all of the urbanized
unincorporated areas contiguous to municipalities, securing the residents
within these areas a voice in the selection of their government and the
services they shall receive;
6.   Decisions with respect to municipal boundaries and urban development need
to be made with adequate consideration of the effect of the proposed actions on
adjacent areas and on the interests of other government units, on the need for
the cost of local government services, the ability to deliver the services
under the proposed actions, and on factors related to population growth and
density of the geographic area; and
7.   The economic and financial impacts of annexation to existing
municipalities must be evaluated to ensure that annexation is financially
desirable.
 
 
 
Chapter 2-Procedure for Adopting Annexation Policy Plan
10-2-401.5 UCA, 1953
 
The duties of the Planning Commission in the adoption of the Annexation Policy
Plan are as follows:
 
1.   Prepare a proposed Annexation Policy Plan as provided herein.
2.   Hold a public meeting to allow affected entities to examine the proposed
Annexation Policy Plan and to provide input on it.
3.    Provide notice of the public meeting to each affected entity at least 14
days before the meeting.
4.    Accept and consider any additional written comments from affected
entities until ten days after the public meeting.
5.   Make any modifications to the proposed annexation policy plan the Planning
Commission considers appropriate, based on input provided at or within ten days
after the public meeting.
6.   In addition to the public meeting mentioned above, hold an official Public
Hearing on the proposed Annexation Policy Plan providing reasonable public
notice, including notice to each affected entity, at least 14 days before the
date of the hearing.
7.   Following the hearing, make any modifications to the proposed Annexation
Policy Plan the Planning Commission considers appropriate, based on input
provided at the public hearing.
8.   Submit its recommended Annexation Policy Plan to the City Council for
their public hearing.
 
The duties of the City Council in the adoption of the Annexation Policy Plan
are as follows:
 
1.   Hold a public hearing on the Annexation Policy Plan recommended by the
Planning Commission.
2.   Provide reasonable notice, including notice to each affected entity, of
the public hearing at least 14 days before the date of the hearing.
3.   After the public hearing, make any modifications to the recommended
Annexation Policy Plan that the City Council considers appropriate, and
4.   Adopt the recommended annexation policy plan, with or without
modifications.
 
 
 
Chapter 3. Contents of this Annexation Policy Plan:
 
1.   Expansion Area Map:
 
A map of the Expansion Area is included in this Annexation Policy Plan and made
a part by reference. This map outlines the boundaries of each area outside, but
adjacent to, the Ivins City municipal boundary, that may be considered for
annexation. The Expansion Area Map shows the area where the City can provide
municipal services. The map also includes areas of influence that impact
watershed areas, wetlands areas, sensitive lands, etc. Even though the
properties are designated on the Expansion Area Map as “Expansion Area” there
is no guarantee that the annexation request will be approved by Ivins City. Any
petition for annexation may require additional requirements than those
contained in the current Annexation Policy Plan.
 
This plan is not a declaration of intent to annex any land. It is a proactive
planning tool that allows Ivins to retain a voice in what occurs around its
borders, protect its character and prepare for future requests by property
owners who may seek annexation. The plan identifies land where annexation could
be considered if requested by the property owner and if it aligns with City
goals.
 
 
2.   The following criteria shall guide the City’s decisions regarding
annexation petitions:
 
a.   The character of the community.
Reference the General Plan Goals and Objectives and the Mission Statement or
Vision of the Community.
 
b.   The need for municipal services.
   The need for services shall be outlined on the petition for annexation by
the petitioners as well as their recommendations for how these services are to
be provided. The Council shall determine what services are actually needed as
well as how and when they are to be provided and financed.
 
   c.   Plans for extension of municipal services.
The City plans to provide services economically within its boundaries first. A
map of existing streets and waterlines is included on the Annexation Plan Map.
As streets are built they must conform to the master street plan. As new
streets are built in annexed areas, they shall conform to the master street
plan. Projected streets, water-lines, sewer plans, parks, etc. shall be
projected as needs dictate and shall be included in the Capital Facilities
Plan.
 
d.   How the services shall be financed.
A long-range financing plan shall be developed consistent with the General Plan
and the Capital Facilities Plan to extend services to new areas. A uniform
financing plan that outlines the cost of providing new services to annexed
areas shall be developed with each annexation, as well as how these costs shall
be met. The cost to provide new services to annexed areas shall be financed by
the lands in that area unless otherwise determined by the City Council after
public hearing.
 
e.   An estimate of the tax consequences.
The residents petitioning for annexation shall prepare a report showing the tax
consequences to properties covered by the annexation and present these with the
petition for annexation. The tax impact within the municipal boundaries shall
be prepared by the City, and presented as a final report on the tax
consequences before a final decision is made on annexation.
 
f.   The interests of all affected entities.
The following is a list of the public and private entities including the
Washington County School District, Washington County, Washington County Water
Conservancy District, City of St. George, and City of Santa Clara within the
Expansion Area, the services they provide, and the possible impact on them as
annexations occur.
 
Washington County . Washington County provides limited road, public safety,
court and other general government services. Washington County’s policy has
been that municipal type development should occur in cities.
 
Washington County School District . The Washington County School District
provides school service to Ivins City and the Expansion Area.
 
City of Santa Clara . Ivins City and the City of Santa Clara share a common
boundary on the south.
 
St. George City . The City of St. George provides, under contract, water and
sewer services to Ivins City and may, under negotiated contract, provide
services to the Expansion Area.
 
Washington County Water Conservancy District. The Washington County Water
Conservancy District provides, under contract, water to Ivins City and may,
under negotiated contract, provide water to the Expansion Area.
 
Bureau of Land Management (BLM). The Bureau of Land Management manages land
within the Expansion Area.
 
School and Institutional Trust Lands Administration (SITLA). SITLA owns land
within the Expansion Area.
 
Shivwits Band of Paiutes . A sovereign, federally recognized tribe located
adjacent to Ivins City on the west side.
 
g.   Avoiding Gaps, Overlaps, Islands, or Peninsulas.
 
The City shall avoid the creation of gaps, overlaps, islands, and peninsulas as
annexations occur.
 
 
h.   20-Year Population Projection.  
 
The 2020 Census reported a population of 8,978 for Ivins City, with a total of
3,992 housing units, 3,389 of which were occupied, resulting in an average
household size of 2.65. The city has continued to grow, with the current 2024
estimate at 10,276. The following chart illustrates the projected growth.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4828_10465x5156.jpg]
 
The City has conducted an analysis projecting the full buildout of the City,
including projected annexations in Areas 2 and 5, but excluding Areas 1, 3, and
4, as the likelihood of annexation for these areas is extremely low. The
analysis estimates the City's full buildout population to be 19,500, with
growth projections indicating that this population will be reached between 2043
and 2065.
i.   Projected Costs of Infrastructure.
 
Ivins City will include costs of servicing the Expansion Areas in a Capital
Facilities Plan. The costs of over-sizing lines and facilities will be included
in the City’s Impact Fee Analysis. The costs to install lines and facilities in
the Expansion Area itself will, in most cases, be borne by the developer.
 
j.   Full Development Plan.  
 
The City shall encourage development within the municipal boundaries in an
effort to utilize undeveloped lands. Policies shall be adopted to encourage the
appropriate use of undeveloped lands within the City and within the Expansion
Area consistent with the General Plan.
 
k.   Consistency with General Plan.
 
All annexations shall be in accordance with the Ivins City General Plan. The
goals and objectives of the Ivins City General Plan shall guide all development
and consideration of annexation.
 
l.   Inclusion of Agricultural, Forest, Recreational, Wildlife Areas.
 
∙   Agricultural Areas.  
 
Agricultural areas are included in the Expansion Area and shall be considered
for annexation when it is consistent with the Agriculture Protection Act of
Utah, the General Plan, and the desires of the owners of said property. In
general, agricultural areas shall be protected from development, unless it is
the desire of the property owners of said lands to develop.
 
∙   Natural Desert Areas.  
 
Natural Desert areas in highly visible areas such as hillsides shall be
considered for annexation with consideration for preservation and beauty of
surrounding environment consistent with the General Plans of the City. Hillside
protection or cluster housing shall be used to partially preserve these areas
when being considered for annexation.
 
∙   Recreational Areas.  
 
Recreational areas shall be considered for annexation to the City with the
intent that municipal services are needed and can be provided effectively
consistent with the General Plans.
 
∙   Wildlife Areas.  
 
As annexations occur into these areas, a balance between the needs of people
and the needs wildlife shall be considered and appropriate steps taken to plan
ahead for these.
 
   m.      Contiguous to Municipal Boundaries.
 
         All proposed annexations shall be contiguous to the boundaries of the
City.
 
n.   Expansion Area Defined. See Expansion Area Map.
 
Chapter 4-Definition of Terms
 
Affected Entity.  Affected entity means:
a.   A county in whose unincorporated area the area proposed for annexation is
located;
b.   An independent special district under Title 17A, Chapter 2, Independent
Special Districts, whose boundaries include any part of an area proposed for
annexation;
c.   A school district whose boundaries include any part of an area proposed
for annexation; and
d.   A municipality whose boundaries are within 1/2 mile of an area proposed
for annexation.
Area of Influence.  Area of Influence means that geographic area surrounding a
municipality that is defined by the community as contributing to and creating
the environment in which the community exists, i.e. scenery, mountains, rivers
and streams, wildlife, farms and agricultural lands, etc. This area of
influence shall generally be consistent with the outer tier of the Expansion
Area Map, but in some cases may not be due to unique characteristics that do
not follow geographic boundaries.
 
Agriculture Protection Area. Agriculture protection area means that area
designated within the Expansion Area according to Title 17, Chapter 41,
Agriculture Protection Area, as an Agriculture Protection Area.
 
Annexation petition. Annexation petition means a petition under Section 10-2-
403 proposing the annexation to a municipality of a contiguous, unincorporated
area that is contiguous to the municipality.
 
Commission. Commission means a Boundary Commission established under Section
10-2-409 for the county in which the property that is proposed for annexation
is located.
 
Contact Sponsor . Contact Sponsor means that person listed on the annexation
petition as the Contact Sponsor.
 
Expansion Area.  Expansion Area means the unincorporated area that is
identified in an annexation policy plan under Section 10-2-401.5 as the area
that the municipality anticipates annexing in the future.
 
Municipal Selection Committee. Municipal Selection Committee means a committee
in each County composed of the Mayor of each municipality within that County.
 
Personal Representative. Personal Representative means the signature of a
person signing a petition or protest in a representative capacity on behalf of
an owner. This signature is invalid unless the person's representative capacity
and the name of the owner the person represents are indicated on the petition
or protest with the person's signature, and the person provides documentation
accompanying the petition or protest that substantiates the person's
representative capacity. A duly appointed personal representative may sign a
petition or protest on behalf of a deceased owner.
 
Petitioner. Petitioner means the owner of real property, for purposes of each
provision of this part, which requires the owners of private real property
covering a percentage or majority of the total private land area within an area
to sign a petition or protest.
 
Petition Sponsors. Petition Sponsors mean five (5) petitioners or qualified
personal representatives of petitioners of an annexation petition that are
designated by the petitioners as Petition Sponsors, one of whom is designated
as the Contact Sponsor.
 
Private. Private, with respect to real property, means property not owned by
the United States or any agency of the federal government, the state, a county,
a municipality, a school district, a special district under Title 17A, Special
Districts, or any other political subdivision or governmental entity of the
State.
 
County. County means Washington County.
 
Urban Development. Urban Development means:
a.   A housing development with more than 15 residential “equivalent” units and
an average density greater than one residential unit per acre; or
b.   A commercial or industrial development for which cost projections
exceed $750,000 for all phases.
 
Owner of Real Property. Owner of Real Property means the recorded title owner
according to the records of the County Recorder.
                    
Qualifying Parcel. Qualifying Parcel means a parcel of real property
represented in the calculation of the required percentage or majority of
petitioners owning said parcel, unless the petition or protest is signed by
owners representing a majority ownership interest in that parcel; or if the
parcel is owned by joint tenants or tenants by the entirety, 50% of the number
of owners of that parcel;
 
Value of Private Real Property. Value of Private Real Property means the value
as determined according to the last assessment roll for County taxes before the
annexation petition or protest.
Chapter 5-Expansion Area Map and Definitions
 
The adoption of a geographic boundary or Expansion Area is provided to
delineate the point beyond which the City does not plan to provide services.
This Expansion Area Map is adopted as a part of the General Plan and should not
be changed without compelling reasons. It is intended to be a fixed boundary
for the life of the General Plan and essentially defines the community’s “Area
of Influence”.
 
The growth areas of the City shall be of sufficient size to accommodate planned
commercial and residential growth consistent with the General Plan, taking into
account the following:
1.   Land with natural constraints, i.e. sensitive lands, water sheds, water
drainage, cliffs, steep slopes, views, vegetation preservation, etc.
2.   Agricultural land to be preserved.
3.   Greenbelt and open space lands.
4.   Public street projections and reservations.
5.   Existing projects with development potential.
6.   Land use patterns already created by existing subdivisions, recorded
plats, or large lot divisions, etc.
7.   Plans to continue the building pattern in existing developments to their
completion.
8.   Preservation of public infrastructure and water sources.
9.   Needs for preservation of open-space, parks, wildlife habitat.
 
The following factors shall be considered in determining the precise location
of Expansion Area Boundaries:
1.   Geographic, topographic, and manmade features;
2.   The location of public facilities;
3.   Availability of needed services; limits of capacities and extension
limits.
4.   Jurisdictional boundaries of other public entities and improvement
districts.
5.   Location of natural resource lands and critical areas.
 
Planning growth in this way shall provide the following advantages to the City:
1.   Encourage an efficient development pattern.
2.   Identify and maintain protected Agricultural Areas.
3.   Avoid unnecessary and premature consumption of land that cannot be
developed or serviced efficiently.
4.   Provide a focused plan for preserving existing pubic facilities and
capital investments and extension of public facilities in the future.
5.   Develop and maintain fiscal integrity in city operations by encouraging
the full utilization of existing streets and other public facilities.
6.   Diversify and strengthen the tax base of the community.
7.   Encourage the development of local job opportunities.
8.   Protect and preserve natural and environmental features that are desired
by the community.
9.   Provide for future developments by advanced mapping of needed facilities
and services.
10.   Facilitate development by providing sufficient areas within each tier and
planned zones appropriate to support anticipated populations.
 
General description of land, ownership, and potential land uses in each of four
areas on the Expansion Area Map are described herein.
 
 Area 1 - 760 acres.
Area 1 includes undeveloped land and some portions of the land may be suitable
for residential development similar to the residential development in the
Kayenta subdivision of Ivins City. Land within Area 1 is managed by the Bureau
of Land Management and is within the boundary of the Red Cliffs Desert Reserve
and the Red Cliffs National Conservation area.
 
Land within Area 1 has development constraints including hillsides, geological
hazards, and those imposed by the Red Cliffs Desert Reserve and the Red Cliffs
National Conservation Area.
 
Land within Area 1 would be carefully planned to meet the objectives of the
Ivins City General Plan.
 
Even though this area is included in the annexation plan, the chance of
annexation in this area is extremely low since it would require change to
federal laws. The City’s population projections do not include any anticipated
growth in this area. If this area ever did annex into the city, it is the
City’s long-term plan to retain this area as open space.
 
Area 2 – 2587 acres.
Area 2 includes primarily undeveloped land. There are a few homes in Area 2
that are currently serviced by Ivins City for public safety needs and receive
water services from the KWU private water system.. There is some privately
owned land currently being used for agriculture. The largest portion of the
land is managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
 
It is anticipated that some of the private land within Area 2 will be suitable
for development. It is also anticipated that some of the private land would be
suitable for agriculture. Ivins City encourages a variety of development types
and this land may be suitable for residential, commercial, industrial,
recreation, agriculture, cultural, historical, and protection of open space
needs of Ivins City.
 
Ivins City has stringent regulations regarding development on sensitive lands.
Much of Area 2 includes sensitive lands including hillsides, washes, rivers,
and geologic, historic and cultural areas. In addition, any development on this
land that is not subject to stringent sensitive land development regulations
would greatly impact Ivins City’s view shed.
 
Area 2 includes lands designated as part of the Santa Clara River Reserve, a
cooperative agreement and partnership between Ivins City, the Bureau of Land
Management, and Santa Clara. The Santa Clara River Reserve encompasses
approximately 6,500 acres and a portion of that acreage is included in Area 2.
The goal of the Santa Clara River Reserve is “to foster a sense of place that
balances the need for resource protection with the needs of multiple user
groups’ recreational desires, provides educational opportunities that inform
the public about sensitive resources and cultural heritage, and remains
responsive to community interests”. This goal is in harmony with Ivins City’s
sensitive land development objects. Ivins City is geographically located to
provide the required services for the Santa Clara River Reserve and all lands
included in Area 2.
 
Along with the Santa Clara River Reserve designation, the majority of the BLM
land in Area 2 has been identified as Areas of Critical Environmental Concern
(ACEC), which means that the BLM has identified the area as possessing
important resources or unique scenic landscapes.
 
Land included in Area 2 has development constraints including hillsides,
washes, geological hazards, and additional environment constraints for
endangered species, archeological, and cultural preservation. Ivins City is
dedicated to the preservation of the natural resources of this area, including
the archeological and cultural sites.
 
Land included in Area 2 is currently being served by Ivins City for Public
Safety requirements. Access in Area 2 is provided most efficiently from Ivins
City. Infrastructure and City services to Area 2 are a logical extension of
existing infrastructure and services provided by Ivins City.
 
Land within Area 2 would be carefully planned to meet the objectives of the
Ivins City General Plan. The property owners would be responsible for the
installation of all necessary and required municipal utility services and
infrastructure.
 
The City has considered future annexations in this area when calculating
population projections. Since these areas have not yet been annexed, no
approved land use plan currently exists. For the purposes of population
projections and calculating buildout populations, it is assumed that private
properties on hillsides will develop with low to very low residential
densities, while those on more moderate slopes will develop with medium
residential densities.
Area 3 – 427 acres.
Area 3 is land that is presently within the municipal boundaries of Santa
Clara. This land is a combination of developed and undeveloped areas. As the
area develops, there may be a need to adjust the boundaries of the two cities
to be fit the development.
 
Land included in Area 3 has development constraints including areas of lava
rock. Ivins City is dedicated to the preservation of the natural resources of
this area.
 
Land included in Area 3 is currently being served by Ivins City for Public
Safety requirements. Infrastructure and City services to Area 3 are a logical
extension of existing infrastructure and services provided by Ivins City.
 
Land within Area 3 would be carefully planned to meet the objectives of the
Ivins City General Plan.
 
Ivins City does not anticipate or plan for any annexations in this area but
leaves the area in the plan for the case that there may be a future need to
adjust city boundaries.
 
Area 4 – 880 acres.
Area 4 is land that is adjacent to Ivins City and inside of Snow Canyon State
Park, the Red Cliffs Desert Reserve, and the Red Cliffs National Conservation
Area. This land abuts existing residential development and may be suitable for
residential development.
 
Land included in Area 4 has development constraints including hillsides,
washes, geological hazards, and additional environment constraints for
endangered species.
 
Land within Area 4 would be carefully planned to meet the objectives of the
Ivins City General Plan. The property owners would be responsible for the
installation of all necessary and required municipal utility services and
infrastructure.
 
It is unlikely that this land would be annexed since it would require
modifications to federal and state laws. The City’s population projections do
not include any growth in this area. If this area ever did annex into the city,
it is the City’s long-term plan to retain this area as open space.
 
Area 5 – 55 acres.
 
Area 5 consists of privately held land on the south side of Old Highway 91,
adjacent to the planned Graveyard Wash Reservoir. This area is included in the
annexation plans for the City of Santa Clara. Ivins City would not oppose
annexation to Santa Clara if the private lands were developed as a recreational
facility adjacent to the future reservoir. However, if the land develops
residentially or commercially, it would be more appropriate for it to be
incorporated into Ivins City for the following reasons: Old Highway 91 lies
within Ivins City, making utility services more readily available, and
properties north of the highway are already part of Ivins City. Development
within Ivins City would ensure a consistent character and cohesive entrance
into the city.
 
This area does face some construction constraints due to Graveyard Wash and its
steep slopes. Property owners would be responsible for installing all required
municipal utility services and infrastructure.
 
This area is planned for annexation into the City and has been included in the
analysis of future population projections.
 
Area 6 – 215 acres.
 
Area 6 includes land within the municipal boundaries of the City of St. George,
adjacent to the eastern border of Ivins City, that may require minor boundary
adjustments as development progresses. This area consists of red sandstone
cliffs, portions of the Sand Hollow Wash, and hillsides that would be subject
to Ivins City's Sensitive Lands Ordinance. The ordinance mandates preservation
and protections as outlined in its provisions.
 
Annexations are not anticipated for this area; therefore, calculations of
future buildout populations do not include it.
 
Expansion Area Boundary
 
The Expansion Area Boundary is intended to establish the outer boundary beyond
which Ivins City does not anticipate expanding into, or the outer boundary of
its Expansion Area or Area of Influence. This Expansion Area Boundary
identifies the areas the community does not anticipate expanding beyond and
define the “Area of Influence” of the community.
 
 
Expansion Area Map to be an Overlay.
 
The Expansion Area Map is to be an overlay on the Land Use Map of the General
Plan of the City and the County and shall provide a view of present and future
uses of land for each City, to make efficient use of resources 20 years into
the future. This should be updated periodically, along with the General Plans.
 
Agriculture Protected Areas.
 
The Expansion Area Map shall recognize the Agriculture Protection Area Map
adopted by the County. Future development of these lands shall be planned in
coordination with the property owners in these areas within the intent of
protecting agricultural lands consistent with right to farm laws.
 
Chapter 6-Annexation Limitations-
10-2-402 UCA, 1953
      
Contiguous Area:
 
Ivins City shall only consider lands for annexation that meet the following
criteria:
1.   It is a contiguous area according to the definition herein.
2.   It is contiguous to the municipality.
3.   The annexation shall not leave or create an unincorporated island or
peninsula; and
4.   The area is within the proposed annexing municipality’s Expansion Area.
 
Necessity of Petition:
 
A formal petition requesting annexation shall be filed with the City Recorder
before an annexation shall be considered, except as provided in Section 10-2-
418 UCA, regarding the annexation of peninsulas, islands or area where the City
is providing services as defined by law, in which case the City can initiate
the annexation petition.
 
Whole Parcels:
 
An annexation under this part may not include part of a parcel of real property
and exclude part of that same parcel unless the owner of that parcel has signed
the annexation petition.
      
Revenue Purposes-Not Sole Reason:
 
It shall be the stated policy of Ivins City to not annex an unincorporated area
for the sole purpose of acquiring municipal revenue.
 
Limitation of Other Municipality’s Growth
 
Ivins City shall not annex unincorporated areas in an effort to retard the
capacity of another municipality to annex the same or a related area unless the
municipality has the ability and intent to provide benefit to the annexed area
by providing municipal services.
       
County Limitation of Urban Developments
 
Pursuant to State Law, it is understood and agreed that Washington County shall
not approve residential or commercial development within the City’s Expansion
Area unless:
 
1.   the County notifies the municipality of the proposed development and the
City consents in writing to the development; or
2.   within 90 days after the County’s notification of the proposed
development, the municipality submits to the County a written objection to the
County’s approval of the proposed development and the County responds in
writing to the municipality’s objections and the concerns are resolved to their
mutual satisfaction.
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7-Annexation Procedure
 
Annexation Petition:
 
1.   An annexation process shall begin with an Annexation Petition by those
desiring
annexation.
      
2.   Each petition shall be filed with the City Recorder, and shall contain the
signatures of the owners of private real property that:
(a)    is located within the area proposed for annexation;
(b)   covers a majority of the private land area within the area proposed for
annexation;
(c)   covers 100% of the private land area that is within an agriculture
protection area created under Title 17, Chapter 41, Agriculture Protection
Area; and
(d)   is equal in value to at least 1/3 of the value of all private real
property within the area proposed for annexation;
3.   If all the real property within the area proposed for annexation is owned
by a public entity other than the federal government, the owner(s) of all the
publicly owned real property must sign the petition;
4.   The petition shall be accompanied by: (a) an accurate and recordable map,
prepared by a licensed surveyor, of the area proposed for annexation; and (b) a
copy of the notice sent to affected entities and a list of the affected
entities to which notice was sent.
5.   The petition shall designate up to five of the signers of the petition as
sponsors, one of whom shall be designated as the Contact Sponsor and indicate
the mailing address of each sponsor.
6.   A petition shall not propose the annexation of all or part of an area
which has
already been proposed for annexation to another municipality where the petition
has not been denied, rejected, or granted.
 
Annexation Boundaries Identified:
 
If practicable and feasible, the boundaries of an area proposed for annexation
shall be drawn:
 
1.   along the boundaries of existing special districts for sewer, water, and
other services;
2.   along the boundaries of school districts whose boundaries follow city
boundaries or school districts adjacent to school districts whose boundaries
follow city boundaries;
3.    along the boundaries of other taxing entities;
4.   to eliminate islands and peninsulas of territory that is not receiving
municipal-type services;
5.    to facilitate the consolidation of overlapping functions of local
government;
6.   to promote the efficient delivery of services;
7.   to encourage the equitable distribution of community resources and
obligations.
 
Filing With the City Council:
 
On the date of filing, the petition sponsors shall deliver or mail a copy of
the
petition to:
 
1.   the City Recorder; and
2.   the County Clerk in which the area proposed for annexation is located.
 
Acceptance or Rejection:
 
The City Council has the option to:
 
1.   deny a petition filed, or
2.   accept the petition for further consideration under this part and forward
it to the City Recorder for Certification as provided herein.
 
A petition shall be considered to have been accepted for further consideration
if The Council fails to act to deny or accept the petition at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Council that is at least 14 days after the
date the petition was filed.
 
If the Council denies a petition, it shall, within five days of the denial,
mail written notice of the denial to the Contact Sponsor and the County Clerk,
stating the reasons for doing so.
 
If the Council accepts the petition, or is considered to have accepted the
petition, the City Recorder shall within thirty (30) days of that acceptance,
consult with the County Clerk and City Attorney to determine whether the
petition meets the requirements of law, certify the petition, and mail or
deliver written notification of the certification to the Council, the Contact
Sponsor, and the County Commission.
 
Re-filing of Petitions:
 
If the City Recorder determines that the petition fails to meet any of the
necessary requirements, the petition shall be rejected, and written
notification stating the reasons for the rejection shall be mailed or delivered
to the Council, the Contact Sponsor, and the County Commission.
 
If the City Recorder rejects a petition, the petition may be modified to
correct the deficiencies for which it was rejected and then refiled.
 
If a petition is refiled after having been rejected by the City Recorder, the
refiled petition shall be treated as a newly filed petition.
        
Petition Certification:
 
If the City Recorder determines that the petition meets the requirements of
law, the City Recorder shall certify the petition and mail or deliver written
notification of the certification to the Council, the Contact Sponsor, and the
County Commission.
      
Notice of certification – Publishing and providing notice of petition.
 
After receipt of the notice of certification from the City Recorder, the
Council shall:
 
1.   publish a notice at least once a week for three successive weeks,
beginning no later than ten days after receipt of the notice of certification,
in a newspaper of general circulation within the area proposed for annexation
and the unincorporated area within ½ mile of the area proposed for annexation;
and
2.   within 20 days of receipt of the notice of certification, mail written
notice to each affected entity.
 
Notices of Petition Certification:
              
The notice of certification shall:
   
1.   state that a petition has been filed with the City proposing the
annexation of an area;
2.   state the date of the Council’s receipt of the notice of certification;
3.   describe the area proposed for annexation in the annexation petition;
4.   state that the complete annexation petition is available for inspection
and copying at the office of the City Recorder;
5.   state in conspicuous and plain terms that the City may grant the petition
and annex the area described in the petition unless, within the time required,
a written protest to the annexation petition is filed with the City and the
County Commission, and
6.   state the address of the County Boundary Commission, or, if one has not
yet been created, the address of the County Clerk, where a protest to the
annexation petition may be filed.
 
Such notice shall state the deadline for filing a written protest in terms of
the actual date rather than by reference to the statutory citation.
 
Annexation of an island or peninsula without a petition – Notice – Hearing.
 
The Council may initiate annexations of an unincorporated area under this
section without an annexation petition if:
 
1.   the area to be annexed consists of one or more unincorporated islands
within, or
unincorporated peninsulas contiguous to, the City;
2.   the majority of each island or peninsula consists of residential or
commercial development;
3.   the area proposed for annexation requires the delivery of municipal-type
services; and
4.   the municipality has provided most or all of the municipal-type services
to the area for more than one year.
 
The Council may also initiate annexations of an unincorporated area under this
section without an annexation petition if:
 
1.   the area to be annexed consists of one or more unincorporated islands
within the City, each of which has fewer than 500 residents; and
2.   the City has provided one or more municipal-type services to the area for
at least one year.
 
The Council may annex a portion of an island or peninsula, leaving
unincorporated the remainder of the unincorporated island or peninsula, if:
 
1.    in adopting the resolution, the Council determines that not annexing the
entire unincorporated island or peninsula is in the City’s best interest.
 
To annex an area under this section, the Council shall:

(a)   adopt a resolution indicating the Council’s intent to annex the area,
describing the area proposed to be annexed, and the reasons for the annexation;
(b)   publish notice at least once a week for three successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation within the area proposed for annexation;
 
(c)   hold a public hearing on the proposed annexation no earlier than 60 days
after the adoption of the resolution of annexation.
 
(d)   the first publication of the notice required shall be within 14 days of
the
Council’s adoption of the resolution of annexation.
 
Each notice required above shall:
 
1.   state that the Council has adopted a resolution indicating its intent to
annex the area proposed for annexation;
2.   state the date, time, and place of the public hearing;
3.   describe the area proposed for annexation, and
4.   state in conspicuous and plain terms that the Council shall annex the area
unless, at or before the public hearing, written protests to the annexation are
filed by the owners of private real property that: (a) is located within the
area proposed for annexation; (b) covers a majority of the total private land
area within the entire area proposed for annexation; and (c) is equal in value
to at least ½ the value of all private real property within the entire area
proposed for annexation.
 
Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the Council may adopt an ordinance
annexing the area proposed for annexation under this section unless, at or
before the hearing, written protests to the annexation have been filed with the
City Recorder by the owners of private real property that: (a) is located
within the area proposed for annexation; (b) covers a majority of the total
private land area within the entire area proposed for annexation; and (c) is
equal in value to at least ½ the value of all private real property within the
entire area proposed for annexation.
 
If protests are filed in a timely manner and comply with the requirements of
law, the municipal legislative body shall not adopt an ordinance annexing the
area proposed for annexation, and the annexation proceedings under this section
shall be considered terminated.
 
Protests:
 
1.   A protest to an annexation petition may be filed by the legislative body
or governing board of an affected entity.
 
2.   Each protest shall be filed no later than 30 days after the Council’s
receipt of the notice of certification from the City Recorder and shall be also
filed with the County Boundary Commission or the County Clerk when a Boundary
Commission has not been appointed yet.
3.   Each protest shall: (a) state the reasons for the protest of the
annexation petition and justification for the protest under the standards
established by state law and this Ordinance; (b) other information that the
Boundary Commission by rule requires or that the party filing the protest
considers pertinent; and(c) the name and address of a contact person who is to
receive notices sent by the Boundary Commission with respect to the protest
proceedings.
4.   The party filing a protest under this section shall on the same date
deliver or mail a copy of the protest to the City Recorder.
5.   Each clerk who receives a protest hereunder shall immediately notify the
County Commission of the protest and shall deliver the protest to the Boundary
Commission within five days of its creation..
 
Approval or Denial
 
1.   If a protest is filed hereunder, the Council may, at its next regular
meeting after expiration of 30 days after the Council’s receipt of the notice
of certification, deny the annexation petition or take no further action on the
annexation petition until after receipt of the Boundary Commission’s notice of
its decision on the protest.
2.   If the Council denies the annexation petition as a result of a protest,
the Council shall, within five days of the denial, send notice of the denial in
writing to: (a) the Contact Sponsor of the annexation petition; (b) the
Boundary Commission; and (c) each entity that filed a protest.
3.   If no timely protest is filed, the Council may grant the petition and, by
ordinance, annex the area that is the subject of the annexation petition.
4.   Before granting an annexation petition, the Council shall:
 
a.   hold a public hearing; and
b.   at least seven days before the public hearing, publish notice of the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and the area
proposed for annexation.
 
Chapter 8-Annexation Growth Plan Maps
   
   Expansion Area Map, including legal descriptions
   Land Use Plan
 
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE IVINS CITY COUNCIL, STATE OF UTAH, ON THE 17TH DAY OF
APRIL, 2025, ALL COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT VOTED IN FAVOR. ONE COUNCIL MEMBER WAS
ABSENT.
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-13
An Ordinance of Ivins City, Utah, Amending Section 2.02.104 of the Ivins City
Code Regarding the Residency Requirement for the
Position of City Manager
WHEREAS the city council for Ivins City (the “City Council”) is authorized by
law to exercise its legislative powers through ordinances as are necessary for
carrying into effect the duties and powers of the City Council and as are
necessary and proper to provide for the safety and preserve the health, and
promote the prosperity, improve the morals, peace and good order, comfort, and
convenience of Ivins City and its inhabitants, and for the protection of
property in Ivins City (see Utah Code § 10-8-84; Ivins City Code §§ 2.01.301,
et seq.)
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of Ivins City as follows:
Section 1. Amendment to Section 2.02.104 of the Ivins City Code. Section
2.02.104 of the Ivins City Code is hereby amended in its entirety as follows:
2.02.104: RESIDENCY: Residency in the city at the time of appointment of a city
manager shall not be required as a condition of appointment, but within one
hundred eighty (180) days after reporting for work the city manager must
permanently reside within the city boundaries or within 30 miles of the city
boundaries and maintain that residence as their primary residence during the
term of such employment.
Section 2. Severability. If any section, clause, or portion of this ordinance
is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall
not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect.
Section 3. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately
upon passage and publication.
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE IVINS CITY COUNCIL, STATE OF UTAH, ON THE 5TH DAY OF
JUNE, 2025, BY A UNANIMOUS VOTE. ALL COUNCIL MEMBERS WERE PRESENT AT THE
MEETING AND VOTED IN FAVOR.
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-14
An Ordinance of Ivins City, Utah,
Amending Section 16.12.103 of the Ivins City Code to Make Accessory Dwelling
Units More Easily Obtained
WHEREAS the city council for Ivins City (the “City Council”) is authorized by
law to exercise its legislative powers through ordinances as are necessary for
carrying into effect the duties and powers of the City Council and as are
necessary and proper to provide for the safety and preserve the health, and
promote the prosperity, improve the morals, peace and good order, comfort, and
convenience of Ivins
City and its inhabitants, and for the protection of property in Ivins City 
(see Utah Code § 10-8-84; Ivins City Code §§ 2.01.301, et seq.)
WHEREAS 
before the City Council can pass an ordinance regulating land use the planning commission
for Ivins City (the “Planning Commission”) must consider the regulation and
conduct a public meeting regarding the proposed land use regulation;
WHEREAS  after conducting a public meeting regarding this ordinance on
June 17, 2025, the Planning Commission recommended that the City Council
approve this ordinance;
WHEREAS 
the City Council has investigated and considered how to make accessory dwelling units
more available;
WHEREAS the City Council finds the purpose of allowing accessory dwelling units
(ADUs) is to provide additional housing in the community. This can also provide
supplementary income opportunities for property owners. ADUs are an important
tool for the housing goals of the City and
allow for alternative and flexible housing options for owner-occupied single-
family residences. Ivins City’s ADU goals will be supported by ordinances to
minimize the impact on neighboring properties
and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the property owners and residents of accessory dwelling
units. The ordinance standards are created to:
1.   Create new housing units while respecting the appearance, neighborhood character, and scale of
single-family residential developments.
2.   Provide more housing choices in residential zones throughout the city.
3.   Allow more efficient use of existing housing and large yards.
4.   Provide housing options for family caregivers, adult children, aging parents, and families seeking
smaller housing.
5.   Offer a means for residents, particularly seniors, single parents, and
families with grown
children, to remain in their homes and neighborhoods, and obtain extra income, security,
companionship, and services.
6.   Broaden the range of affordable housing options throughout the city.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED  by the City Council of Ivins City as follows:
Section 1. Amendment to Section 16.12.103 of the Ivins City Code. 
Section 16.12.103 of the Ivins City Code is hereby amended in its entirety as
follows:
See  Exhibit A
Section 2. Repeal of Section 16.12.105, 106 and 107 of the Ivins City Code. 
Sections 16.12.105, 106 and 107 of the Ivins City Code are hereby repealed.
Section 3. Severability.  If any section, clause, or portion of this ordinance
is declared invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force
and effect.
Section 4. Effective Date. 
This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon passage and publication.
 
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE IVINS CITY COUNCIL, STATE OF UTAH, ON THE 17TH DAY OF
JULY, 2025. ALL COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT VOTED IN FAVOR. ONE COUNCIL MEMBER WAS
ABSENT.
 
 
 
Exhibit A
 
16.12.103: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS, ACCESSORY GARAGES & CARPORTS, AND
ACCESSORY UNITS FOR AGRICULTURE:
The purpose of allowing accessory dwelling units (ADUs) is to provide
additional long-term
housing in the community. This can also provide supplementary income
opportunities for property owners. ADUs are an important tool for the housing
goals of the City and allow for alternative and flexible housing
options for owner-occupied single-family residences. Ivins City will regulate
ADUs through its city code to minimize the impact on
neighboring properties and to promote the health, safety and welfare of all
residents.
The following standards are created to:
1.  Create new housing units while respecting the appearance, neighborhood
character, and scale of single-family residential developments.
2.  Provide more housing choices in residential zones throughout the city.
3.  Allow more efficient use of existing housing and large yards.
4.  Provide housing options for family caregivers, adult children, aging
parents, and families seeking smaller housing.
5.  Offer a means for residents, particularly seniors, single parents, and
families with grown children, to remain in their homes and neighborhoods,
and obtain extra income, security, companionship, and services.
6.  Broaden the range of affordable housing options throughout the city.
Accessory dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that is located on a single-
family residential lot in addition to the primary dwelling
unit. No accessory dwelling unit may be allowed in any multi-family dwelling
or multi-family lot. No accessory dwelling unit may be allowed within any
zone on any lot that cannot satisfy the parking, setbacks, or lot coverage
requirements listed herein. A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit shall
be allowed in each owner-occupied single-family dwelling, or in a detached
accessory structure associated with a single-family dwelling.
   (1)   Definitions:
      (a)   EXTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADUE): A self-contained dwelling
unit located on an owner-occupied property that
is in a detached building providing complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, including a separate kitchen.
ADUEs are intended to provide long-term housing and shall not be used as
vacation rentals, short-term rentals, or transient lodging.
      (b)   INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADUI): An accessory dwelling
unit within the footprint or attached to a single-family residential building
providing
complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation including a separate
kitchen and complies with Chapter 11 of this Code and Utah State Law 10-9a-530.
ADUIs are intended to provide long-term housing and shall not be used as
vacation rentals, short term rentals, or transient lodging.
      (c)   GARAGE: A fully enclosed structure, either attached or detached,
used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles.
      (d)   CARPORT: A roofed structure, either attached or detached and open
on at least three sides, used for the parking of motor vehicles. Detached
carports shall be open on four (4) sides. The floor surface of attached and
detached carports can be concrete, gravel, or asphalt. There can be no enclosed
use above a carport.
      (e)   OWNER-OCCUPIED: No ADUI or ADUE shall be created, established
or occupied in a single-
family dwelling unless the owner of the property occupies either a portion of
the main dwelling or a ADUE on the same single-family lot.
For this section, the term “Owner-Occupied” shall be defined as full-time
residency within the home by the bona fide property owner(s) as shown on the
County Tax assessment website.
      (f)   SQUARE FEET: For the purpose of measuring the size of a structure,
“square feet” means the gross building area (GBA) which is the total floor area
of a building, measured from the exterior face of exterior walls. It does not
include exterior spaces such as porches, decks, patios, carports, or attached
garages.
   (2)   General Regulations:
      (a)   Except as provided in this Code, no ADUE or ADUI shall be erected,
raised,
moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in conformity
with Ivins City regulations.
      (b)   All ADUEs and
ADUIs hereafter erected in Ivins City shall comply with the
current standards, codes, and ordinances adopted by Ivins City.
      (c)   ADUEs and ADUIs may be authorized on all lots located only in
medium-density and low-density single-
family residential zones, provided all requirements of this title, all
other land use ordinances and the Building Code are met.
   (3)   Development Standards:
      (a)   The property owner, which shall include the titleholder,
must occupy either the
primary dwelling unit, the ADUE, or the ADUI as their permanent residence.
Applications for an ADUE or ADUI will require evidence of owner occupancy.
      (b)   ADUEs or ADUIs
shall not be sold separately from the primary housing unit.
      (c)   A maximum of one (1) ADUE may be established on each individual,
separate legal lot, such that the lot meets all
requirements, including minimum lot size, for the zoning district in
which the lot is located. A property can also have one ADUI.
      (d)   The design and size of the ADUE or ADUI shall conform to all
applicable
standards in the building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, fire, health and
other applicable codes.
      
(e)   Installing separate utility meters and separate addresses for the ADUE or ADUI
is prohibited. Addresses are described in subsection 11.
      (f)   The square footage of an ADUE shall not exceed one thousand (1000)
square feet. The minimum square footage is four hundred (400)
square feet. Either will be required to meet the lot coverage
requirements.  The ADUE square footage shall cover no more than 30% of the rear
yard area.
      
(g)   The occupants of the ADUE or ADUI shall not sublease any portion of the
ADUE or ADUI to other individuals.
      (h)   ADUEs and
ADUIs and the main dwelling must be on the same parcel and may not be
subdivided.
      (i)   ADUEs and
ADUIs shall be constructed of materials and colors designed to blend
with the primary building and meet Chapter 19 Design Requirements of the Ivins
City Code.
      (j)   A minimum of one (1) off-street parking space must be provided for
the ADUEs or ADUIs. ADUEs or
ADUIs greater than 600 square feet shall provide two (2) off-street parking
spaces.
      (k)   The construction of all ADUEs and
ADUIs shall meet all the requirements of the adopted City Building Code.
      (l)   An ADUE shall be located as a permanent structure on the lot. No
mobile homes,
travel trailers, boats, recreational vehicles, cargo containers, shipping crates,
boxes, campers, tents, or other temporary structures/vehicles shall be used
as an ADUE or any other type of accessory building.
      (m)   The lot proposed for an ADUE shall have an existing family dwelling
unit
established or approved prior to the consideration of the use applications to allow
the ADUE.
      (n)   No stormwater runoff from any accessory building shall be allowed
to run onto adjacent property.
      (o)   Accessory buildings, located on corner lots,
shall meet the required corner side
yard setback applicable in the zoning district in which the accessory
building is located.
      (p)   The ADUE or ADUI shall not be isold or conveyed and shall only be
allowed for long-term rental.
      (q)   Occupancy: ADUEs and ADUIs shall only be provided for the occupancy
of one family. Definition of Family is provided in 16.34.102
Definitions of General Purpose.
   (4)   Garages: See also section 16.12.104 of this chapter for garage
requirements.
      (a)   An accessory garage may be attached to or detached from the primary
building.
      (b)   All garages and other accessory buildings located within ten feet 
(10') of the primary building shall be considered attached and
part of the primary building and the
setback requirements applicable to the primary building shall apply.
      (c)   An accessory garage that is
detached from a primary building shall meet all
requirements for the location of a detached accessory building, as provided
herein.
      (d)   Accessory carports are allowed.
      (e)   Height: Detached carports shall be as per Table 16-1.
      (f)   No detached garage shall be greater in height than Table 16-1.
      (g)   No detached garage or other accessory buildings shall be located
in any required front yard.
      (h)   Metal carports are only approved in areas outlined in figure 12-2.
Figure 12-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4835_6026x5122.jpg]
      (i)   No ADUEs or ADUIs will be allowed on top of detached garages.
    (5)   Carports
      (a)   Maximum Size: Twelve feet (12') in width by fifty feet (50') in
length or calculated by the following formulas:
         (i)   The total square footage of any attached carport shall not be
greater than fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the footprint of the
primary structure excluding the attached garage on lots less than one-half (1/
2) acre, sixty percent (60%) on lots one-half (1/2) but less than one acre and
seventy percent (70%) on lots one acre or larger.
         (ii)   The total square footage of any detached carport shall not be
greater than fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the footprint of the
primary structure including the attached garage on lots less than one-half (1/
2) acre, sixty percent (60%) on lots one-half (1/2) acre to less than one acre,
and seventy percent (70%) on lots one acre or larger.
      (b)   Maximum Entry Height: Thirteen feet, six inches (13'6").
      (c)   Materials: Carports may be constructed of materials to match the
architectural style of the existing residence or shall be an engineered metal
building. Poles supporting a metal carport shall be of a color compatible with
the exterior of the primary structure.
      (d)   Minimum Setbacks: Comply with the minimum setback requirements for
the zoning district in which it is located.
      (e)   Front Of Carport: The front of the carport shall be located at
least three feet (3') back from the front of the structure on the side that it
is located on.
      (f)   Conformance With Building Code: Engineered to resist wind and
seismic loads in conformance with the most recently adopted edition of the
Building and/or Residential Code.
      (g)   Number Allowed: No more than one carport shall be permitted for
each dwelling unit.
      (h)   Materials Prohibited: Carports constructed of corrugated metal,
fiberglass panels, and fabric materials are expressly prohibited.
      (i)   Height: Carports may be up to the height of the primary residence
or up to fifteen feet (15') tall, whichever is lower. The carport may have a
flat roof.
   (6)   Accessory Units for Agriculture:
      (a)   Accessory
buildings, except for agricultural use accessory buildings, shall be
constructed of similar materials and colors
and be an architectural style designed to blend with the primary building or
meet Chapter 19 Design Requirements.
      (b)   Agricultural use accessory buildings, including barns and stables,
shall be constructed of materials and colors designed to blend with
the primary building or meet Chapter 19 Design Requirements.
      (c)   Accessory buildings used for the housing of domestic livestock
or fowl shall
comply with the requirements of section 16.12.113 of this chapter, and
specifically subsection 16.12.113(8) of this chapter.
      (d)   All
accessory buildings associated with a commercial kennel shall comply with
the requirements of section 16.12.115 of this chapter.
      (e)   Agricultural use accessory building constructed prior to
the primary building as allowed in the agriculture (A) zone and
residential agriculture (RA) zone shall be a
maximum of two thousand five hundred (2,500) total square footage and shall be
constructed of materials and colors that blend with the natural environment or
comply with Chapter 19 Design Requirements for this Code.
      (f)   Agricultural use accessory buildings larger than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet shall require a Class II Conditional Use Permit.
   (7)   Lot Coverage: To avoid the appearance of overcrowding in
residential zones and to protect setbacks and fire safety, the lot coverage of
an ADUE shall not exceed 30% of the rear yard area.
Rear yard means any property extending across the full width of a lot and
is more or less opposite to the front lot line. The depth of the rear
yard is the shortest distance from the rear line of the lot to the nearest wall
of the main building situated on the lot.
Example of Lot Coverage:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4838_8707x3641.jpg]
   (8)   Setbacks and Building Heights
      (a)   Height and Size Restrictions: All detached external accessory
buildings, including ADUEs shall be constructed according to Table 16-1. The
City Council may approve a special
exception to the height and size restrictions for ADUEs, as provided by
Chapter 28 of this title, with consideration given to larger lots than required by
the minimum lot size of the applicable residential zone,
of the architecture and style of the primary building.
      (b)   ADUEs shall be limited to one story with a maximum height of
fifteen feet (15’) for a pitched roof and thirteen feet (13’) for a flat roof,
but in no event exceeding the height of the primary dwelling.
TABLE 16-1
Setback Maximum     Maximum
        Wall Height Building Height
3'      8'          12'
4’    9’        13.5’
5'      10'         15'
6’    11’       16’
7’    12’       17’
8’    13’       18’
9’    14.5’     19’
10'     16'         20'
      (c)   All garages and other accessory buildings located within ten feet 
(10') of the primary building shall be considered attached and
part of the primary building and the
setback requirements applicable to the primary building shall apply.
Exception: ADUEs and the required parking for the ADUE
can be within 5 feet of the property line when
the lot is less than 20,000 square feet.
Note: Accessory buildings located closer than five feet (5') to the property
line shall be one hour fire resistant construction or shall be less than two
hundred (200) square feet as required by the International Residential Code.
   (9)   Permits Required:
      (a)   An accessory building with a maximum height of ten feet (10') and a
maximum size of less than two hundred (200) square feet
shall not require a building permit, provided all setback requirements for the
zoning district in which the accessory building is located are met.
      (b)   The zoning administrator is authorized to approve a
class II use application for an ADUE or ADUI that is not part of the
original construction of the single-
family dwelling unit to which it is associated, provided all requirements of this
section,
all other applicable requirements of all land use ordinances, and all other regulations
are met.
      (c)   The zoning administrator is authorized to approve a Class II use
application for an ADUE or ADUI that is part of construction associated with
a new single-family
dwelling, provided all requirements of this section, all other applicable requirements
of all land use ordinances, and all other regulations are met.
      (d)   Legalizing Existing ADUEs and ADUIs: Owners of ADUEs or ADUIs
existing on the effective date hereof, and
that have not been approved as required herein,
shall apply for approval within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective
date hereof.
      (e)   Noncomplying ADUEs and ADUIs: All owners of ADUEs or ADUIs
determined to be noncomplying structures, shall be subject to the provisions
for noncomplying structures, as provided herein by Chapter 25 of this Title.
There will be no impact fees charged for building an ADUE or ADUI.
   (10)   Parking: A single-family dwelling with an ADUE or ADUI shall provide
at least one (1) additional off-street parking space for the ADUE or
ADUI, above the minimum spaces required for a single-family dwelling. ADUE and
ADUI parking shall be separate from the required parking of the main dwelling
and does not include the main driveway of the primary dwelling. If the ADUE or
ADUE I is larger than 600 square feet, a second additional off-street parking
space is required.
No parking spaces may be located within the front or side yard setbacks
adjacent to a street, except within an approved driveway. No parking of
trailer, recreational vehicle, or trailers shall be allowed by the ADUE or ADUI
tenant.
Example of ADUE or ADUI Lot Parking:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4842_8346x4094.jpg]
   (11)   Address: The principal dwelling unit and the ADUE or ADUI shall have
the same address number but shall refer to the accessory dwelling unit as Unit
B or Unit C if there is both an ADUE or ADUI. Addresses must be located
in a visible location on the street front portion of the home.
   (12)   Not Intended For Sale: No ADUE or ADUI shall be sold or conveyed
separate from the primary dwelling unit and shall only be rented.
   (13)   Home Occupation Business: Home occupation businesses in an ADUE or
ADUI shall be restricted to  use that creates no customer traffic. No
home occupation business shall be established within an ADUE or ADUI without
the express written permission of the property owner and pertinent licensing.
   (14)   Tiny Homes: One tiny home shall be permitted as the allowed ADUE
per residential lot. The tiny home shall be permanently connected to and
approved for all required utilities and must be attached to a site-
built permanent foundation that meets the building code. The type of foundation
could be a slab-on-grade or a perimeter
foundation. Building inspections are required for the construction of the foundation,
as well as to ensure the correct installation of the structure,
and to approve the proper
connection to utilities. All manufactured home running gear, tongues, axles, and
wheels must be removed at the time of installation and shall be constructed
with materials that are weather-
resistant and aesthetically consistent with the main dwelling, complying with
design guidelines set forth in chapter 19 of this title.
   (15)   Kit Homes: For purposes of this section, “kit home” refers to a
structure assembled from pre-manufactured components supplied by a third-party
contractor or company approved or recognized by the State of Utah. One kit home
shall be permitted as the ADUE per residential lot. The kit home shall be
permanently connected to and approved for all required utilities and must be attached to
a site-built permanent foundation that meets the building code. The kit home
shall be constructed with materials that are weather resistant and
aesthetically consistent with the main dwelling, complying with design
guidelines set forth in chapter 19 of this title. The type of foundation
could be a slab-on-grade
or a perimeter foundation. Building inspections are required for
the construction of the foundation, as well as to ensure the
correct installation of the structure, and to approve the proper connection to
utilities.
      
(a)   Ivins City will inspect the foundation, electrical and sanitation portions of
the construction process.
      (b)   The 3rd Party/contractor will provide a certificate of code
compliance.
      (c)   Must comply with Ivins City Design guidelines.
   (16)   Design Standards: An ADUE shall incorporate at least one
of the exterior materials used in the principal dwelling for twenty percent 
(20%) of all facades of the structure. The ADUE rook must match the style and
pitch of the principal dwelling, except if the principle dwelling has a pitched
rook, the roof of an ADUE that is a tiny home or kit home may be a pitched,
flat or slightly pitched shed roof . The ADUE shall maintain the same color
of the primary dwelling for at least fifty percent (50%) of all
facades and comply with Ivins City Design guidelines. Balconies or a second story of
an ADUE are prohibited.
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-15
 
An Ordinance of Ivins City, Utah, Adopting the Ivins City Sewer Impact Fee
Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis; Enactment of Sewer Impact Fees
 
WHEREAS, Ivins City (the “City”) is a political subdivision of the State of
Utah, authorized and organized under the provisions of Utah law; and
 
WHEREAS, the City has legal authority pursuant to Title 11, Chapter 36a of the
Utah Code known as the “Impact Fee Act” (hereinafter “the Act”) to impose
development impact fees as a condition of development approval, which impact
fees are used to defray capital infrastructure costs attributable to growth
activity; and
 
WHEREAS, the City has historically assessed impact fees as a condition of
development approval in order to appropriately assign capital infrastructure
costs to development in an equitable and proportionate manner; and
 
WHEREAS, the City has reviewed and evaluated the City’s Sewer Service Area
(City-Wide), and has determined that it is in the City’s best interest to
retain said Service Area for the purpose of imposing Sewer Impact Fees (See
Figure 2-1 of the Sewer Master Plan Update titled Ivins City Existing Sewer
Service Area); and
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to the requirements of Sections 11-36a-301 and 11-36a-302 of
the Act, the City has retained professional engineers (Bowen Collins &
Associates) to prepare the Ivins City Sewer Master Plan, as well as the Sewer
Impact Fee Facilities Plan attached hereto which has been properly certified
pursuant to the requirements of Section 11-36a-306 of the Act; and
 
WHEREAS, pursuant to the requirements of Sections 11-36a-303 and 11-36a-304 of
the Act, the City also retained Bowen Collins & Associates to prepare the
attached written Sewer Impact Fee Analysis which has been properly certified
pursuant to the requirements of Section 11-36a-306 of the Act; and
 
WHEREAS, the written Sewer Impact Fee Analysis also calculates for enactment
proposed Sewer Impact Fees pursuant to the requirements of Section 11-36a-305
of the Act; and
 
WHEREAS, the City has given all required notices and copies of the Sewer Impact
Fee Facilities Plan, Impact Fee Analysis and this Enactment have been made
available to the public as required by the Act; and
 
WHEREAS, the required public hearing on the Sewer Impact Fee Facilities Plan,
Sewer Impact Fee Analysis and the Sewer Impact Fee Enactment was held on July
17th, 2025; and
 
WHEREAS, the Ivins City Council desires to hereby approve and adopt the Ivins
City Sewer Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Sewer Impact Fee Analysis, and to
formally enact the proposed Sewer Impact Fees pursuant the requirements of the
Act;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Ivins City Council as follows:
 
Section 1 Purpose.
This Sewer Impact Fee Enactment establishes the City’s Sewer Impact Fee
policies and procedures and is promulgated pursuant to the requirements of the
Act. This Enactment establishes Impact Fees for sewer facilities within the
service area, describes certain capital improvements to be funded by impact
fees, provides a schedule of impact fees for differing types of land-use
development, and sets forth direction for adjusting and/or challenging said
impact fees.
Section 2 Definitions.
Words and phrases that are defined in the Act shall have the same definition in
this Impact Fee Ordinance.
Section 3 Service Area.
The Service Area for sewer infrastructure within the City, for purposes of the
Sewer Impact Fee Facilities Plan, shall be all areas within the boundaries of
Ivins City (“City-Wide”). The City Council hereby approves and adopts the
Service Area for imposing Sewer Impact Fees.
Section 4 Impact Fee Facilities Plan.
1.   Summary. Included within the Sewer Impact Fee Facilities Plan is a summary
designed to be understood by a lay person. A copy of the Sewer Impact Fee
Facilities Plan has been made available to the public as required by Section
11-36a-502 of the Act.
2.   Plan Description. The Sewer Impact Fee Facilities Plan describes the
public facilities required to serve development resulting from new development
activity. The Sewer Impact Fee Facilities Plan has been prepared based on
reasonable growth assumptions for the City and general demand characteristics
of current and future users of the system. Further, the Sewer Impact Fee
Facilities Plan identifies the impact on system improvements created by
development activity and addresses existing and proposed levels of service.
3.   Level of Service & Growth Demands. The Sewer Impact Fee Facilities Plan:
   (a) identifies the existing level of service;
   (b)   establishes a proposed level of service;
(c)   identifies any excess capacity to accommodate future growth at the
proposed level of service;
(d)   identifies demands placed upon existing public facilities by new
development activity as the proposed level of service; and
(e)   identifies the means by which the City will meet those growth demands.
4.   Consideration of Other Revenue Sources. In preparing the Sewer Impact Fee
Facilities Plan, the City considered other applicable revenue sources to
finance the impacts on system improvements, including: grants; bonds; interfund
loans; and anticipated or accepted dedications of system improvements.
5.   Adoption. The City Council hereby approves and adopts the Ivins City Sewer
Impact Fee Facilities Plan attached hereto.
Section 5    Written Impact Fee Analysis.
1.   Summary. Included within the written Sewer Impact Fee Analysis is a
summary that is designed to be understood by a lay person. A copy of the
written Sewer Impact Fee Analysis has been made available to the public as
required by Section 11-36a-504 of the Act.
2.   Proportionate Share Analysis. Included in the Sewer Impact Fee Analysis is
a proportionate share analysis which estimates the public facility improvements
that are roughly proportionate and reasonably related to the service demands
and needs of any development activity. In analyzing whether or not the
proportionate share of the costs of public facilities are reasonably related to
new development activity, the proportionate share analysis considered, as
applicable:
(a)    the cost of each existing public facility that has excess capacity to
serve the anticipated development resulting from the new development activity;
(b)    the cost of system improvements for each public facility;
(c)    other than impact fees, the manner of financing for each public
facility, such as user charges, special assessments, bonded indebtedness,
general taxes, or federal grants;
(d)    the relative extent to which development activity will contribute to
financing the excess capacity of and system improvements for each existing
public facility by such means as user charges, special assessments, or payment
from the proceeds of general taxes;
(e)    the relative extent to which development activity will contribute to the
cost of existing public facilities and system improvements in the future;
(f)    the extent to which the development activity is entitled to a credit
against impact fees because the development activity will dedicate system
improvements or public facilities that will offset the demand for system
improvements, inside or outside the proposed development;
(g)    extraordinary costs, if any, in servicing the newly developed
properties; and
(h)    the time-price differential inherent in fair comparisons of amounts paid
at different times.
4.   Adoption. The City Council hereby approves and adopts the Sewer Impact Fee
Analysis attached hereto.
Section 6    Impact Fee Calculations.
1.   Elements. In calculating the Sewer Impact Fee, the City has included, to
the extent applicable, realistic estimates for:
(a)    costs of construction;
(b)    the cost of acquiring land, improvements, materials, and fixtures;
(c)   costs for planning, surveying, and engineering services provided for and
directly related to the construction of system improvements; and
(d)   debt service charges, if the City might use impact fees as a revenue
stream to pay the principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other obligations
issued to finance the cost of system improvements.
2.   Maximum Supportable Impact Fees. The fee schedule included herein
represents the maximum Impact Fees which the City may impose on development
within the defined Ivins City-Wide Service Area and are based upon general
demand characteristics and potential demand that can be created by each class
of user.
 
SEWER IMPACT FEE
Maximum Allowable Impact Fee per Equivalent Residential Unit $777.74
           
 
CALCULATION OF NON-STANDARD IMPACT FEE
1Based on average indoor water use per ERU from historical Ivins City records.
Of this amount, 159 gallons per day is expected to enter the wastewater
collection system.
 
3.   Adoption. The City Council hereby approves and adopts the Sewer Impact Fee
Calculations contained in the attached Sewer Impact Fee Analysis.
4. Adjustments. The City may adjust the standard impact fee, at the time the
fee is charged, to respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases or to
ensure that impact fees are imposed fairly. The Impact Fee assessed to a
particular development may also be adjusted should the developer supply
sufficient written studies and/or data to the City showing a discrepancy
between the fee being imposed and the actual impact on the system.
5.   Developer Credits. A developer may receive a credit against or
proportionate reimbursement of an impact fee if the developer dedicates land
for a system improvement, builds and dedicates some or all of a system
improvement, or dedicates a public facility that the City and the developer
agree will reduce the need for a system improvement. A developer may also be
allowed a credit against Impact Fees for any dedication of land for,
improvement to, or new construction of, any system improvements provided by the
developer if the facilities are system improvements, or are dedicated to the
public and offset the need for an identified system improvement.
Section 7    Impact Fee Proceeds.
1.   Accounting of Impact Fees. The City will establish a separate interest
bearing ledger account for the impact fees collected pursuant to this Ordinance
and will conform to the accounting requirements provided in Section 11-36a-601
of the Act. All interest earned on the collection of Sewer Impact Fees shall
accrue to the benefit of the segregated account.
(a)   Reporting. At the end of each fiscal year, the City shall prepare a
report on each fund or ledger account showing the source and amount of all
monies collected, earned and received by the fund or ledger account and each
expenditure from the fund or account. The City shall also produce a report
that:
(i) identifies impact fee funds by the year in which they were received, the
project from which the funds were collected, the impact fee projects for which
the funds were budgeted and the projected schedule for expenditures;
   (ii) is in a format developed by the state auditor;
   (iii) is certified by the City’s Chief Financial Officer; and
   (iv) is transmitted annually to the state auditor.
(b)   Expenditure of Impact Fees. The City may expend impact fees only for a
system improvement identified in the Impact Fee Facilities Plan and for the
specific public facility type for which the fee was collected.
(c)   Time of Expenditure. The City shall expend or encumber the impact fees
for a permissible use within six years of their receipt. For purposes of this
calculation, the first funds received shall be deemed to be the first funds
expended.
(d)   Extension of Time. The City may hold the fees for longer than six years
if it identifies in writing;
(i)    an extraordinary and compelling reason why the fees should be held
longer than six years; and
(ii) an absolute date by which the fees will be expended.
4.   Refunds. The City shall refund any impact fee paid by a developer, plus
interest earned, when:
(i)    the developer does not proceed with the Development Activity and files a
written request for a refund;
(ii) the fee has not been spent or encumbered; and
(iii) no impact has resulted.
5.   Additional Fees and Costs. The Impact Fees authorized herein are separate
from and in addition to user fees and other charges lawfully imposed by the
City and other fees and costs that may not be included as itemized component
parts of the Impact Fee Schedule. In charging any such fees as a condition of
development approval, the City recognizes that the fees must be a reasonable
charge for the service provided.
6.   Fees Effective at Time of Payment. Unless the City is otherwise bound by a
contractual requirement, the Impact Fee shall be determined from the fee
schedule in effect at the time of payment in accordance with the provisions of
Section 6 below.
7.   Imposition of Additional Fee or Refund After Development Activity. Should
any developer undertake Development Activities such that the ultimate density
or other impact of the Development Activity is not revealed to the City, either
through inadvertence, neglect, a change in plans, or any other cause
whatsoever, and/or the Impact Fee is not initially charged against all units or
the total density within the development, the City shall be entitled to charge
an additional Impact Fee to the developer or other appropriate person covering
the density for which an Impact Fee was not previously paid.
Section 8    Challenges
1.   Standing. A person or entity residing in or owning property within the
service area, or an organization, association, or a corporation representing
the interests of persons or entities owning property within the service area,
has standing to file a declaratory judgment action challenging the validity of
an impact fee.
2.   Generally. A person or an entity required to pay an impact fee who
believes the impact fee does not meet the requirements of law may seek the
remedies set forth in Section 11-36a-701 and 11-36a-703 of the Act by following
the procedures set forth therein for each available remedy.
3.   Time Limitations. A person or an entity that initiates a challenge under
Subsection 11-36a-701(3)(a) of the Act may not initiate that challenge unless
it is initiated within the times set forth in section 11-36a-702(1) of the Act.
The deadline to file an action in district court is tolled from the date that a
challenge is filed using an administrative appeals procedure described in
Section 11-36a-703 of the Act until 30 days after the day on which a final
decision is rendered in the administrative appeals procedure.
4.   Mediation. In addition to the methods of challenging an impact fee under
Section 11-36a-701 of the Act, a specified public agency may require the City
to participate in mediation of any applicable impact fee. To require mediation,
the specified public agency shall submit a written request for mediation to the
City and may submit a request for mediation at any time, but no later than 30
days after the day on which an impact fee is paid. Upon the submission of a
request for mediation, the City shall cooperate with the specified public
agency to select a mediator and participate in the mediation process.
5.   Arbitration. A person or entity intending to challenge an impact fee under
Section 11-36a-703 of the Act shall file a written request for arbitration with
the City within the time limitation described in Section 11-36a-702 of the Act
for the applicable type of challenge and by following the procedures set forth
in Section 11-36a-705 of the Act.
Section 9    Miscellaneous
1.   Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or phrase of
this Enactment shall be declared invalid for any reason, such decision shall
not affect the remaining portions of this Enactment, which shall remain in full
force and effect, and for this purpose, the provisions of this Enactment are
declared to be severable.
 
2.   Interpretation. This Enactment has been divided into sections,
subsections, paragraphs and clauses for convenience only and the interpretation
of this Enactment shall not be affected by such division or by any heading
contained herein.
 
3.   Effective Date. This Enactment shall become effective 90 days after the
day on which it was approved.
 
PASSED AND ADOPTED BY THE IVINS CITY COUNCIL, STATE OF UTAH, ON THE 17TH DAY OF
JULY, 2025, BY A UNANIMOUS VOTE. ALL COUNCIL MEMBERS WERE PRESENT AT THE
MEETING AND VOTED IN FAVOR.
 
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
IVINS CITY CODE
SECTION:
1.01.101: Title
1.01.102: Acceptance
1.01.103: Amendments
1.01.104: Code Alterations
1.01.105: Conflicting Provisions
1.01.101: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of Ivins City. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the IVINS CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.01.102: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect. (Ord.
2005-45, 2005)
1.01.103: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and/or
section number(s) to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient
compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or
revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such amendments or
revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the
said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in
each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified
and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the city code. (Ord. 2005-45,
2005)
1.01.104: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any
way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the meaning of
any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be
inserted according to the official instructions of the city council. The city
recorder shall see that such replacement pages are properly inserted in the
official copies maintained in the office of the city recorder and any person
having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every effort to maintain
said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered or made available to such person through the office of the city
recorder. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be
returned to the office of the city recorder when directed to do so by order of
the city council. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.01.105: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
Whenever anything contained in any city ordinance shall be or become in
conflict with any provision of the laws of the state, such provisions of the
city ordinance shall be deemed to be repealed and to be of no effect for such
period as such law so in conflict therewith shall remain in effect, and the
state law shall govern. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1.02.101: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1.02.102: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1.02.103: Court Proceedings
1.02.104: Severability Clause
1.02.101: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   (1)   All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of
this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal, except that the following
ordinances are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the city; and all special ordinances.
   (2)   The repeal of ordinances provided herein shall not affect any debt or
fee which is accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or
proceeding commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term
of office of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take
effect; nor shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any
ordinance heretofore repealed or superseded. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.02.102: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to streets and other public ways, or relating to the
conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by
virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the preceding section,
excepting as this code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case,
this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance in respect to such
provisions only. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.02.103: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   (1)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (2)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (3)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city
herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.02.104: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code
or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or
ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this code, or
any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed
each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid
or ineffective. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1.03.101: Construction Of Words
1.03.102: General Definitions
1.03.103: Headings
1.03.101: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or person is
referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or a
particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite gender
and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules
of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code which contains
any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter
or context may be repugnant thereto. The use of any verb in the present tense
shall include the future and past tense when applicable. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.03.102: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BUSINESS: Includes any trade, profession, calling, activity, operation or
enterprise for which a license or permit is required by any ordinance of the
city.
CITY: Ivins City, Washington County, Utah.
CITY CODE: The city code of Ivins City, Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of Ivins City, Utah.
CITY RECORDER: The individual appointed to act as the city recorder.
COUNTY: Washington County, Utah.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of Ivins City".
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
HIGHWAY; ROAD: Includes public bridges, and may be equivalent to the words
"county way", "county road", "common road", and "state road".
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation. The term "license" includes any certificate, permit or license
issued by the city.
LOCATION: Whenever any act, conduct or offense is prohibited or required and no
reference is made to location, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the act, conduct or offense prohibited or required shall be within
the boundaries of this city.
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS OR OFFICIALS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city
officer or official by title only, this shall be construed as though followed
by the words "of Ivins City".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
REASONABLE TIME: In all cases where any ordinance requires that an act be done
in a reasonable time or that reasonable notice be given, such reasonable time
for such notice shall be deemed to mean such time as may be necessary for the
expeditious performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Utah.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places, sidewalks, gutters and culverts, crosswalks and
intersections.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
TIME COMPUTED: The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any
ordinance or in any resolution or order of the city, when expressed in days,
shall be determined by excluding the first day and including the last day,
except if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, then the last day shall
be the day next following such Sunday or legal holiday which is not a Sunday or
legal holiday. When time is expressed in hours, Sunday and all legal holidays
shall be excluded.
WEEK: Shall be construed to mean any seven (7) day period.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.03.103: HEADINGS:
The headings of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section thereof, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the headings, are amended or
reenacted. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1.04.101: Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance
1.04.102: Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors
1.04.103: Infractions
1.04.104: Fines
1.04.105: Offenses Designated And Classified
1.04.106: Liability
1.04.107: Applicability Of State Statutes
1.04.101: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ORDINANCE:
   (1)   Criminal: The city council may impose a minimum criminal penalty for
the violation of any city ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B
misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a term of
imprisonment up to six (6) months, or by both the fine and term of
imprisonment.
   (2)   Civil: Except for moving traffic violations, the city council may
otherwise prescribe a minimum civil penalty for the violation of any city
ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor fine under
Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.04.102: TERM OF IMPRISONMENT FOR MISDEMEANORS:
A person convicted of a class B or a class C misdemeanor for violating a city
ordinance may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
   (1)   In the case of a class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six (6)
months; and
   (2)   In the case of a class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding ninety
(90) days. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.04.103: INFRACTIONS:
A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be subject to
a fine, forfeiture and disqualification, or any combination thereof. Whenever a
person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is specified, the person
may be fined as for a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.04.104: FINES:
A person convicted of violating a city ordinance may, in addition to any term
of imprisonment imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed:
   (1)   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a class B misdemeanor conviction;
and
   (2)   Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a class C misdemeanor
conviction. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.04.105: OFFENSES DESIGNATED AND CLASSIFIED:
   (1)   A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this code or the
ordinances of this city shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. Ordinances enacted after the effective date of this code which
involve an offense should be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance
with this chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (2)   Violations of a city ordinance are designated as misdemeanors or
infractions.
      (a)   Misdemeanors under this code are classified into two (2)
categories: class B misdemeanors; and class C misdemeanors. An offense
designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful in
this code or other ordinances of this city, when no other specification as to
punishment or category is made, is a class B misdemeanor.
      (b)   Infractions are not classified. Any offense which is made an
infraction in this code or other ordinances of this city, or which is expressly
designated an infraction, and any offense designated by this code or other
ordinances of this city which is not designated as a misdemeanor and for which
no penalty is specified, is an infraction.
   (3)   In all instances where the violation of this code or any city
ordinance hereafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or
continues to occur. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.04.106: LIABILITY:
When the provisions of any section of this code prohibit the commission of an
act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the
directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in
aiding or abetting the said person shall be guilty of the offense described and
liable to the penalty set forth. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.04.107: APPLICABILITY OF STATE STATUTES:
Nothing in this code shall be construed to preclude any county or state
prosecutor or law enforcement agency from prosecuting violations according to
state law. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1.05.101: Corporate Name
1.05.102: Corporate Seal
1.05.103: City Logos
1.05.101: CORPORATE NAME:
The official and legal name of this municipal corporation is "Ivins City".
Wherever deemed desirable, appropriate or necessary to the execution of any
legal document, there may be added to the official name of this city the
additional words "a municipal corporation" for the purpose of designating the
municipal character of said corporation. The official and legal name of the
city ("Ivins City") shall not be used for any private business purpose. (Ord.
2005-45, 2005)
1.05.102: CORPORATE SEAL:
The seal hereto provided and used by Ivins City, and which shall continue to be
used by Ivins City, is described as follows: a circular seal with the words
"Ivins City, Washington County", around the outer edge and the words "Corporate
Seal" in the middle thereof. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
1.05.103: CITY LOGOS:
The city council may, from time to time, adopt one or more city logos or other
identifying marks for use by the city on, among other things, its official
correspondence, forms and vehicles. Use of a city logo adopted by the city
council shall be controlled by the city manager. In no event, however, shall a
city logo be used:
   (1)   By any person that is not an officer, authorized employee or
authorized contract provider of the city;
   (2)   For political campaign purposes;
   (3)   For any private business purpose; or
   (4)   For any other purpose that is not official city business, as
determined by the city manager. (Ord. 2005-45, 2005)
TITLE 2
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
Part 1. Administration
2.01.101: Presiding Officer
2.01.102: Mayor Pro Tempore
2.01.103: Powers And Duties
2.01.104: Prescribe Additional Powers And Duties
2.01.105: Change Of Duties
2.01.106: General Administrative Powers
2.01.107: Rules And Regulations For Administration
2.01.108: Appointed Officers; Residency Requirement
Part 2. City Council Meetings; Quorum; Voting
2.01.201: Regular Meetings
2.01.202: Special Meetings
2.01.203: Open Meetings
2.01.204: Quorum
2.01.205: Voting
Part 3. Ordinances And Resolutions
2.01.301: Legislative Power Exercised By Ordinance
2.01.302: Extent Of Power Exercised By Ordinance
2.01.303: Penalties For Violation
2.01.304: Form Of Ordinances
2.01.305: Requirements As To Form; Effective Date
2.01.306: Publication Of Ordinances
2.01.307: Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Passage
2.01.308: Codification Of Ordinances
2.01.309: Resolutions
Part 4. Land Use Matters
2.01.401: Land Use Matters
PART 1. ADMINISTRATION
2.01.101: PRESIDING OFFICER:
The mayor shall be the chairperson and preside at the meetings of the city
council, but he shall not vote, except in the case of a tie vote of the city
council. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.102: MAYOR PRO TEMPORE:
Pursuant to section 10-3b-302(2)(a) of the Utah code, if the mayor is absent or
unable or refuses to act, the council may elect a member of the council as
mayor pro tempore to:
   (1)   Preside at a council meeting; and
   (2)   Perform, during the mayor's absence, disability, or refusal to act,
the duties and functions of mayor. (Ord. 2014-02, 2014)
2.01.103: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (1)   The mayor shall:
      (a)   Perform all duties prescribed by law, resolution or ordinance;
      (b)   Ensure that all the laws, ordinances and resolutions are faithfully
executed and observed;
      (c)   Report to the city council the condition of the city and recommend
for city council consideration any measures that the mayor considers to be in
the best interests of the city;
      (d)   When necessary, call on the residents of the city over the age of
twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the state and
ordinances of the city;
      (e)   Appoint, with the advice and consent of the city council, persons
to fill city offices or vacancies on commissions or committees of the city,
unless otherwise delegated to the city manager by ordinance;
      (f)   Sign all city ordinances and resolutions, and the mayor is further
hereby authorized to sign his name officially for and in behalf of the city to
all deeds, bonds, bills, notes, contracts, leases and other writings to which
the city is a party, when so directed by the city council; and
      (g)   Report to the city council any release granted under subsection (2)
(b) of this section.
   (2)   The mayor may:
      (a)   At any reasonable time, examine and inspect the books, papers,
records or documents of the city; and
      (b)   Release any person imprisoned for violation of any city ordinance.
(Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.104: PRESCRIBE ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city council may by resolution prescribe additional duties, powers and
responsibilities for any elected or appointed official which are not prohibited
by any specific statute, except that the mayor may not serve as recorder and
neither the mayor nor the recorder may serve as treasurer. A justice court
judge may not hold any other municipal office or position of employment with
the city. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.105: CHANGE OF DUTIES:
The mayor may, with the concurrence of a majority of the city council, change
the administrative assignment of any member of the city council who is serving
in any administrative position in the city government. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.106: GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS:
The city council shall, from time to time, prescribe by ordinance the general
powers and duties to be performed by appointed officers and department
directors. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.107: RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The city council shall approve rules and regulations which are not inconsistent
with the laws of this state, for the efficient administration, organization,
operation, conduct and business of the city. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.108: APPOINTED OFFICERS; RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT:
The city council may require by ordinance that any or all appointed officers
reside in the city. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
PART 2. CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS; QUORUM; VOTING
2.01.201: REGULAR MEETINGS:
   (1)   The city council shall hold two (2) regular meetings, which shall be
held on the first and third Thursday of each month, unless otherwise posted, at
city hall, 55 North Main Street, which meetings shall begin promptly at five
thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M.
   (2)   If a regular meeting date falls on a legal holiday, then the city
council may, by a majority vote of the city council, change the date to another
date.
   (3)   The city council may, by a majority vote of the city council, provide
for a different time and place for holding any regular meeting of the city
council. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.202: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
If at any time the business of the city requires a special meeting of the city
council, such meeting may be ordered by the mayor or any two (2) members of the
city council. The order shall be entered in the minutes of the city council.
The order shall provide at least three (3) hours' notice of the special meeting
and notice thereof shall be served by the city recorder or clerk on each member
who did not sign the order by delivering the notice personally or by leaving it
at the member's usual place of abode. The personal appearance by a city council
member at any specially called meeting constitutes a waiver of the notice
required in this section. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.203: OPEN MEETINGS:
Every meeting is open to the public unless closed pursuant to Utah Code
Annotated sections 52-4-4 and 52-4-5. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.204: QUORUM:
The number of members of the city council necessary to constitute a quorum is
three (3) or more. No action of the city council shall be official or of any
effect except when a quorum of the members is present. Fewer than a quorum may
adjourn from time to time. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.205: VOTING:
   (1)   How Vote Taken: A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all
ordinances, resolutions and any action which would create a liability against
the city and in any other case at the request of any member of the city council
by a "yes" or a "no" vote and shall be recorded. Every resolution or ordinance
shall be in writing before the vote is taken.
   (2)   Minimum Vote Required: The minimum number of yes votes required to
pass any ordinance or resolution or to take any action by the city council,
unless otherwise prescribed by law, shall be a majority of the members of the
quorum, but shall never be less than three (3).
      (a)   Any ordinance, resolution or motion of the city council having
fewer favorable votes than required in this section shall be deemed defeated
and invalid, except a meeting may be adjourned to a specific time by a majority
vote of the city council even though such majority vote is less than that
required in this section.
      (b)   A majority of the members of the city council, regardless of
number, may fill any vacancy in the city council.
   (3)   Reconsideration: Any action taken by the city council shall not be
reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting unless the number of members
of the city council present at the special meeting is equal to or greater than
the number of members present at the meeting when the action was approved.
(Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
PART 3. ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
2.01.301: LEGISLATIVE POWER EXERCISED BY ORDINANCE:
The city council shall exercise its legislative powers through ordinances.
(Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.302: EXTENT OF POWER EXERCISED BY ORDINANCE:
The city council may pass any ordinance to regulate, require, prohibit, govern,
control or supervise any activity, business, conduct or condition authorized by
statute or any other provision of law. An officer of the city shall not be
convicted of a criminal offense where he relied on or enforced an ordinance he
reasonably believed to be a valid ordinance. It shall be a defense to any
action for punitive damages that the official acted in good faith in enforcing
an ordinance or that he enforced an ordinance on advice of legal counsel. (Ord.
2005-38, 2005)
2.01.303: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
   (1)   Criminal Penalties: The city council may impose a minimum criminal
penalty for the violation of any city ordinance by a fine not to exceed the
maximum class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or
by a term of imprisonment up to six (6) months, or by both the fine and term of
imprisonment.
   (2)   Civil Penalties: The city council may prescribe a minimum civil
penalty for the violation of any city ordinance by a fine not to exceed the
maximum class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301.
However, the city may not impose a civil penalty and adjudication for the
violation of a city moving traffic ordinance. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.304: FORM OF ORDINANCES:
Any ordinance passed by the city council shall contain and be in substantially
the following order and form:
   (1)   A number;
   (2)   A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the
ordinance;
   (3)   A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance;
   (4)   An ordaining clause which states "Be it ordained by the city council
of Ivins City, state of Utah";
   (5)   The body or subject of the ordinance;
   (6)   When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of
the ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance
which prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of a
city ordinance; or, the penalty may establish a classification of penalties and
refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such violation is established;
   (7)   A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the date
when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting as
required by this section;
   (8)   A line for the signature of the mayor or acting mayor to sign the
ordinance; and
   (9)   A place for the city recorder to attest the ordinance and affix the
seal of the city. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.305: REQUIREMENTS AS TO FORM; EFFECTIVE DATE:
   (1)   Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be signed by
the mayor, or if he is absent, by the mayor pro tempore, or by a quorum of the
city council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be
void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated sections 10-3-704(1) through 10-3-704(4).
   (2)   Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication,
or thirty (30) days after final passage by the city council, whichever is
closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become effective at an
earlier or later date after publication if so provided in the ordinance.
   (3)   Ordinances which do not have an effective date shall become effective
twenty (20) days after publication, or thirty (30) days after final passage by
the city council, whichever is sooner. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005; amd. Ord. 2025-02,
2025)
2.01.306: PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES:
   (1)   All ordinances, except those enacted pursuant to Utah Code Annotated
sections 10-3-706 through 10-3-710, before taking effect, shall be deposited in
the office of the city recorder and a short summary of the ordinance published
in accordance with section 10-3-711 of the Utah Code.
   (2)   Any ordinance, code or book, other than the state code, relating to
building or safety standards, city functions, administration, control or
regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further publication
or posting, if reference is made to the code or book and at least one copy has
been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city
recorder prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the city council. (Ord.
2005-38, 2005; amd. Ord. 2025-02, 2025)
2.01.307: RECORDING, NUMBERING AND CERTIFICATION OF PASSAGE:
The city recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose,
all ordinances passed by the city council. The city recorder shall give each
ordinance a number, if the city council has not already done so. Immediately
following each ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the city recorder
shall make or cause to be made a certificate stating the date of passage and of
the date of publication. The record and memorandum, or a certified copy
thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and
publication of the ordinance or codification. Failure to comply with this
section shall not affect or render invalid any ordinance of the city. (Ord.
2005-38, 2005; amd. Ord. 2025-02, 2025)
2.01.308: CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES:
The city council may authorize, from time to time, the compilation,
codification and publication in book, pamphlet or looseleaf form all ordinances
of the city of a general and permanent character and to make such changes,
alterations, modifications, additions and substitutions therein as it may deem
best to the end that a complete simplified code of the ordinances then enforced
shall be presented, but with errors, inconsistencies, repetitions and
ambiguities therein eliminated. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.01.309: RESOLUTIONS:
   (1)   Purpose: Unless otherwise required by law, the city council may
exercise all administrative powers by resolution, including, but not limited
to: a) establishing water and sewer rates; b) charges for garbage collection
and fees charged for city services; c) establishing personnel policies and
guidelines; and d) regulating the use and operation of city property.
Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution.
   (2)   Form: Any resolution passed by the city council shall be in a form and
contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
   (3)   Publication; Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective without
publication or posting and may take effect on passage or at a later date as the
city council may determine, but resolutions may not become effective more than
three (3) months from the date of passage. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
PART 4. LAND USE MATTERS
2.01.401: LAND USE MATTERS:
The powers and duties of the city council regarding land use matters are set
forth in the land use ordinances of the city. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
CHAPTER 2
CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
2.02.101: Office Created
2.02.102: Appointment
2.02.103: Term Of Office
2.02.104: Residency
2.02.105: Compensation
2.02.106: Powers And Duties
2.02.107: Acting City Manager
2.02.108: Removal From Office
2.02.109: Employment Agreement
2.02.110: Resignation
2.02.101: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of city manager was heretofore created and established pursuant to
Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-830, as amended, and shall continue in force
and effect as an appointed office of the city. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.02.102: APPOINTMENT:
The city manager shall be appointed by the city council (herein defined as the
mayor and city council). The city council shall approve the employment contract
entered into with the city manager and the mayor shall sign the approved
employment contract on behalf of the city. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.02.103: TERM OF OFFICE:
The city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city council for an
indefinite period. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.02.104: RESIDENCY:
Residency in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be
required as a condition of appointment, but within one hundred eighty (180)
days after reporting for work the city manager must permanently reside within
the city boundaries or within thirty (30) miles of the city boundaries and
maintain that residence as their primary residence during the term of such
employment. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005; amd. Ord. 2025-13, 2025)
2.02.105: COMPENSATION:
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall,
from time to time, determine. In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed
for all actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official
duties. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.02.106: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Pursuant to the authority outlined in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-830, and
under the direction and control of the city council, the city manager shall be
responsible for the efficient management of all administrative affairs of the
city. In addition to the general powers as chief administrative officer, the
city manager shall have the following powers, duties and obligations:
   (1)   Enforcement: The city manager shall faithfully execute and enforce all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, and see that all
franchises, leases, permits, contracts, licenses and privileges granted by the
municipality are observed.
   (2)   Authority For Employees: It shall be the duty of the city manager, and
the city manager shall have the authority, to control, order and give
directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and
employees of the city through their respective department heads.
   (3)   Power Of Appointment And Removal: It shall be the duty of the city
manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and
employees of the city, subject to all applicable personnel ordinances, rules
and regulations, except for the positions of city recorder, city treasurer,
city attorney, city engineer, justice court judge and city department heads,
which shall only be appointed, demoted or removed with the advice and consent
of the city council.
   (4)   Direct And Supervise Administration: It shall be the duty of the city
manager to direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices
and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by law.
   (5)   Administrative Reorganization Of Offices: It shall be the duty and
responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and implement such
administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under the city
manager's direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective
and economical conduct of the city's business.
   (6)   Implement And Recommend Policies And Programs: The city manager shall
carry out the policies and programs established by the city council. The city
manager shall submit to the city council plans and programs relating to the
development and needs of the city.
   (7)   Ordinances: The city manager shall recommend to the city council for
adoption such measures and ordinances necessary for the efficient management of
administrative affairs.
   (8)   Attendance At City Council Meetings: It shall be the duty of the city
manager to attend all meetings of the city council, unless excused therefrom by
the mayor or the city council, and to take part in the discussions and to
recommend matters for adoption by the city council, but without the right to
vote.
   (9)   Financial Reports: It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep
the city council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and
needs of the city. The city manager shall prepare and submit monthly financial
reports to the city council for their information and review.
   (10)   Budget: The city manager shall prepare and submit the proposed annual
budget and capital improvements program to the city council for their approval
and in accordance with all state laws and regulations. The city manager shall
serve as the city budget officer.
   (11)   Expenditure Control And Purchasing: It shall be the duty of the city
manager to manage all expenditures in accordance with state law and the city
purchasing policy.
   (12)   Investigations And Complaints: It shall be the duty of the city
manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city, or any department
or division thereof, and also any contract for the proper performance of any
obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to
investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration
of the city government. The city manager shall examine and inspect the books,
records and official papers of any office, department, agency, board or
commission of the city and make investigations and require reports from all
personnel.
   (13)   Public Buildings: It shall be the duty of the city manager to
exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all
other public properties which are under the control and jurisdiction of the
city.
   (14)   Emergencies: The city manager shall notify the city council of any
emergency that may arise in the city.
   (15)   Additional Duties: It shall be the duty of the city manager to
perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may lawfully be
delegated to the city manager from time to time by ordinance or resolution or
other official action of the city council. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.02.107: ACTING CITY MANAGER:
The city manager shall appoint, with the approval of the city council, an
acting city manager to serve in the absence or temporary incapacity of the city
manager. The acting city manager shall have all the powers and duties of the
city manager, but shall consult with the mayor regarding decisions of major
impact on the city. The mayor shall act as city manager in the event of absence
or temporary incapacity of both the city manager and the acting city manager.
(Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.02.108: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of
the city council convened in a regular city council meeting, except that the
city manager shall not be removed from office during, or within a period of,
ninety (90) days after the date newly elected officials take office after a
municipal election. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected
member of the city council to directly observe the actions and ability of the
city manager to perform the duties described herein. After the expiration of
the ninety (90) day period, the city manager may be removed from office. The
city council may, without any particular showing of cause, remove the city
manager from office. The city council's action shall be final. (Ord. 2005-38,
2005)
2.02.109: EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or
authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the
city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not
inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.02.110: RESIGNATION:
The city manager shall give the city council thirty (30) days' notice in
writing of the intent to resign as city manager. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
CHAPTER 3
APPOINTED OFFICERS AND CITY DEPARTMENTS
SECTION:
Part 1. Appointed Officers
2.03.101: Offices Created By City Council
2.03.102: Appointed Officers
2.03.103: City Recorder
2.03.104: Director Of Finance
2.03.105: City Treasurer
2.03.106: City Attorney
Part 2. City Departments
2.03.201: City Organization
2.03.202: General Requirements Of City Departments
2.03.203: Interdepartmental Cooperation
2.03.204: Departments Established
2.03.205: Department Directors
2.03.206: Duties Of Department Directors
PART 1. APPOINTED OFFICERS
2.03.101: OFFICES CREATED BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council may create any office deemed necessary for the government of
the city and provide for filling vacancies in elective and appointive offices.
(Ord. 2006-22, 2006)
2.03.102: APPOINTED OFFICERS:
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall appoint a
qualified person to each of the following offices: city recorder; director of
finance; city treasurer; city attorney; city engineer; and directors for each
city department. All appointed officers shall continue in office until their
successors are appointed and qualified. (Ord. 2006-22, 2006)
2.03.103: CITY RECORDER:
The office of the city recorder shall have the following functions:
   (1)   Attend meetings of the city council, keep the record of its
proceedings, and perform such other duties of a like nature as may be required
by the city council.
   (2)   Be responsible for the recording, filing, indexing, making available
for public inspection and safekeeping of all proceedings of the city council
and other records of the city.
   (3)   Record in full, uniformly and permanently, all ordinances and
authenticate the same. The city recorder shall record, in a book used
exclusively for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the city council. The
city recorder shall give each ordinance a number, if the city council has not
already done so. Immediately following the adoption of each ordinance, or
codification of ordinances, the city recorder shall make or cause to be made a
certificate stating the date of passage and of the date of publication or
posting, as required.
   (4)   Post or publish all legal notices, ordinances and resolutions as
required by law.
   (5)   Supervise all city elections in accordance with applicable laws and
ordinances; keep and maintain all election records and have custody of all
property used in connection therewith, according to law.
   (6)   Countersign all contracts made on behalf of the city and maintain a
properly indexed record of all such contracts.
   (7)   Notify the appointing authority of the impending expiration of the
term of office of a member of any board or commission, said notice to be given
at least thirty (30) days before such expiration.
   (8)   Be the custodian of the official seal of the city.
   (9)   Act as the city records officer to oversee and coordinate records
access and management and city archives activities as required by local, state
and federal law.
      (a)   As the records officer, the city recorder shall: make annual
reports of records service activities to the city council, as requested;
provide training relative to records management, maintenance and access to the
various city departments, as necessary; establish and maintain an active,
continuing program for the economical and efficient management of the city's
records; submit to the state archivist proposed schedules of records; cooperate
with the state archivist in conducting surveys made by the state archivist;
evaluate all record series that the city uses or creates and report to the
state archivist the classification of each record series that is classified;
establish and report to the state archivist, retention schedules for objects
that the city determines are not records but have historical or evidentiary
value; and designate those record series as required by law and report the
designations of its record series to the state archivist.
      (b)   As the records officer, the city recorder may: classify a
particular record, record series or information within a record at any time,
but is not required to classify a particular record, record series or
information until access to the record is requested; and redesignate a record
series or reclassify a record, record series or information within a record at
any time.
   (10)   As the ex officio city auditor, perform the duties of that office.
   (11)   Maintain the general books for each fund of the city and all
subsidiary records relating thereto, including a list of the outstanding bonds,
their purpose, amount, terms, date and place payable.
   (12)   Keep accounts with all receiving and disbursing officers of the city,
preaudit all claims and demands against the city before they are allowed, and
prepare the necessary checks in payment.
   (13)   In the event the city is without funds on deposit in one of its
appropriate bank accounts with which to pay any lawfully approved claim, draw
and sign a warrant upon the city treasurer for payment of the claim.
   (14)   The city recorder or other delegated person shall prepare and present
to the city council monthly summary financial reports and quarterly detail
financial reports, prepared in the manner prescribed in the uniform accounting
manual for Utah cities.
   (15)   Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the close of each fiscal
period, the city recorder or other delegated person shall present to the city
council an annual financial report prepared in conformity with generally
accepted accounting principles, as prescribed in the uniform accounting manual
for Utah cities. This requirement may be satisfied by presentation of the audit
report furnished by the city's independent auditor, if the financial statements
included are appropriately prepared and reviewed with the city council.
   (16)   The city council, by resolution or ordinance, may create a director
of finance position to perform the financial duties and responsibilities of the
city recorder; provided, however, the director of finance does not assume any
duties of the city treasurer.
   (17)   Perform such other duties assigned by the city manager or that may be
prescribed by the city council or state law. (Ord. 2006-22, 2006)
2.03.104: DIRECTOR OF FINANCE:
A director of finance may be appointed to perform the following duties: (Ord.
2006-22, 2006)
   (1)   The financial duties and responsibilities of the director of finance,
including:
      (a)   Maintain the general books for each fund of the city and all
subsidiary records relating thereto, including a list of the outstanding bonds,
their purpose, amount, terms, date and place payable.
      (b)   In the event the city is without funds on deposit in one of its
appropriate bank accounts with which to pay any lawfully approved claim, draw
and sign a warrant upon the city treasurer for payment of the claim.
      (c)   Prepare and present to the city council monthly summary financial
reports and quarterly detail financial reports, prepared in the manner
prescribed in the uniform accounting manual for Utah cities.
      (d)   Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the close of each fiscal
period, present to the city council an annual financial report prepared in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, as prescribed in the
uniform accounting manual for Utah cities. This requirement may be satisfied by
presentation of the audit report furnished by the city's independent auditor,
if the financial statements included are appropriately prepared and reviewed
with the city council.
   (2)   Such other duties as assigned by the administrative services director
or the city manager, or that may be prescribed by the city council or state
law. (Ord. 2007-01, 2-1-2007)
2.03.105: CITY TREASURER:
The office of the city treasurer shall have the following functions:
   (1)   The city treasurer is custodian of all monies, bonds, or other
securities of the city.
   (2)   The city treasurer shall:
      (a)   Determine the cash requirements of the city and provide for the
investment of all monies by following the procedures and requirements of Utah
Code Annotated title 51, chapter 7, the state money management act;
      (b)   Receive all public funds and monies payable to the city, within
three (3) business days after collection, including all taxes, licenses, fines
and intergovernmental revenue;
      (c)   Keep an accurate detailed account of all monies received under
subsection (2)(b) of this section in the manner provided herein and as directed
by the city council by ordinance or resolution; and
      (d)   Collect all special taxes and assessments as provided by law and
ordinance.
   (3)   The city treasurer shall give or cause to be given to every person
paying money to the city treasury, a receipt or other evidence of payment
therefor, specifying, as appropriate, the date of payment and upon which
account paid and shall file the duplicate of the receipt, a summary report, or
other evidence of payment in the office of the city recorder.
   (4)   The city treasurer, or in her absence the deputy treasurer, shall sign
all checks prepared by the city recorder. Prior to affixing the signature, the
city treasurer shall determine that a sufficient amount is on deposit in the
appropriate bank account of the city to honor the check. The city council may
also designate a person, other than the city recorder, to countersign checks.
   (5)   In the absence of appropriate monies, the city treasurer shall pay all
warrants in the order in which presented and as money becomes available for
payment thereof in the appropriate funds of the city. The city treasurer shall
note upon the back of each warrant presented, the date of presentation and the
date of payment.
   (6)   All monies received by the city treasurer on any special assessment
shall be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment was
made. The monies shall be used for the payment of interest and principal on
bonds or other indebtedness issued in settlement thereof, and shall be used for
no other purpose whatever, unless otherwise provided by law.
   (7)   The city treasurer shall promptly deposit all city funds in the
appropriate bank accounts of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to
commingle city funds with his/her own money.
   (8)   The city treasurer shall perform such other duties assigned by the
city manager or that may be prescribed by the city council or state law. (Ord.
2006-34, 2006)
2.03.106: CITY ATTORNEY:
The office of the city attorney shall have the following functions:
   (1)   Serve as the chief legal officer of the city and be responsible to the
mayor and city council for the proper administration of the legal affairs of
the city.
   (2)   Act as legal advisor of the city in all matters pertaining to
contracts with or by the city and on any question of law. It shall be his duty
to advise all city officials in relation to their official duties. He shall
advise the city council, or its committees, on such legal questions as may
arise in relation to the business of the city, and shall report, at any time
the city council or mayor may direct, upon any matters in his hands, which may
be necessary for their information.
   (3)   Prosecute, or oversee the prosecution of, all violations of city
ordinances, and under state law, may prosecute infractions and misdemeanors
occurring within the boundaries of the city. The city attorney and designees
shall have the authority to grant transactional immunity for violations of city
ordinances and, under state law, infractions and misdemeanors occurring within
the boundaries of the city. The city attorney and designees shall represent the
interests of the city or state in the appeal of any matter prosecuted in any
trial court by the city attorney.
   (4)   Attend city council meetings and any other meetings as requested by
the mayor, city council or city manager, unless such attendance is excused.
   (5)   Draft or review ordinances and resolutions for the city council when
requested; draft or review policies and procedures of the city and its
departments when requested; and draft or review written contracts, forms or
other papers of the city when requested.
   (6)   Perform such other duties assigned by the city manager or that may be
prescribed by the city council or state law. (Ord. 2006-22, 2006)
   (7)   Pursuant to rule 1.13 of the Utah rules of professional conduct, the
city attorney represents the city as a governmental entity, except as the
representation or duties of the city attorney are otherwise required by law.
(Ord. 2014-02, 2014)
PART 2. CITY DEPARTMENTS
2.03.201: CITY ORGANIZATION:
The city organization shall be divided into such offices, departments,
divisions, boards, or committees as the city manager shall determine
appropriate with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 2006-22,
2006)
2.03.202: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CITY DEPARTMENTS:
All departments, and units thereof, shall:
   (1)   Be open during regular business hours, as defined by the city council;
   (2)   Pay out monies belonging to the city only in the manner prescribed by
law, ordinance, policy or regulation; and
   (3)   Deliver all records, documents and property of every description
belonging to the office or to the city to the successor in office. (Ord. 2006-
22, 2006)
2.03.203: INTERDEPARTMENTAL COOPERATION:
Each department shall cooperate with other departments and furnish any other
department, upon the direction of the city manager, such service, labor, and
materials as may be requisitioned by the head of such department. (Ord. 2006-
22, 2006)
2.03.204: DEPARTMENTS ESTABLISHED:
The city has established the following departments:
   (1)   Building and zoning department, with the building official/zoning
administrator as the department head;
   (2)   Legal/human resources department, with the city attorney as the
department head;
   (3)   Parks and recreation department, with the parks and recreation
director as the department head;
   (4)   Public safety department, with the public safety director as the
department head;
   (5)   Public works department, with the public works director as the
department head; and
   (6)   Administrative services department, with the administrative services
director as the department head. (Ord. 2007-08, 2007)
2.03.205: DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS:
All department directors shall have the powers and responsibilities for
planning, organizing, staffing, directing and controlling the function of their
appointed departments. They shall be responsible to the city manager and shall
keep him/her fully advised of all the affairs with respect to their
departments. (Ord. 2006-22, 2006)
2.03.206: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT DIRECTORS:
Department directors shall:
   (1)   Be responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of
their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto;
   (2)   Be responsible to implement all ordinances, resolutions, rules and
regulations, directives, and services within the budget parameters established
by the city council to achieve the goals of the elected officials;
   (3)   Develop and maintain up to date departmental policies, procedures and
instructions for carrying out departmental operations in conformity with city
ordinances and directives of the city manager;
   (4)   Be responsible for planning, organizing, supervising and directing the
operations of the departments and for the full and effective use of personnel,
equipment and financial resources assigned to the department;
   (5)   Assign subordinate employees in the department to any duty which in
his/her judgment is required for the good of the city;
   (6)   Establish department goals, priorities and work plans consistent with
the goals and priorities of the mayor, city council and city manager;
   (7)   Conduct performance evaluations of department employees in accordance
with the personnel policies and procedures of the city;
   (8)   Implement risk management programs required by the city insurance
carriers and city manager to protect the health, safety and welfare of city
employees and the public; prevent financial losses and reduce insurance
premiums; conduct affairs of the department to reduce insurance premiums;
conduct affairs of the department to reduce the potential for claims and
lawsuits against the city;
   (9)   Maintain spending within the budget parameters established by the city
council and the city manager;
   (10)   Purchase equipment, supplies and services in accordance with the
procurement rules and procedures of the city;
   (11)   Recruit, select and appoint employees in accordance with the
personnel policies and procedures of the city;
   (12)   Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field
and implement such new practices within the parameters of city ordinances,
resolutions, policies and procedures, and regulations in the most efficient and
effective manner possible;
   (13)   Create and maintain a work environment free from sexual and other
forms of harassment;
   (14)   Create and maintain a work environment free from discrimination based
on race, color, age, sex, religion or national origin;
   (15)   Submit reports as required by the city manager detailing the
activities of the department;
   (16)   Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and
reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper
control of departmental activities and to form a basis for periodic reports to
the city council and city manager;
   (17)   Perform such other duties assigned by the city manager or that may be
prescribed by the city council or state law. (Ord. 2006-22, 2006)
CHAPTER 4
RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
2.04.101: Government Records Access And Management Act Adopted
2.04.102: Fees For Records Requests
2.04.101: GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT ACT ADOPTED:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all of
the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah government records access and management act, Utah Code
Annotated title 63, chapter 2, as amended, are hereby adopted by the city.
(Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.04.102: FEES FOR RECORDS REQUESTS:
The fees paid to the city in connection with a records request shall be in such
amounts as established by the consolidated fee schedule adopted by the city
council. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
CHAPTER 5
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
SECTION:
2.05.101: Administrative Hearings
2.05.102: Administrative Law Judge
2.05.103: Appeals Of Final Administrative Determinations
2.05.104: Employee Appeal Board
2.05.101: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
An administrative hearing:
   (1)   Shall be a public meeting;
   (2)   Shall be conducted by an administrative law judge;
   (3)   Shall provide due process for the parties;
   (4)   Shall be recorded or otherwise documented so that a true and correct
transcript may be made of its proceedings; and
   (5)   May not be held for a civil violation that occurs in conjunction with
another criminal violation as part of a single criminal episode that will be
prosecuted in a criminal proceeding. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.05.102: ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:
An administrative law judge:
   (1)   Shall be appointed by the city council to conduct administrative
hearings;
   (2)   May be an employee of the city; and
   (3)   Shall make a final administrative determination for each
administrative proceeding. (Ord. 2005-38, 2005)
2.05.103: APPEALS OF FINAL ADMINISTRATIVE DETERMINATIONS:
   (1)   If a final administrative determination is for a violation, the final
administrative determination may be appealed in accordance with this chapter.
   (2)   Any person adversely affected by a final administrative determination
may petition for review by the district court of the final administrative
determination, provided all administrative remedies have first been exhausted.
   (3)   In the petition, the petitioner may only allege that the final
administrative determination was arbitrary, capricious or illegal.
   (4)   The petition is barred unless it is filed within thirty (30) days
after the administrative determination is final.
   (5)   If a timely petition is filed, the city recorder shall transmit to the
reviewing district court the record of the administrative hearing, including
all findings and orders, and a true and correct transcript of the proceedings.
   (6)   The district court may not accept or consider any evidence that is not
included in the record of the administrative hearing unless the evidence was
offered at the administrative hearing and the district court determines that
the evidence was improperly excluded by the administrative law judge. (Ord.
2005-38, 2005)
2.05.104: EMPLOYEE APPEAL BOARD:
The city's administrative law judge, as provided under section
2.05.102 of this chapter, is hereby designated as the employee appeal board
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1106. (Ord. 2008-01, 2008)
CHAPTER 6
RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE GOVERNING PUBLIC MEETINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL,
PLANNING COMMISSION AND SENSITIVE LANDS COMMITTEE
SECTION:
Part 1. General
2.06.101: Purpose
2.06.102: Basic Principles
Part 2. Duties Of Chair And Vice Chair
2.06.201: Duties Of Chair
2.06.202: Duties Of Vice Chair
Part 3. Meetings
2.06.301: Meeting Schedule
2.06.302: Agenda Setting Procedures
2.06.303: Attendance At Meetings
2.06.304: Quorum Defined
2.06.305: Minimum Vote Required
2.06.306: Rules Of Procedure
2.06.307: Order Of Business For Public Hearings
2.06.308: Order Of Business For Regular Meetings
2.06.309: Motions
2.06.310: Second Required
2.06.311: Withdrawing A Motion
2.06.312: Motion To Amend
2.06.313: Motion To Table
2.06.314: Voting On Multiple Motions
2.06.315: Motion To Recess
2.06.316: Motion To Adjourn
2.06.317: Debate, Interruptions, And Questions
2.06.318: Voting
2.06.319: Rules Of Order
2.06.320: Suspension Or Alteration Of Rules
2.06.321: Work Meetings And/Or Field Trips
2.06.322: Cancellation
Part 4. Reconsideration
2.06.401: Grounds For Reconsideration
Part 5. Conduct Of Members
2.06.501: Code Of Ethics
Part 6. Amending Or Waiving Rules
2.06.601: Amendment Of Rules Of Procedure
2.06.602: Waiving Or Suspending Rules
2.06.603: Temporary Rule
PART 1. GENERAL
2.06.101: PURPOSE:
These rules of order and procedures are designed and adopted for the purpose of
providing guidance and direction to the members of the city council, planning
commission and sensitive lands committee in public meetings. (Ord. 2011-10,
2011)
2.06.102: BASIC PRINCIPLES:
   (1)   State Law Controls: If anything herein is in conflict with state law,
state law shall govern and control.
   (2)   Public Body: As used herein, the term "public body" shall refer to the
city council, the planning commission or the sensitive lands committee.
   (3)   Chair: As used herein, the term "chair" shall refer to either the
mayor or the person elected by the planning commission or sensitive lands
committee to act as chair.
   (4)   Vice Chair: As used herein, the term "vice chair" shall refer to the
person elected by the public body as either the mayor pro tem or vice chair.
   (5)   Equality Of Members: As the public body conducts its affairs in
accordance with these rules, each member has the same rights, privileges and
duties as any other member.
   (6)   Freedom Of Discussion: Members have the right to be heard and to hear
what others have to say about a motion before voting.
   (7)   Member Right To Know: Members have a right at all times to know the
immediate pending motion and have it restated prior to any vote.
   (8)   Meeting Properly Called: The public body may take official action only
in meetings properly called and with a quorum of members present.
   (9)   Actions Must Be Lawful: Actions taken by the public body must be in
accord with applicable city, state and federal law, including, but not limited
to, the Utah open and public meetings act. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
PART 2. DUTIES OF CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR
2.06.201: DUTIES OF CHAIR:
The chair, or in the chair's absence the vice chair, shall be in charge of all
proceedings before the public body, and shall take such actions as necessary to
preserve order and the integrity of all proceedings before the public body. The
chair's duties are as follows:
   (1)   Call the public body to order on the day and the hour scheduled and
proceed with the order of business.
   (2)   Announce the business before the public body in the order in which it
is to be acted upon.
   (3)   Receive and submit, all motions and propositions presented by the
members of the public body.
   (4)   Put to vote all questions which are properly moved, or which
necessarily arise in the course of proceedings, and to announce the results of
motions.
   (5)   Inform the public body, when necessary, on any point of order or
practice. In the course of discharge of this duty, the chair shall have the
right to call upon legal counsel for advice.
   (6)   Authenticate by signature, when necessary, or when directed by the
public body, all of the acts, findings and orders, and proceedings of the
public body.
   (7)   Maintain order at the meetings of the public body.
   (8)   Move the agenda along, hold down redundancy by limiting time allowed
for comments if necessary, set guidelines for public input, and reference
handouts and procedures during meetings.
   (9)   Recognize speakers and members prior to receiving comments and
presentations.
   (10)   Because the chair conducts the meeting, it is common courtesy for the
chair to take a less active role than other members in debates and discussions.
This does not mean that the chair should not participate; rather, the chair
should strive to be the last to speak at the discussion and debate stage.
   (11)   Should not make or second a motion unless he/she is convinced that no
other member will do so. In no event may the mayor make or second a motion.
(Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.202: DUTIES OF VICE CHAIR:
The vice chair, during the absence of the chair, shall have and perform all of
the duties and functions of the chair. In the event both the chair and vice
chair are absent from the meeting, then those members present shall elect one
of the members present to act as chair for that meeting by majority vote. (Ord.
2011-10, 2011)
PART 3. MEETINGS
2.06.301: MEETING SCHEDULE:
The public body shall establish its regular meeting schedule in December of
each year for the following calendar year. Special meetings may be requested by
a majority vote of the public body, or pursuant to section 10-3-502 of the Utah
code for the city council. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.302: AGENDA SETTING PROCEDURES:
   (1)   An item may be placed on the agenda by the mayor, city manager, or at
the request of at least two (2) members.
   (2)   Generally, the deadline for requesting placement of an application on
any public body agenda shall be at five o'clock (5:00) P.M., fifteen (15) days
prior to the public body meetings, to allow appropriate time for notifications
and staff review. Exceptions to the general deadline of fifteen (15) days prior
to the public body meeting may occur, provided there is sufficient time left to
comply with the open and public meetings act.
   (3)   The city manager shall review and approve all matters to be placed on
the agenda to assure adequate information and time is available for the public
body's consideration and decision.
   (4)   The city recorder or a deputy city recorder shall be responsible for
scheduling all public hearings for the public body and shall be responsible for
giving all required notices for meetings and public hearings for the public
body. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.303: ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
Every member of the public body shall attend the meetings of the public body,
unless duly excused. Any member desiring to be excused shall notify the city
recorder, who shall inform the chair of the member's planned absence. The
foregoing notwithstanding, however, state law provides that the legislative
body of a municipality may compel the attendance of its own members at its
meetings and provide penalties it considers necessary for the failure to comply
with an exercise of the authority to compel attendance. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.304: QUORUM DEFINED:
Three (3) members of the public body shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. Except in cases where the mayor is the chair, the
chair shall be included for purposes of establishing a quorum and shall act as
a voting member of the public body. If less than a quorum is present at a
meeting, said meeting shall be canceled or rescheduled to the public body's
next available meeting and appropriate notices given. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.305: MINIMUM VOTE REQUIRED:
All actions of the public body shall require the vote of at least three (3)
members, with mayoral vote as authorized by statute. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.306: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
The public body shall conduct its proceedings consistent with the provisions of
Utah law relating to cities. The chair of the public body shall rule on all
matters of procedure with fundamental fairness. The chair may be reversed on
matters of procedure by majority vote of the public body members present and
not disqualified. Any formal action of the public body shall be initiated by a
motion and shall be seconded prior to a vote of the membership. Voting shall be
by verbal vote; the chair, but not the mayor except in cases of a tie vote,
shall vote last if a roll call vote. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.307: ORDER OF BUSINESS FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS:
The following procedure will normally be observed for public hearings; however,
it may be rearranged by the chair for individual items if necessary for the
expeditious conduct of business:
   (1)   The chair shall introduce the item.
   (2)   Staff shall present its report and recommendations.
   (3)   The applicant or petitioner shall be invited to outline the nature of
the request and present supporting evidence if the applicant or petitioner
desires to do so.
   (4)   The chair shall open the public hearing. The chair, without objection
by members of the public body, may impose time limits for comment to facilitate
the business of the public body.
   (5)   The chair shall close the public hearing.
   (6)   The chair shall allow the applicant or petitioner to address issues
raised by the public comment.
   (7)   The chair shall allow members of the public body to discuss the matter
and ask questions of the applicant or petitioner.
   (8)   The chair shall call for a motion by the public body on the
application or petition. If a substantial amount of public comment was
received, the chair may entertain a motion to continue the matter to allow
members to review the public comment.
   (9)   If the motion is seconded, a vote must be taken by the public body.
(Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.308: ORDER OF BUSINESS FOR REGULAR MEETINGS:
The following procedure will normally be observed for all meetings of the
public body; however, it may be rearranged by the chair for individual items if
necessary for the expeditious conduct of business:
   (1)   The chair shall introduce the agenda item.
   (2)   Staff shall present its report and recommendations.
   (3)   The chair shall allow members of the public body to discuss the matter
and ask questions of staff.
   (4)   The chair may call for a motion by the public body on the agenda item.
   (5)   If the motion is seconded, a vote must be taken by the public body.
(Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.309: MOTIONS:
   (1)   Any member may make or second a motion.
   (2)   Motions should state findings for approval or denial within the
motion.
   (3)   The motion may refer to the staff report for the detail of the
findings of fact and conditions for approval if the author of the motion finds
them acceptable.
   (4)   Motions may be repeated for clarification following discussion and
prior to the vote at the request of any member.
   (5)   Members may request legal advice from the city attorney in the
preparations, discussion and deliberation of motions.
   (6)   Up to two (2) motions may be on the floor simultaneously. (Ord. 2011-
10, 2011)
2.06.310: SECOND REQUIRED:
Any motion of the public body that fails to be seconded shall be deemed
defeated. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.311: WITHDRAWING A MOTION:
After a motion is made, it may be withdrawn by the author of the motion any
time prior to the vote. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.312: MOTION TO AMEND:
When a motion is pending before the public body, any member may move to amend
the original motion any time prior to the vote. The motion to amend must be
germane to the initial motion and not the same as a negative vote on the
initial motion. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.313: MOTION TO TABLE:
A motion to table an agenda item for further study should be accompanied by
specific reasons for continuing the matter. Whenever possible, a specific date
to rehear the matter should be scheduled. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.314: VOTING ON MULTIPLE MOTIONS:
When two (2) motions are on the floor at the same time, the first vote should
be on the last motion made. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.315: MOTION TO RECESS:
A motion shall be made to break for a specific purpose while also stipulating a
specific time to reconvene the meeting. The time to reconvene must be during
the same day as the meeting in which the motion to recess was made. No motion
to reconvene shall be necessary. The foregoing notwithstanding, however, the
chair may declare an immediate recess in the event of any behavior that is
disruptive to the public meeting or that raises concern for public safety.
(Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.316: MOTION TO ADJOURN:
A motion to adjourn the meeting shall be made at the end of each public
meeting. A second followed by a vote is also required on a motion to adjourn.
(Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.317: DEBATE, INTERRUPTIONS, AND QUESTIONS:
No member of the public body shall interrupt or question another member in
debate without obtaining the acknowledgment of the chair. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.318: VOTING:
   (1)   Changing A Vote: No member shall be permitted to change his/her vote
after the chair announces the decision, except when properly reconsidering an
agenda item.
   (2)   Abstention: Any member may abstain from voting. However, an abstention
shall be the equivalent of a no vote.
   (3)   Roll Call Vote: State law provides that a roll call vote shall be
taken and recorded for all ordinances, resolutions, and any action which would
create a liability against the city and in any other case at the request of any
member of the city council by a "yes" or "no" vote. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.319: RULES OF ORDER:
In accordance with these rules and procedures, the chair shall decide all
points of procedure and order, unless otherwise directed by a majority vote of
the members in attendance. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.320: SUSPENSION OR ALTERATION OF RULES:
No standing rules of the public body shall be altered, amended, suspended or
rescinded without the vote of a majority of all the members of the public body.
(Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.321: WORK MEETINGS AND/OR FIELD TRIPS:
Work meetings and/or field trips of the public body may be held if found
necessary. Notice of the work meeting and/or field trip shall be in accordance
with city and state law. The public shall be allowed at field trip sites but
encouraged to present their case at the public body's meeting, not during the
field trip. Field trips shall be for the purpose of gathering information, not
for discussing decisions. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.322: CANCELLATION:
If no business is scheduled before the public body, or if it is apparent that a
quorum of the public body will not be available, any meeting may be canceled by
the chair by giving notice to all members. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
PART 4. RECONSIDERATION
2.06.401: GROUNDS FOR RECONSIDERATION:
   (1)   Basis For Reconsideration: A proper request for reconsideration shall
be based on one or more of the following:
      (a)   The prior decision was arbitrary, capricious or otherwise illegal;
      (b)   There was some material irregularity in the proceedings when the
matter was previously voted on by the public body that makes the previous
decision improper; or
      (c)   Newly discovered evidence that is material to persons adversely
affected by the original decision that was not or could not, with reasonable
diligence, have been discovered and produced at the meeting when the matter was
previously voted on by the public body.
   (2)   Procedure:
      (a)   During the meeting in which an agenda item has been voted on, the
public body may reopen the matter by simple majority vote and reconsider their
decision. The request to reconsider the matter must be made by a member who
voted with the majority.
      (b)   After adjournment of the meeting in which an agenda item was voted
upon, reconsideration must adhere to the following, except for legislative
matters which may be reconsidered by the city council at any time:
   (i) Only voting members of the public body may request reconsideration of an
agenda item which has been voted on by the public body.
   (ii) The request for reconsideration must be made by a member who voted with
the majority when the matter was previously voted on by the public body.
   (iii) The request for reconsideration shall be transmitted in writing to the
chair within thirty (30) days following the meeting the item was previously
voted on.
   (iv) At the next regularly scheduled meeting of the public body following
the chair's receipt of a proper request for reconsideration, under the agenda
item entitled "items to be placed on future agendas", the public body will
decide whether to reconsider the item on a future agenda. A majority vote in
favor of reconsideration will place the item on a future regularly scheduled
agenda of the public body. Failure to receive a majority vote will halt the
reconsideration process.
   (v) Items approved for reconsideration shall be placed on the next regularly
scheduled meeting agenda of the public body unless the public body specifically
votes to set a different schedule for reconsidering the matter. All affected
parties who appeared at and/or participated in the meeting at which the matter
was previously voted on shall be mailed written notice by the city recorder of
the date of reconsideration. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
PART 5. CONDUCT OF MEMBERS
2.06.501: CODE OF ETHICS:
Members of the public body shall comply with the standards of conduct set forth
in the Utah public officers' and employees' ethics act. Members of the public
body shall properly disclose all personal and/or business interests that create
a substantial conflict between his/her private interests and his/her public
duties. In the event a member is an applicant or presenter of an item that is
before the public body for decision, the member should not participate as a
member of the public body regarding that item, either in the discussion or
voting concerning that item. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
PART 6. AMENDING OR WAIVING RULES
2.06.601: AMENDMENT OF RULES OF PROCEDURE:
These rules of procedure may be amended by a future ordinance adopted by the
city council. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.602: WAIVING OR SUSPENDING RULES:
A rule of procedure may be suspended or waived at any meeting by a majority
vote of public body members present, unless such rule is set by state law or
city ordinance. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
2.06.603: TEMPORARY RULE:
A temporary rule of procedure, in conformity with state law and city ordinance,
may be adopted by the public body for a meeting or agenda item following a
unanimous vote of the public body members present. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
CHAPTER 7
ARTS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2.07.101: Creation, Number Of Members, Appointment
2.07.102: Powers And Duties
2.07.103: Term Of Office
2.07.104: Officers, Rules And Procedures
2.07.105: Notice Of Vacancies
2.07.106: Removals For Not Attending Meetings
2.07.107: Compensation; Cost Reimbursement
2.07.108: Meetings
2.07.109: Quorum And Vote
2.07.101: CREATION, NUMBER OF MEMBERS, APPOINTMENT:
The Ivins arts commission shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by
the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. It is the intent of
this chapter that the arts commission consist of a majority of members who
reside in Ivins and who, in the aggregate, have broad experience and expertise
in the arts and/or arts organization management and such other characteristics
valued by the city council. No member of the arts commission shall be an
elected official or an employee of Ivins City. (Ord. 2015-20, 2015)
2.07.102: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Ivins City arts commission shall have all powers necessary to fulfill the
following duties:
   (1)   Recommend to the city council how the arts master plan can best be
implemented;
   (2)   Recommend to the city council persons to be appointed to the arts
commission;
   (3)   Periodically review the arts master plan in accordance with its
provisions and recommend to the city council revisions to the plan when
warranted;
   (4)   Recommend to the city council applicants to receive RAP tax funding
for the arts under the competitive process set forth by the city council; and
   (5)   With the consent of the City Council, apply for art grant funds on
behalf of Ivins City. Prior to submitting an art grant fund application, the
arts commission shall provide the Director of Finance with a copy of the
application for determination if there is a contributory match requirement. To
expend funds obtained in this manner, the arts commission shall submit a check
request, with supporting documentation, to the Director of Finance for review,
processing, and payment.
   (6)   Apply for uncommitted arts RAP tax funds on behalf of Ivins City. To
expend funds obtained in this manner, the arts commission shall submit a check
request, with supporting documentation, to the Director of Finance for review,
processing, and payment.
(Ord. 2015-20, 2015; amd. Ord. 2019-05, 2019)
2.07.103: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office for each arts commission member shall be two (2) years. An
arts commission member may serve no more than three (3) consecutive two (2)
year terms. Terms of office shall begin on April 1 of each calendar year,
except that the city council may appoint the first members of the arts
commission to serve for staggered terms of one or two (2) years. (Ord. 2015-20,
2015)
2.07.104: OFFICERS, RULES AND PROCEDURES:
The officers of the arts commission shall be a chair and vice chair. A deputy
city recorder shall record and take minutes of the meetings of the arts
commission and the commission shall follow the rules of order and procedure set
forth in chapter 6 of this title. At its first meeting, and annually
thereafter, the members of the arts commission shall elect by a majority vote
such officers from among the members. The terms of each officer shall begin on
the day of election and continue until a successor is elected. No arts
commission member may serve more than one consecutive term in the same officer
position, but may again be elected to serve in the position once held so long
as he/she has been out of the office for at least one term. (Ord. 2015-20,
2015)
2.07.105: NOTICE OF VACANCIES:
Prior to the expiration of a sitting arts commission member's term, the mayor
may publish, through usual and customary methods, a notice of the vacancy and
the application deadline to be considered for appointment. Vacancies of
appointed members occurring for any reason other than the expiration of the
member's term may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by
appointment. (Ord. 2015-20, 2015)
2.07.106: REMOVALS FOR NOT ATTENDING MEETINGS:
An arts commission member who misses three (3) consecutive arts commission
meetings shall be deemed to have resigned and automatically removed from the
arts commission. (Ord. 2015-20, 2015)
2.07.107: COMPENSATION; COST REIMBURSEMENT:
The members of the arts commission shall serve without compensation; however,
members of the arts commission shall be reimbursed for previously approved
expenditures by following the process outlined in the city's purchasing
ordinance. (Ord. 2015-20, 2015)
2.07.108: MEETINGS:
The arts commission shall meet at least quarterly. The dates and agendas for
all arts commission meetings shall be posted in accordance with the usual
procedures used by Ivins City for public notice. Arts commission meetings shall
be open to the public and held in Ivins City Hall or such other location deemed
appropriate. The arts commission may receive and consider public input as
needed on various issues pertaining to the scope and purpose of the arts
commission. (Ord. 2015-20, 2015)
2.07.109: QUORUM AND VOTE:
A quorum shall consist of four (4) members. No business may be conducted on any
matter unless a quorum is present. A simple majority vote of members present is
required to take action on any matter. (Ord. 2015-20, 2015)
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 1
USE AND DISPOSAL OF CITY PROPERTY
SECTION:
Part 1. Use Of City Property
3.01.101: Unlawful Use
3.01.102: Exemptions
3.01.103: Repair Or Restoration
3.01.104: Franchise To Use Property
Part 2. Disposal Of City Owned Personal Property
3.01.201: Petition City Council
3.01.202: Advertisement For Sale
3.01.203: Property With No Resale Value
3.01.204: Removal Of Disposed Property From City Assets
Part 3. Disposal Of City Owned Real Property
3.01.301: Definitions
3.01.302: Notice; Public Comment
3.01.303: City Council Approval Required
PART 1. USE OF CITY PROPERTY
3.01.101: UNLAWFUL USE:
Unless authorized by permit or other written authorization issued by the city,
or unless authority is granted by provisions of this code or other ordinance of
the city now or hereafter enacted, it shall be a class B misdemeanor for any
person to:
   (1)   Construct, lay, excavate, erect, operate or maintain over, under,
across, in or through any property owned or controlled by this city any
utility, canal, ditch, construction or building;
   (2)   Enter upon any property of this city contrary to posting or marking
restricting or prohibiting use of the area; or
   (3)   Intentionally use or perform acts upon property of the city that
materially impairs, alters or damages the property. (Ord. 2010-16, 2010)
3.01.102: EXEMPTIONS:
It shall not be a violation of this chapter when any person uses the public
property of this city in the manner or for the purpose or purposes for which
such property has been made available for public use. (Ord. 2010-16, 2010)
3.01.103: REPAIR OR RESTORATION:
The city council, in addition to any other penalty, which may be imposed, may
order any person who has damaged, altered or changed any property of this city
to repair or restore the property to its condition prior to the damage,
alteration or change. (Ord. 2010-16, 2010)
3.01.104: FRANCHISE TO USE PROPERTY:
   (1)   The city council may grant to any person a franchise or easement on
such terms and conditions as it deems reasonable, for the purpose of entering
upon, constructing, building, operating and maintaining any business or for
other use of the property of this city, and the provisions of sections
3.01.101 and
3.01.102 of this chapter shall not apply to the extent such provisions are
waived, qualified or made inapplicable to the rights or privileges granted in
the franchise ordinance or easement.
   (2)   Any franchise or easement granted by this city shall be in writing and
any franchise or easement not in writing shall be void. (Ord. 2010-16, 2010)
PART 2. DISPOSAL OF CITY OWNED PERSONAL PROPERTY
3.01.201: PETITION CITY COUNCIL:
Department heads shall petition the city council for approval to classify as,
and then dispose of, any city owned personal property that is considered
surplus, obsolete or unusable. (Ord. 2010-16, 2010)
3.01.202: ADVERTISEMENT FOR SALE:
Any surplus personal property determined to have a resale value of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more shall be advertised for sale by the city
recorder. The city may refuse any or all bids on items offered for sale. (Ord.
2010-16, 2010)
3.01.203: PROPERTY WITH NO RESALE VALUE:
Property not deemed to have a resale value of at least five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) shall be disposed of by the department head in a manner deemed to
be in the best interest of the public and approved by the city manager. (Ord.
2010-16, 2010)
3.01.204: REMOVAL OF DISPOSED PROPERTY FROM CITY ASSETS:
The department head shall provide the director of finance with a list of all
such property disposed of so that it may be removed from the list of city
assets. (Ord. 2010-16, 2010)
PART 3. DISPOSAL OF CITY OWNED REAL PROPERTY
3.01.301: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CITY OWNED REAL PROPERTY: Any parcel of real property owned by the city,
excluding real property held jointly with other entities.
DISPOSAL OR DISPOSITION: The alienation of city owned real property by sale,
trade, or transfer of title.
SIGNIFICANT PARCEL: Any city owned real property. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.01.302: NOTICE; PUBLIC COMMENT:
Before the city disposes of a significant parcel of real property, the city
shall provide public notice of the proposed disposition and of a public hearing
to receive public comment on the proposed disposition. Notice of the public
hearing for a proposal to vacate a public street, right of way, or easement
shall be governed by section 10-9a-208 of the Utah code, as amended. All other
types of notices to dispose of real property shall be given at least fourteen
(14) days before the public hearing, shall give the date, time and place of the
public hearing, and shall be:
   (1)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area;
   (2)   Published on the Utah public notice website; and
   (3)   Posted at city hall and on the city's website. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.01.303: CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED:
Approval of the city council shall be required for the disposition of any
significant parcels of city owned real property, such approval coming after a
public hearing thereon has been held and finding made that it would be in the
city's best interest to proceed with the proposed disposition. The city council
shall also approve contracts related to the proposed disposition of significant
parcels of city owned real property. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
CHAPTER 2
MUNICIPAL TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3.02.101: Purpose
3.02.102: Collection Of Tax
3.02.103: Revenue Use
3.02.101: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to impose the maximum tax allowed by section
59-12-352 of the Utah code (currently 1 percent) on charges for the
accommodations and services described in subsection 59-12-103(1)(i), as
amended. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.02.102: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   (1)   The tax imposed above shall be collected and distributed as set forth
in section 59-12-354 of the Utah code, as amended. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.02.103: REVENUE USE:
All revenues generated by the transient room tax shall be added to the general
fund and the uses of the funds will be budgeted under the auspices of the
general fund. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
CHAPTER 3
LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.03.101: Purpose
3.03.102: Sales And Use Tax Levied
3.03.103: State Statutes Incorporated
3.03.104: Report Of Tax Collection; Point Of Sale; Public Utilities
3.03.105: Contract With State Tax Commission
3.03.106: Exemption From Tax
3.03.107: Tax Paid Not Part Of Purchase Price
3.03.101: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to conform the sales and use tax of the city
to the requirements of the sales and use tax act, Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, parts 1 and 2, 1953, as amended. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.03.102: SALES AND USE TAX LEVIED:
There is hereby levied, and there shall be collected and paid, a tax upon every
transaction listed in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-103(1) of the sales and
use tax act made within the city at the rate of one percent (1%). (Ord. 2016-
23, 2016)
3.03.103: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED:
   (1)   Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of the sales and use tax act, all of the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, parts 1 and 2, 1953, as amended, in force
and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales and
use taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, are adopted and
made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein.
   (2)   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, part 1, 1953, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the
taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in
this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city
for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state
tax commission, or of the constitution of the state of Utah, nor shall the name
of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result
of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or
any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state tax commission in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter.
   (3)   Any amendments made by the Utah legislature to Utah Code Annotated
title 59, chapter 12, parts 1 and/or 2, 1953, as amended, which would be
applicable to the city, are hereby incorporated herein by reference and shall
be effective upon the date they are effective as a Utah statute. (Ord. 2016-23,
2016)
3.03.104: REPORT OF TAX COLLECTION; POINT OF SALE; PUBLIC UTILITIES:
All sales and use taxes collected under this chapter shall be reported to the
state tax commission on forms, which accurately identify the location where the
sale or use transaction was consummated. If a retailer has no permanent place
of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or
places at which the retail sales are consummated for the purposes of this
chapter shall be determined under rules of the state tax commission. "Public
utilities", as defined by Utah Code Annotated title 54, 1953, as amended, shall
not be obligated to determine the place or places within the city where public
utility services are rendered, and the state tax commission shall apportion the
revenues arising from such services on an equitable basis pursuant to an
appropriate formula and under rules to be prescribed and adopted by it. (Ord.
2016-23, 2016)
3.03.105: CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
Pursuant to agreement, the state tax commission has been performing all
functions incident to the administration or operation of the sales and use tax
ordinance of the city. That agreement is hereby confirmed and the mayor is
authorized to enter into such supplementary agreement with the state tax
commission as may be necessary for the continued administration and operation
of the sales and use tax ordinance of the city as enacted by this chapter.
(Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.03.106: EXEMPTION FROM TAX:
The sale, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the
gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of which has been subject to sales
or use tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Utah
Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 2, 1953, as amended, by a county
other than Washington County or by any other Utah city or town shall be exempt
from the tax. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.03.107: TAX PAID NOT PART OF PURCHASE PRICE:
The amount of any tax paid under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part
1, 1953, as amended, shall not be included as a part of the purchase price paid
or charged for a taxable item hereunder. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
CHAPTER 4
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT GUARANTY FUND
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
CHAPTER 5
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT TAXES
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
CHAPTER 6
MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.06.101: Purpose
3.06.102: Definitions
3.06.103: Energy Sales And Use Tax
3.06.104: Exemptions From Energy Sales And Use Tax
3.06.105: Existing Franchise Agreements
3.06.106: Collection Of Taxes By State Tax Commission
3.06.107: State Statutes Incorporated
3.06.108: Additional License For Collection Of Tax Not Required
3.06.101: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the city council to provide both a stable revenue source
and create a more competitive environment for the energy industry by repealing
its utility franchise tax levied on gas and electricity and adopting a
municipal energy sales and use tax pursuant to, and in conformance with, Utah
Code Annotated section 10-1-301 et seq., the municipal energy sales and use tax
act. (Ord. 2000-12, 2000)
3.06.102: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
COMMISSION: The state tax commission.
CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to
the energy sales and use tax.
CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE: (1) A fee provided for in a franchise agreement and
that is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
   (2)   A fee similar to subsection (1) of this definition; or
   (3)   Any combination of subsections (1) and (2) of this definition.
DE MINIMIS AMOUNT: An amount of taxable energy that does not exceed the greater
of:
   (1)   Five percent (5%) of the energy supplier's estimated total Utah gross
receipts from sales of property or services; or
   (2)   Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
DELIVERED VALUE: (1) The fair market value of taxable energy delivered for sale
or use in the municipality and includes:
      (a)   The value of the energy itself; and
      (b)   Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service
charges, or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in
usable form to each class of customer in the municipality.
   (2)   "Delivered value" does not include the tax paid under:
      (a)   Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, tax collection;
      (b)   Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 2, the local sales
and use tax act.
ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except that the commission
may by rule exclude from this definition a person supplying a de minimis amount
of taxable energy.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract or agreement
granting a franchise.
FRANCHISE TAX: (1) A franchise tax;
   (2)   A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
   (3)   Any combination of subsections (1) and (2) of this definition.
PERSON: As defined in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-102(10).
SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in
any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
   (1)   Installment sales;
   (2)   Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
   (3)   Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable
energy is granted incident to the ownership or the leasing of the taxable
energy.
STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in Ivins City for any
purpose except sale in the regular course of business.
TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity.
USE: The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the
ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy. "Use" does not include the
sale, display, demonstration or trial of the taxable energy in the regular
course of business and held for resale. (Ord. 2000-12, 2000)
3.06.103: ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this chapter, a tax on
every sale or use of taxable energy made within the city equaling six percent
(6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax
shall be known as the "energy sales and use tax".
   (1)   The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable
energy to the consumer.
   (2)   The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy
imposed by the city or the state. (Ord. 2005-11, 2005)
3.06.104: EXEMPTIONS FROM ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX:
   (1)   Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b), the following
are exempt from the energy sales and use tax:
      (a)   Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, or special fuel subject
to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
      (b)   The sales and use of taxable energy that the city is prohibited
from taxing under federal law or the constitution of the United States or the
Utah constitution;
      (c)   The sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored in the
state for resale;
      (d)   The sales or use of taxable energy to a person if the primary use
is for compounding or producing taxable energy or fuel subject to taxation
under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13, motor and special fuel tax act;
      (e)   Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or
working in the state at the time of purchase;
      (f)   The sales or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than use
as a fuel; and
      (g)   The sale of taxable energy for use outside the corporate limits of
the city.
   (2)   The sale, storage, use or other consumption of taxable energy is
exempt from the energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter, provided:
      (a)   The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a
municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the
state; and
      (b)   The city has paid the difference between the tax paid to the other
municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this chapter, if the
tax due under this chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality.
   (3)   No exemptions shall be granted from the energy sales and use tax
imposed by this chapter except those specifically set forth in this section.
(Ord. 2000-12, 2000)
3.06.105: EXISTING FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS:
This chapter, as amended, shall not alter any existing franchise agreements
between the city and energy suppliers, except that any franchise fees
previously imposed on the sale or use of taxable energy within the city are
hereby repealed and replaced with the energy sales and use tax set forth in
this chapter. (Ord. 2005-11, 2005)
3.06.106: COLLECTION OF TAXES BY STATE TAX COMMISSION:
   (1)   On or before the effective date hereof, the city shall contract with
the state tax commission to perform all functions incident to the
administration and collection of the energy sales and use tax, in accordance
with this chapter. This contract may be a supplement to the existing contract
with the commission to administer and collect the local sales and use tax, as
provided in this code. The city may enter into supplementary agreements with
the state tax commission as may be necessary and proper for the continued
administration and operation of the energy sales and use tax ordinance enacted
by this chapter.
   (2)   An energy supplier shall pay the energy sales and use tax revenue
collected from consumers directly to the city if:
      (a)   The city is the energy supplier; or
      (b)   The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and
use tax collected annually from its Utah customers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more; and
      (c)   The energy supplier collects the energy sales and use tax. (Ord.
2000-12, 2000)
3.06.107: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED:
   (1)   Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 1, part 3,
municipal energy sales and use tax act, as well as this chapter, all of the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, and
in force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to
sales and use taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, and
excepting for the amount of the sales and use taxes levied therein, are adopted
and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
   (2)   Wherever and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, part 1, as amended, the state of Utah is named or referred to as
the taxing agency, the name of Ivins City shall be substituted, insofar as is
necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as Utah Code Annotated title
10, chapter 1, part 3, as amended. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed
to require substitution of the name Ivins City for the word "state" when that
word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or of the
constitution of the state, nor shall the name of Ivins City be substituted for
that of the "state" in any section when the result of such substitution would
require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather
than by or against the state tax commission in performing the functions
incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.
   (3)   Any amendments made to Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part
1, as amended, which would be applicable to the city for the purposes of
carrying out this chapter are incorporated herein by reference and shall be
effective upon the date that they are effective as a Utah statute. (Ord. 2000-
12, 2000)
3.06.108: ADDITIONAL LICENSE FOR COLLECTION OF TAX NOT REQUIRED:
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use
tax is required, provided the energy supplier collecting the tax has a license
issued under Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-106. (Ord. 2000-12, 2000)
CHAPTER 7
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX
SECTION:
3.07.101: Municipal Telecommunications License Tax
3.07.102: Tax Rate
3.07.103: Collection Of Taxes By State Tax Commission
3.07.101: MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX:
There is hereby levied upon every telecommunications provider a municipal
telecommunications license tax on the telecommunications provider's gross
receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed to the city in
accordance with section 10-1-407 of the Utah code. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.07.102: TAX RATE:
The rate of the telecommunications license tax levied and to be collected by
the city shall be the maximum rate allowed by section 10-1-403 of the Utah code
(currently 3.5 percent). (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.07.103: COLLECTION OF TAXES BY STATE TAX COMMISSION:
On or before the effective date hereof, the city shall contract with the state
tax commission to perform all functions incident to the administration and
collection of the municipal telecommunications license tax, in accordance with
this chapter. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
CHAPTER 8
MOBILE TELEPHONE SERVICE REVENUE TAX
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
CHAPTER 9
COMMERCIAL UTILITY ACCOUNTS
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
CHAPTER 10
DONATIONS
SECTION:
3.10.101: Purpose
3.10.102: Definitions
3.10.103: Funds; Accounting
3.10.104: Acceptance Of Monetary Donations
3.10.105: Acceptance Of Nonmonetary Donations
3.10.101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the acceptance of donations for any
public use by the city and to specify policies and procedures for doing so.
(Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.10.102: DEFINITIONS:
DONATION: Any monetary or nonmonetary contribution, gift, grant, devise or
bequest to the city.
   (1)   A monetary donation includes cash or a check, money order or other
negotiable instrument.
   (2)   A nonmonetary donation includes real or personal property. In the
event of a stock donation, such a donation would be liquidated and turned into
cash or another liquid asset and treated as a monetary donation.
   (3)   All donations not meeting the definition of a "restricted donation"
shall be unrestricted and the city shall have absolute discretion to use the
donations for any purpose.
RESTRICTED DONATION: A donation that can only be used by the city for a special
purpose specified in writing by the donor and agreed to by the city.
   (1)   Prior to accepting a restricted donation, the person authorized to
approve the acceptance of such donation shall consider the impacts of the
donation, including impacts on future or ongoing operations or capital costs
associated with the donation.
   (2)   Restricted donations shall be deposited into the appropriate fund/
account for the purpose specified by the donor and agreed to by the city. (Ord.
2016-23, 2016)
3.10.103: FUNDS; ACCOUNTING:
The city treasurer shall be responsible for depositing all donations in a
timely manner. The director of finance shall track the proposed use of any such
donations and shall maintain separate records of accounts showing receipts and
disbursements. The director of finance may establish further rules and
regulations for the accounting and administration of donations, consistent with
this chapter. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.10.104: ACCEPTANCE OF MONETARY DONATIONS:
   (1)   Donations Under Five Thousand Dollars: Department heads are authorized
to approve the acceptance of any monetary donations of less than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) on behalf of the city. All such donations shall only be
received by city employees authorized and bonded to receive money on behalf of
the city and all donations shall be turned over to the city treasurer to be
deposited into the appropriate account.
   (2)   Donations Under Ten Thousand Dollars: The city manager is authorized
to approve the acceptance of any monetary donations of less than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) on behalf of the city. All such donations shall only be
received by city employees authorized and bonded to receive money on behalf of
the city and all donations shall be turned over to the city treasurer to be
deposited into the appropriate account.
   (3)   Donations Greater Than Ten Thousand Dollars: The city council shall
approve the acceptance of any monetary donations greater than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) on behalf of the city. All such donations shall only be
received by city employees authorized and bonded to receive money on behalf of
the city and all donations shall be turned over to the city treasurer to be
deposited into the appropriate account. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
3.10.105: ACCEPTANCE OF NONMONETARY DONATIONS:
All nonmonetary donations shall be reported to the director of finance for
booking and tracking of city assets.
   (1)   Donations Under Five Thousand Dollars: Department heads are authorized
to approve the acceptance of any nonmonetary donations of personal property
valued at less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) on behalf of the city.
   (2)   Donations Under Ten Thousand Dollars: The city manager is authorized
to approve the acceptance of any nonmonetary donations of personal property
valued at less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) on behalf of the city.
   (3)   Donations Greater Than Ten Thousand Dollars: The city council shall
approve the acceptance of any nonmonetary donations of personal property valued
at greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or any donation involving
real property, on behalf of the city. All such donations shall be handled by
and through the city attorney. (Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
CHAPTER 11
RECOVERY OF EXPENSES FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCIES
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-23, 2016)
CHAPTER 12
PURCHASING
SECTION:
Part 1. General Provisions
3.12.101: Purpose
3.12.102: Definitions
3.12.103: Ethics Of Public Contracting
3.12.104: Greater Restrictions Prevail
3.12.105: Severability
3.12.106: Contractor Verification Of Employment Eligibility
Part 2. Purchasing Authority
3.12.201: Purchase Orders Required
3.12.202: Duties Assigned
3.12.203: Authorization Required
3.12.204: Department Head Authorization
3.12.205: Routing
3.12.206: Check Signing
3.12.207: Purchasing Agent Responsibilities
3.12.208: City Manager Responsibilities
Part 3. Bidding Requirements
3.12.301: Competitive Bid Required For Building Improvements
3.12.302: Competitive Bid Required For Public Works Projects
3.12.303: Procurement Of Professional Services
3.12.304: Purchase Orders And Contracts Not Requiring Bids
3.12.305: Advertisement, Rejection And Extension Of Bids
3.12.306: Bonds Of Bidders May Be Required
3.12.307: Contracts Required
Part 4. Inspection And Payment; Fixed Assets
3.12.401: Inspection Of Merchandise Received
3.12.402: When Checks May Be Written
3.12.403: Fixed Assets
Part 5. Checks And Balances
3.12.501: Separation Of Cash Receipting And Accounting Responsibilities
Required
Part 6. Disposal Of City Property 1
   (Rep. by Ord. 2010-16, 2010)
Part 7. Appeals
3.12.701: Appeals
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 1 of this title.
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
3.12.101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a policy and procedure for
purchases and payments made by the city. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.102: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BIDDING: The procedure used to solicit quotations on price and delivery from
various prospective suppliers of supplies, equipment and/or contractual
services.
BUILDING IMPROVEMENT: Includes any repair, maintenance or construction of city
owned buildings.
BUSINESS: Any corporation, limited corporation, partnership, individual, sole
proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal
entity.
CHANGE ORDER: A written order directing the contractor to suspend work or make
changes, which the appropriate clauses of the contract authorize, without the
consent of the contractor, or any written alteration in specifications,
delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity or
other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties
to the contract.
CITY: When used in this chapter, refers to Ivins City.
CONTRACT: Any city agreement for the procurement or disposal of supplies,
services or construction.
DEPARTMENT HEAD: That individual who administers a department or his/her
designee as specified in writing to the purchasing agent or, in the absence of
a department head, the city manager.
EMERGENCY CONDITION: A situation that creates a threat to public health,
welfare or safety.
FIXED ASSET: Capital asset purchased for or valued at five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) or greater.
INVITATION FOR BIDS: All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, used for soliciting bids.
OFFEROR: Person submitting the bid. See also definition of Responsible Bidder.
PAYMENT BOND: A contract of guaranty for the protection of each person
supplying labor, service, equipment or material for the performance of the work
provided for in a contract.
PERFORMANCE BOND: A contract of guaranty executed subsequent to award by a
successful bidder to protect the city from loss due to the inability of the
bidder to complete the contract as agreed.
PERSON: Any business, individual, union, committee, club, other organizations
or group of individuals.
PROCUREMENT: Purchasing, renting, leasing, leasing with an option to purchase,
or otherwise acquiring any supplies, services or construction.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: Services such as auditing, architects, engineers,
consulting, contracts or other service providers.
PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT: Includes any repair, maintenance or construction of
streets, water transportation and storage, sewer, and storm drain projects.
PURCHASE DESCRIPTION: The words used in a solicitation to describe the
supplies, services or construction to be purchased and includes specifications
attached to or made a part of the solicitation.
PURCHASE ORDER: Official document used in committing city funds for the
purchase of supplies, equipment or services.
PURCHASING AGENT: That person duly authorized by the city manager to administer
purchasing policies and regulations.
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP): All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, utilized for proposal solicitation.
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A bidder who submits a responsible bid; who has furnished,
when requested, information and data to prove that his financial resources,
production or service facilities, service reputation and experience are
adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the supplies, equipment or
contractual services on which he bids; and who has not violated or attempted to
violate any provisions of this chapter.
ROUTINE EXPENSES: Expenses such as payroll, payroll taxes and related expenses,
utility bills and similar expenses, payment for previously approved leases,
contracts, professional services and maintenance of city equipment and
property. Included in the definition of a "routine expense" is any expense for:
   (1)   A tangible or intangible good that may aid in the performance of the
work of the city, including but not limited to supplies, equipment, vehicles,
software, etc.; provided however that such item must at a minimum be (a)
generally identified by type (i.e., "truck," "software," etc.) in the approved
annual budget and therein assigned a specific amount constituting the maximum
amount that can be spent on the item without obtaining additional approval by
the city council and (b) actually cost less than the specified maximum amount;
and
   (2)   A service that occurs at least annually, including but not limited to
maintenance of city equipment and property such as road resurfacing, etc., that
was anticipated when the annual budget was approved and which, if paid, will
not exceed the total appropriated amount for that category of expense as
reflected in the approved annual budget.
   A "routine expense" does not include any expense related to a new building
improvement, a new capital improvement project, or a new professional service
contract until such building improvement, capital improvement project, or
professional service contract has otherwise been approved as required by this
chapter or other applicable law.
SPECIFICATION: Any description of the physical or functional characteristics,
or of the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may include a
description of any requirement for inspection, testing, or preparing a supply,
service or construction item for delivery.
(Ord. 2006-27, 2006; amd. Ord. 2024-14, 8-15-2024)
3.12.103: ETHICS OF PUBLIC CONTRACTING:
   (1)   No person involved in making procurement decisions may have personal
investments in any business entity the city contracts with, as this will create
a substantial conflict between their private interests and their public duties.
   (2)   Any person involved in making procurement decisions is guilty of a
felony if the person asks for, receives, or offers to receive any emolument,
gratuity, contribution, loan or reward, or any promise thereof, either for the
person's own use or the use or benefit of any other person or organization,
from any person or organization interested in selling to the city. (Ord. 2006-
27, 2006)
3.12.104: GREATER RESTRICTIONS PREVAIL:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter shall be considered as minimum requirements. Where the provisions of
any statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant imposes greater
restrictions than the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of such
statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant shall prevail. (Ord. 2006-27,
2006)
3.12.105: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason to be held invalid, that section shall be severed from the chapter
and shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.106: CONTRACTOR VERIFICATION OF EMPLOYMENT ELIGIBILITY:
   (1)   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote compliance with
federal and state laws governing employment eligibility and verification of
workers by entities that contract with the city.
   (2)   Contractor Verification:
      (a)   All requests for proposals and all contracts for the procurement of
goods and services under this chapter shall contain the following statement:
By submitting a proposal and/or by signing this contract, contractor certifies
that it does not and will not, during the performance of this contract,
knowingly employ or subcontract with any entity which employs workers in
violation of 8 U.S.C. §1324a. Contractor agrees to produce, at the City's
request, such documents which are required to verify compliance with applicable
federal and state laws. If the contractor knowingly employs workers in
violation of 8 U.S.C. §1324a, such violation shall be cause for unilateral
cancellation of the contract between contractor and the City. In the event this
contract is terminated due to violation of 8 U.S.C. §1324a by the contractor or
by a subcontractor of the contractor, the contractor shall be liable for any
and all costs associated with such termination including, but not limited to,
any damages incurred by the City, as well as attorney's fees.
      (b)   The foregoing statement shall also be accompanied by a signature
line for the contractor to sign, thereby acknowledging that the contractor has
read, understands, and agrees to comply with the requirements of federal and
state law regarding eligibility of workers.
   (3)   Use Of Status Verification System: As required by section 63G-11-103
of the Utah code:
      (a)   Required: A contractor shall register and participate in the status
verification system in order to enter into a contract with the city; and
      (b)   Verification Of Eligibility: The city will not enter into a
contract for the physical performance of services within the state with a
contractor unless the contractor registers and participates in the status
verification system to verify the work eligibility status of the contractor's
new employees that are employed in the state.
      (c)   Exception: This subsection (3) does not apply to contracts entered
into prior to July 1, 2009, or that involve underwriting, remarketing, broker-
dealer activities, securities placement, investment advisory, financial
advisory, or other financial or investment banking services. (Ord. 2008-12,
2008)
PART 2. PURCHASING AUTHORITY
3.12.201: PURCHASE ORDERS REQUIRED:
   (1)   A purchase order shall be used whenever goods and limited services are
to be acquired by outright purchase in an amount exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), except when a purchasing card is used for purchases up to five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with department head approval of a cost allocation
report in lieu of a purchase order. The purchase order shall specify the nature
of the goods or services to be acquired, the purchase price or estimate
thereof, the date of the purchase, freight charges, prompt payment discounts,
the delivery date, the vendor from whom acquired, the department for whom the
acquisition is being made, the general ledger number assigning funding for the
proposed purchase, signature of purchaser, and other information that is
pertinent to the clear understanding of the purchase. The purchase order shall
incorporate by reference all the terms, conditions and specifications, if any,
contained in the related request for bids. (Ord. 2009-06, 2009; amd. Ord. 2015-
16, 2015)
   (2)   It is the policy of the city that payment for goods or services shall
not be made until the goods or services have been delivered. (Ord. 2009-06,
2009)
3.12.202: DUTIES ASSIGNED:
   (1)   Disperse Purchase Orders: The purchasing agent shall be responsible
for dispersing purchase orders, keeping records of all purchase orders, and
overseeing the operations of the purchasing function in such a manner as to
effectively execute procurement and property acquisition and disposition
policies established by the city council by policy declaration, or by the city
manager by way of administrative directive, and as incorporated in this
chapter.
   (2)   Duties Delegated: The city manager may delegate purchasing
responsibility to an employee on a temporary basis. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.203: AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED:
   (1)   Purchase orders shall require authorization as follows:
 
Amount                              Authorization Required
Up to $10,000                       Department Head
Over $10,000 up to $25,000          Department Head and City Manager
Over $25,000 - routine expenses     Department Head and City Manager
Over $25,000 - non-routine expenses Department Head, City Manager, and City
                                    Council
 
   (2)   Authorization of purchase orders for expenditures within the amounts
specified above shall be made prior to the purchase of any item or service.
Each department head approving a routine expense greater than twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall provide the city council with a report of
such expense within 30 days of approving the expense. The city manager shall
ensure that such reports are timely made to the city council.
   (3)   All purchase orders for expenditures over twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00), excluding routine expenses, shall be approved by the city council
prior to the purchase of any item or service.
   (4)   The department head's approval on all purchase orders shall signify
that there are sufficient unencumbered funds in the requesting department's
appropriated budget for the purchase.
   (5)   Nothing in this section removes any other procurement process or
requirement as described in this chapter or any other applicable law, including
but not limited to any requirement to obtain bids/quotes or follow specified
standards for selection or awards, etc.
(Ord. 2015-16, 2015; amd. Ord. 2023-07, 2023; Ord. 2024-14, 8-15-2024)
3.12.204: DEPARTMENT HEAD AUTHORIZATION:
   Each department head shall be authorized to purchase items costing up to ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and to disperse and authorize use of the purchase
orders which the department head has received from the purchasing agent.
(Ord. 2006-27, 2006; amd. Ord. 2015-16, 2015; amd. Ord. 2023-07, 2023; Ord.
2024-14, 8-15-2024)
3.12.205: ROUTING:
A purchase order number shall be issued to the vendor at the time the purchase
is made. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.206: CHECK SIGNING:
Checks for all expenditures shall be signed by the city treasurer, or in his/
her absence the deputy treasurer, and the city recorder, or in his/her absence
an authorized designee, after written approval of the check register by the
city manager. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.207: PURCHASING AGENT RESPONSIBILITIES:
The purchasing agent shall periodically review lists of approved vendors, being
alert to unknown vendors, vendors with names similar to other known vendors,
vendors with no physical address or telephone number, vendors whose addresses
match employee addresses, and certify that purchase orders are preapproved by
the appropriate signatures. The purchasing agent shall determine that there are
sufficient unencumbered funds in the appropriated budget for purchases
requested on a purchase order. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.208: CITY MANAGER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   (1)   The city manager shall review the contents of all bank statements and
review all bank reconciliations. The city manager's review shall include
accounting for all checks and the sequence of checks, making sure all payees
are known and recognizable, checking for alteration of any checks, being sure
all checks are signed by authorized signatories, and being alert to any other
unusual items. The city manager shall approve all transfers of money between
city accounts.
   (2)   In addition, the city manager shall be alert to any changes in
employee attitudes, behavior and lifestyles and shall also require all
employees responsible for cash receipting, cash management, or accounting to
take a minimum of five (5) consecutive days of vacation during each calendar
year. In addition, the city manager shall provide an opportunity for employees
to anonymously report the occurrence of fraud or other misconduct. (Ord. 2009-
06, 2009)
PART 3. BIDDING REQUIREMENTS
3.12.301: COMPETITIVE BID REQUIRED FOR BUILDING IMPROVEMENTS:
   (1)   Bid Requirements: All purchases and contracts, whether by sealed bid,
quotation or negotiation, shall be made on a competitive basis to the maximum
practical extent, except as noted below:
 
Amount Of Purchase      Bid Required
Up to $1,000.00         No bid required; competitive quotes recommended
$1,001.00 to $40,000.00 Informal bids required (2 if possible)
Over $40,000.00         Formal bid required
 
   (2)   Amounts In Excess Of Forty Thousand Dollars:
      (a)   If the improvement is a building improvement and the estimated cost
of the improvement is in excess of forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00), the
city shall, if it determines to do the work, only do so by contract let to the
lowest responsible bidder after publication of notice at least twice in a
newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the city at least
five (5) days prior to the opening of bids.
      (b)   The term "lowest responsible bidder" means any prime contractor who
has bid in compliance with the invitation to bid and within the requirements of
the plans and specifications for a construction project, who is the lowest
bidder, who has furnished a bid bond or equivalent in money as a condition to
the award of a prime contract and who furnishes a payment and performance bond
as required by law.
      (c)   When the cost of a contemplated improvement exceeds the bid
requirement sum, the job cannot be divided into smaller jobs to avoid having to
bid the job.
      (d)   The purchasing agent shall send out all bids based on the
information provided by the department head and shall keep a list of the date
the bids were mailed and a list of the vendors to whom the bids were mailed.
The purchasing agent shall also receive all bids and keep a list of the date
and time they were received. Whenever practical, the opening of the bids shall
be made in the presence of the department head and the city recorder.
   (3)   Amounts Up To Forty Thousand Dollars But In Excess Of One Thousand
Dollars: If the improvement is a building improvement and the estimated cost of
the improvement is forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) or less, but in excess
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the city may make the improvement without
calling for bid, except as otherwise provided within this chapter.
   (4)   Purchases Up To One Thousand Dollars; Competitive Bid Not Required:
These purchases shall be obtained by using purchase orders issued by the
department head to obtain supplies and services, which have been approved as
part of the budget.
      (a)   Written competitive bids are not required, but the department head
or his/her designee is encouraged to obtain competitive quotations.
      (b)   The employee receiving the supplies shall sign the delivery ticket
to designate that he/she obtained the supplies or services in good condition.
(Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.302: COMPETITIVE BID REQUIRED FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS:
   (1)   Requirements: All public works projects, whether by sealed bid,
quotation or negotiation, shall be made on a competitive basis to the maximum
practical extent except as noted below:
 
Amount Of Purchase       Bid Requirement
Up to $1,000.00          No bid required - competitive quotes required
$1,001.00 to $125,000.00 Informal bids required (2 if possible)
Over $125,000.00         Formal bid required
 
   (2)   Amounts In Excess Of One Hundred Twenty Five Thousand Dollars:
      (a)   If the improvement is a public works project and the estimated cost
of the improvement or maintenance of existing facilities is in excess of one
hundred twenty five thousand dollars ($125,000.00), the city shall, if it
determines to do the work, only do so by contract let to the lowest responsible
bidder after publication of notice at least twice in a newspaper of general
circulation printed and published in the city at least five (5) days prior to
the opening of bids. The cost shall be estimated by the city engineer.
      (b)   The term "lowest responsible bidder" means any prime contractor who
has bid in compliance with the invitation to bid and within the requirements of
the plans and specifications for a construction project, who is the low bidder,
who has furnished a bid bond or equivalent in money as a condition to the award
of a prime contract and who furnishes a payment and performance bond as
required by law.
      (c)   When the cost of a contemplated improvement exceeds the bid
requirement sum, the job cannot be divided into smaller jobs to avoid having to
bid the job.
      (d)   The purchasing agent shall send out all bids based on the
information provided by the department head and shall keep a list of the date
the bids were mailed and a list of the vendors to whom the bids were mailed.
The purchasing agent shall also receive all bids and keep a list of the date
and time they were received. Whenever practical, the opening of the bids shall
be made in the presence of the department head and the city recorder.
   (3)   Amounts Up To One Hundred Twenty Five Thousand Dollars, But In Excess
Of One Thousand Dollars: If the improvement is a public works project and the
estimated cost of the project is one hundred twenty five thousand dollars
($125,000.00) or less, but in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the
city may make the improvement without calling for bid, except as otherwise
provided within this chapter.
   (4)   Purchases Up To One Thousand Dollars; Competitive Bid Not Required:
These purchases shall be obtained by using purchase orders issued by the
department head to obtain supplies and services, which have been approved as
part of the budget.
      (a)   Written competitive bids are not required, but the department head
or his/her designee is encouraged to obtain competitive quotations.
      (b)   The employee receiving the supplies shall sign the delivery ticket
to designate that he/she obtained the supplies or services in good condition.
(Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.303: PROCUREMENT OF PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:
The procurement of professional services shall be based upon qualifications and
shall be secured on a competitive basis to the maximum practical extent except
as noted below:
 
Amount Of Contract                          Request For Proposals
Up to $50,000.00 per fiscal year (Utah
procurement code defines anything less than No RFP required; competitive quotes
$100,000.00 as a small contract not         recommended
requiring formal RFP procedures)
Over $50,000.00 in 1 fiscal year            Formal request for proposals
 
The city council shall approve the award of contracts for professional services
exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in any single fiscal year. The
award of contracts for professional services less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) may be approved jointly by the applicable department head and the
city manager. Awards shall be made to the individual or firm whose proposal is
determined to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration
price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. (Ord.
2013-15, 2013)
3.12.304: PURCHASE ORDERS AND CONTRACTS NOT REQUIRING BIDS:
   (1)   Sole Source: The restrictions contained above shall not apply in cases
where purchases or contracts are for items which can only be purchased from a
single or sole source manufacturer or distributor and no reasonable similar
alternative exists. The purchase order shall justify the sole source exemption
and shall be signed by the appropriate department head and the city manager.
   (2)   Contracts Not Suited To Competitive Bidding: Contracts which by their
nature are not suited to award by competitive bidding shall not be subject to
the competitive bidding requirements of this chapter. These contracts include:
      (a)   Contracts for items that can only be purchased from a single or
sole source provider.
      (b)   Contracts for additions to and repairs and maintenance of equipment
owned by the city which may be efficiently added to, repaired or maintained by
only a particular person or firm.
      (c)   Contracts for equipment which, by reason of the training of city
personnel or the inventory of replacement parts maintained by the city, is more
compatible with the existing equipment owned by the city.
   (3)   Utilities Purchase: Utility services such as water, electric power,
natural gas and telephone, except when alternative supplies or services are
available.
   (4)   Court Fees: Witness and jury fees and other payments as may be ordered
by the court.
   (5)   Return Of Deposits: Water deposits and other deposits collected for
specific purposes may be returned upon the requirements of the deposit being
met.
   (6)   Emergency: When a public emergency will not tolerate the delay
incident to the advertising for a solicitation of bids, the department head
shall determine the emergency and then file a report with the city manager. The
city manager shall determine and approve the payment of emergency purchases
under the following conditions:
      (a)   Purchases under this subsection shall be based on a need that is
compelling and of unusual urgency, such as when the city would be seriously
injured financially or otherwise if the personal property or services were not
furnished by a certain time, and when they could not be procured by that time
by means of advertising, bidding and/or solicitations of quotations as
previously defined.
      (b)   The department for whom the emergency purchases are made shall, as
soon as practical, file a written report with the city manager, which shall
contain the following information:
         (i)   The conditions which created the emergency, and a description of
the threat to the health, welfare or safety of the public pursuant to finding
that an emergency existed;
         (ii)   The basis for the selection of the particular contractor or
supplier and a description of what efforts were utilized to identify and
contact alternative suppliers or contractors;
         (iii)   The contractor's or supplier's name and address, along with a
list of the supplies, materials, services or construction procured under the
contract;
         (iv)   Completed and signed purchase orders with attached invoices
requesting payment for the emergency purchases.
      (c)   The city manager shall review the report submitted and, if
appropriate, shall declare the condition an emergency and shall approve the
report and purchase orders and authorize the payment for the emergency
purchases.
         (i)   The city manager is empowered to declare a state of emergency,
for the purposes of this chapter, when, in his/her opinion, such a condition
exists, and, when the amount to be expended to meet such emergency does not
exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
         (ii)   When the city manager finds and declares an emergency, the city
manager, in conjunction with the department for whom the emergency purchases
are made, shall, as soon as practical, present a written report to the mayor
and city council which shall contain the following information:
            (A)   The conditions which created the emergency, and a description
of the threat to the health, welfare or safety of the public pursuant to
finding that an emergency existed;
            (B)   The basis for the selection of the particular contractor or
supplier and a description of what efforts were made to identify and contract
alternative suppliers or contractors;
            (C)   The contractor's or supplier's name and address, along with a
list of the supplies, materials, services or construction procured under the
contract;
            (D)   Completed signed purchase orders with attached invoices
requesting payment for the emergency purchases.
         (iii)   The city council shall review the report submitted, and if
appropriate, shall ratify the city manager's declaration of the emergency
condition, and shall approve the report and requisitions and authorize the
payment of the emergency purchases.
   (7)   State Procurement Contracts:
      (a)   Purchases made from vendors who are under state procurement
contract, when the price is that price established by the contract awarded by
the state after competitive bidding pursuant to state code, or less.
      (b)   Purchases made from vendors who, within the past sixty (60) days,
have been under state procurement contract, when the price offered is the price
established by the former contract awarded by the state after competitive
bidding pursuant to state code, or less.
   (8)   Government Goods And Services: Those goods and services made available
by any federal, state or local unit of government, or association of
government, and acquired in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or
state code.
   (9)   Fringe Benefits: Purchases of services or benefits that are part of
any personnel fringe benefit agreements are authorized by the city council and
may be negotiated between the city manager and the service or benefit vendor.
   (10)   City Owned Concession Or Recreation Facility: Purchases or contracts
for supplies, materials or inventory to be used for resale at any city owned
and/or operated concession or recreation facility.
   (11)   Public Auction And Other Similar Circumstances: Supplies, materials
or equipment that can be purchased at any public auction, closeout sale,
bankruptcy sale or other similar sale, at a price below the market cost in the
community.
   (12)   Exchange Of Supplies, Material Or Equipment: Exchanges of supplies,
material or equipment between the city and any other entity.
   (13)   Utah Correctional Industries Division: Supplies, material or
equipment produced by the Utah correctional industries division. (Ord. 2006-27,
2006)
3.12.305: ADVERTISEMENT, REJECTION AND EXTENSION OF BIDS:
   (1)   Advertisement Of Bid:
      (a)   The department head shall provide the purchasing agent with an
appropriate advertisement or description of the item to be advertised so that
the purchasing agent may formulate a bid advertisement. The purchasing agent
shall then, with the concurrence of the city manager, place the advertisement
in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The request for bid
shall include:
         (i)   A description of the material, supplies, services, personal
property or construction in sufficient detail that prospective bidders should
know what their obligations will be, which description may be made either in
the advertisement itself or by reference to detailed plans and specifications
on file with the purchasing agent;
         (ii)   Deadline for bids to be received;
         (iii)   Time and place for the opening of the bids;
         (iv)   Notification of the city's requirements for a bidder's good
faith deposit, bid bond, or performance bond, as well as proof of liability
insurance and workers' compensation insurance;
         (v)   An announcement that the city may reject all bids, or any part
thereof;
         (vi)   Any other information upon which the bidder must rely in order
to be a responsible bidder.
      (b)   Contracts shall be awarded based on competitive sealed bidding,
except as otherwise provided herein.
      (c)   An invitation for bids shall be issued when a contract is to be
awarded by competitive sealed bidding. The invitation shall include a purchase
description and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the
procurement.
      (d)   Public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given within a
reasonable time prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids.
The notice may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation within
the city within a reasonable time prior to bid opening.
"Reasonable time" for purposes of this chapter, means that a notice of an
invitation for bids shall, prior to the acceptance of a bid, be published at
least once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in one or more newspapers of
general circulation within the city.
      (e)   Bids shall be opened publicly at the time designated in the
invitation in the presence of one or more witnesses (including the purchasing
agent and the concerned department head when practical) at city hall, or other
place designated in the invitation for bids if use of the city hall is not
available or impracticable.
      (f)   The amount of each bid and any other relevant information specified
in the bid notice, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded by
the city recorder at the time the bids are opened. The record and each bid
shall be open to public inspection.
      (g)   Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or
correction, except as authorized in this chapter.
      (h)   Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the
invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such
as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a
particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and will be
considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable. The
criteria may include discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle
cost. No criteria may be used in bid evaluations that are not set forth in the
invitation for bids.
      (i)   Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or
after award, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes,
shall be permitted in accordance with rules and regulations set out in the bid
notice.
      (j)   After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provisions of
bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair competition shall be
permitted. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or rules and
regulations set out in the bid notice, all decisions to permit the correction
or withdrawal of bids or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes
shall be supported by a written determination made by the city manager or city
council, depending on the value of the bid received, and in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      (k)   The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written
notice to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder whose bid meets the
requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. In the event
all bids for a construction project exceed available budgeted funds as
certified by the city recorder and the lowest responsive and responsible bid
does not exceed such funds by more than five percent (5%), the city manager is
authorized, in situations where time or economic considerations preclude
resolicitation of bids of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the
bid price, including changes in the bid requirements, with the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount
of available funds.
      (l)   When it is considered impractical to initially prepare a purchase
description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be
issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an
invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers have been qualified
under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation.
   (2)   Rejection Of Bids:
      (a)   An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other
solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected,
in whole or in part, specified in the solicitation, when it is in the best
interests of the city in accordance with rules and regulations set out in the
bid notice or invitation. The reasons for such rejections shall be made part of
the contract or bid file. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
      (b)   The city council shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts
of all bids or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services
included in the proposed contract, when the lowest responsible bid exceeds
available budgeted funds as certified by the city recorder, or when the public
interest will be served thereby and when permitted by law to do so. When all
bids exceed available budgeted funds and time or economic considerations
preclude resolicitation of work or purchase of a reduced scope or quantity, the
purchasing agent may negotiate an adjustment of the bid price, including
changes in the bid requirements, with the lowest responsible bidder, in order
to bring the low bid within the amount of available funds. (Ord. 2007-20, 2007)
   (3)   Extension Of Bids: The city manager may extend the time for opening of
bids, if in his/her opinion it is in the public interest to do so. Notice of
the extension shall be given to all prospective bidders by the purchasing agent
in such manner as is most practical under the circumstances. Such extension
shall not exceed ten (10) working days. No extension may be granted for the
purpose of qualifying a bid that was delivered after the time advertised for
the original opening.
   (4)   Late Bids: No bids shall be received or accepted at any time
subsequent to the time indicated in the announcement. Any bids delivered by
mail, or any other means, subsequent to the appointed time shall not be opened.
   (5)   Responsible Bidder: The city shall award contracts, which are required
to be let by competitive bidding under this chapter to the lowest responsible
bidder. The city may reject the lowest bid and accept the next lowest bid if
the city determines that the lowest bid was made by a bidder who is not
responsible.
      (a)   The city may consider any or all of the following when determining
whether a bidder is responsible:
         (i)   Whether the bid fully complies with the invitation for bids;
         (ii)   The bidder's financial responsibility;
         (iii)   The bidder's honesty and integrity;
         (iv)   Whether the bidder has the skill and business judgment to
complete the contract;
         (v)   The bidder's experience;
         (vi)   Whether the bidder has the facilities and equipment to complete
the contract;
         (vii)   The bidder's conduct under other contracts, regardless of
whether the contracts were with the city or with other parties;
         (viii)   The quality of the bidder's other work, regardless of whether
the work was performed for the city or for other parties; and
         (ix)   Any other matter bearing on the likelihood that the bidder will
promptly and efficiently perform the contract.
      (b)   If the city determines that the lowest bidder is not responsible,
the city shall notify the bidder in writing that it is rejecting the bidder's
bid. The notice shall also contain a short description of the reasons for the
rejection. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.306: BONDS OF BIDDERS MAY BE REQUIRED:
   (1)   Bidders may be required to supply deposits of good faith, or bonds
with sufficient sureties, in such amounts as shall be deemed adequate and
approved by the city manager or city council, as set out in the bid notice, not
only to ensure performance of the contract or purchase order in the time and
manner prescribed, but also to save, indemnify, and hold the city harmless
against losses, damages, claims, liabilities, judgments, costs, and expenses
which may accrue in consequence of granting the contract or purchase order.
   (2)   Before any contract for the construction, alteration or repair of any
public building, public work or public improvement of the city is awarded to
any person, that person shall furnish to the city such bonds as are required by
state code.
   (3)   Exceptions include repair and maintenance on city equipment and
property. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.307: CONTRACTS REQUIRED:
   (1)   A contract signed by both parties is required when:
      (a)   Personal property is acquired by means of lease, rental or
installment purchase;
      (b)   Personal or professional services are required by the city, except
where the services are to be performed at the vendor's place of business, or
where the services are for nonrepetitive repairs or maintenance, and where a
purchase order has been bid or negotiated to cover said services;
      (c)   Consultant services are to be acquired;
      (d)   Real estate or any interest therein is to be acquired except:
         (i)   When acquired pursuant to the power of eminent domain and entry
of a decree by a court of competent jurisdiction;
         (ii)   When acquired as a result of the filings and recording of a map
or plat as required by the city subdivision ordinance;
      (e)   The requesting office, department, agency or city council shall so
specify;
      (f)   The vendor requires that a contract other than a purchase order be
signed by the city; and
      (g)   Intergovernmental, interagency and service provider agreements
require participation by the city involving funding, performance or assumption
of liability or risk in any form.
   (2)   The following procedure should be followed for all contracts for
construction:
      (a)   Two (2) original copies of the contract document shall be prepared
with all required supplemental information attached, signed by the contractor,
and forwarded to the city recorder. Required attachments are:
         (i)   One hundred percent (100%) performance bond;
         (ii)   One hundred percent (100%) payment bond;
         (iii)   Certificate of liability insurance;
         (iv)   Certificate of workers' compensation insurance.
      (b)   The city recorder shall review the contract document and all
attachments.
      (c)   Contracts over twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be
forwarded to the city attorney for review and approval.
      (d)   The city recorder shall submit the contract document with all
required attachments to the mayor for signature, and attest the mayor's
signature.
      (e)   Upon final contract approval, the city recorder shall return one
original and one copy of the signed contract to the appropriate department head
and retain the second original contract.
      (f)   The appropriate department head shall prepare the notice to proceed
for the contractor and submit a copy of the notice to proceed to the city
recorder for filing with the original contract.
      (g)   Upon completion of the project, the appropriate department head
shall prepare a notice of completion and submit the notice of completion to the
city recorder for filing with the original contract.
      (h)   No work may begin prior to final contract approval. (Ord. 2006-27,
2006)
PART 4. INSPECTION AND PAYMENT; FIXED ASSETS
3.12.401: INSPECTION OF MERCHANDISE RECEIVED:
   (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the department head or his designees
to immediately inspect all material, supplies, equipment and personal property
of any nature purchased pursuant to this chapter prior to the acceptance of the
delivery.
   (2)   The signature of the individual conducting the inspection shall be
required on all packing/delivery slips to designate that they have received and
inspected the merchandise.
   (3)   Damaged property or items not specified on the purchase order shall
not be accepted, and the nonconforming nature of the goods, together with the
reason for rejection thereof, shall be noted in writing upon the delivery
receipt. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.402: WHEN CHECKS MAY BE WRITTEN:
Checks may be written after proof of receipt or completion and an invoice for
the expenditure is received. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
3.12.403: FIXED ASSETS:
Whenever payment is made for an acquisition costing five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) or more, the director of finance shall forthwith record said
acquisition in the fixed asset inventory records of the city and shall cause a
property sticker to be placed upon said asset. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
PART 5. CHECKS AND BALANCES
3.12.501: SEPARATION OF CASH RECEIPTING AND ACCOUNTING RESPONSIBILITIES
REQUIRED:
Employees responsible for cash receipting shall not be involved in accounting
functions. Employees responsible for accounting functions shall not be involved
in cash receipting. (Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
PART 6. DISPOSAL OF CITY PROPERTY 1
   (Rep. by Ord. 2010-16, 2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 1 of this title.
PART 7. APPEALS
3.12.701: APPEALS:
   (1)   Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror or contractor who is
aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may appeal
to the city recorder. An appeal shall be submitted in writing within five (5)
working days after the aggrieved person knows or should have known of the
facts.
   (2)   The city recorder shall promptly issue a written decision regarding
any appeal, if it is not settled by a mutual agreement. The decision shall
state the reasons for the action taken and inform the protestor, contractor or
prospective contractor of the right to appeal to the city manager.
   (3)   The city manager shall be the final appeal on the city level.
   (4)   All further appeals shall be handled in accordance with state code.
(Ord. 2006-27, 2006)
CHAPTER 13
CABLE FRANCHISES
SECTION:
Part 1. General
3.13.101: Short Title
3.13.102: Definitions
3.13.103: Franchise Required
3.13.104: Franchise Purposes
3.13.105: Nonexclusive Franchise
3.13.106: Duration
3.13.107: Police Powers
3.13.108: Use Of Rights Of Way
3.13.109: Relocation Of Facilities
3.13.110: Pole Or Conduit Agreements
3.13.111: Franchise Fees
3.13.112: Taxes
Part 2. Obtaining A Cable Franchise
3.13.201: Application
Part 3. Customer Service Standards
3.13.301: Customer Service Policy
3.13.302: Courtesy And Accessibility
3.13.303: Responsiveness
3.13.304: Repairs And Outages
3.13.305: Bills, Credits, Refunds And Deposits
3.13.306: Treatment Of Property
3.13.307: Services For Customers With Disabilities
3.13.308: Customer Information
3.13.309: Safety
3.13.310: Complaints To The City
3.13.311: Remedying Violations
Part 4. Regulations
3.13.401: Access Programming
3.13.402: Financial And Insurance Requirements
3.13.403: Other Authorizations
3.13.404: Liquidated Damages
3.13.405: Rules And Regulations Of The City
3.13.406: Delegation Of Powers
3.13.407: Design, Functionality And Technical Standards
3.13.408: Provision Of Cable Service
3.13.409: Construction Standards
3.13.410: Street Cut Or Repair
3.13.411: Safety Requirements
3.13.412: Regulation Of Rates And Charges
3.13.413: Discriminatory Practices Prohibited
3.13.414: Equal Employment Opportunity
3.13.415: Reimbursement
3.13.416: Franchise Renewal
3.13.417: Franchise Revocation
3.13.418: Miscellaneous Provisions
PART 1. GENERAL
3.13.101: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CABLE FRANCHISE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2011-09,
2011)
3.13.102: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural.
Words otherwise not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ACCESS: Includes public, educational and governmental access and means the
availability for noncommercial use by various public, educational and
governmental agencies, institutions and organizations in the community,
including the city and its designees, of a particular channel on the cable
system to receive and distribute video programming to subscribers, including,
but not limited to:
   (1)   "Public access" means access where local institutions or residents are
the primary users having editorial control over programming and services.
   (2)   "Educational access" means access where schools are the primary users
having editorial control over programming and services.
   (3)   "Governmental access" means access where governmental institutions or
their designees are the primary users having editorial control over programming
and services.
ACCESS CHANNEL: Channel capacity designated for public, educational or
governmental access use, or otherwise made available to facilitate access
programming.
APPLICANT: Any person or entity that applies for an initial franchise.
CABLE SERVICE: The one-way transmission to customers of video programming or
other programming service, and customer interaction, if any, which is required
for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming
service.
CABLE SYSTEM: Any facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is
provided to multiple customers within a community, but such term does not
include: a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations; b) a facility that serves customers
without using any public right of way; c) a facility of a common carrier which
is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the
communications act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable
system (other than for purposes of section 621(c) of the communications act) to
the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to customers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on demand services; d) an open video system that complies with
federal statutes and regulations; or e) any facilities of any electric utility
used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
CITY: Ivins City, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah, and all of the
area within its boundaries, as such may change from time to time.
CITY COUNCIL: The Ivins City council, or its successor, the governing body of
the city.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT: The communications act of 1934, as amended by, among other
things, the cable communications policy act of 1984, the cable consumer
protection and competition act of 1992, and the telecommunications act of 1996,
as it may be further amended from time to time.
CUSTOMER: Any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose,
cable service provided by a franchisee by means of or in connection with the
cable system and whose premises are physically wired and lawfully activated to
receive cable service from franchisee's cable system.
CUSTOMER SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE OR CSR: Any person employed by the franchisee
to assist or provide service to customers, whether by answering public
telephone lines, answering customers' questions or performing other customer
service related tasks.
CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS: Those customer service standards set forth herein
and as hereafter amended that are applicable to franchisees.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
FRANCHISE: An agreement that authorizes a person or entity to construct,
operate, maintain or reconstruct a cable system. Upon the written acceptance by
a franchisee, the agreement constitutes a contract between the city and
franchisee.
FRANCHISE AREA: The area within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city to be
served by a franchisee as specified in the franchise.
FRANCHISEE: The person, firm, corporation or entity to whom or which a
"franchise", as herein defined, is granted by the city council under this
chapter and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of said person, firm,
corporation or entity.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS: Those hours during which most similar businesses in the
city are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" must
include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some weekend
hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS: Those service conditions that are within the
control of the franchisee. Those conditions that are not within the control of
the franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those
conditions that are ordinarily within the control of the franchisee include,
but are not limited to, special promotions, pay per view events, rate
increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade
of the cable system.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: All of the following which have been dedicated
to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under
public authority or by others and are located within the city: streets,
roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges, sidewalks, easements and
similar public property and areas.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION: The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable
channels. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.103: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to engage in or commence construction, operation or maintenance
of a cable system in the city without a franchise issued under this chapter.
The city council may, by ordinance, issue a nonexclusive franchise to
construct, operate and maintain a cable system within the city to any person or
entity, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who applies for
authority to furnish cable service which complies with the terms and conditions
of this chapter, and provided that such person or entity also agrees to comply
with all of the provisions of the franchise. However, this shall not be deemed
to require the grant of a franchise to any particular person or entity. The
city council may restrict the number of franchises should it determine such a
restriction would be in the public interest. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.104: FRANCHISE PURPOSES:
A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall:
   (1)   Permit the franchisee to engage in the business of operating a cable
system and providing cable service within the city;
   (2)   Permit the franchisee to erect, install, construct, repair,
reconstruct, replace and retain wires, cables, related electronic equipment,
conduits and other property in connection with the operation of the cable
system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across rights of way within the
city; and
   (3)   Set forth the obligations of the franchisee under the franchise. (Ord.
2011-09, 2011)
3.13.105: NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive and not
preclude the city from granting other or future franchises or permits. (Ord.
2011-09, 2011)
3.13.106: DURATION:
The term of any franchise, and all rights, privileges, obligations and
restrictions pertaining thereto, shall be specified in the franchise. The
effective date of any franchise shall be as specified in the franchise. (Ord.
2011-09, 2011)
3.13.107: POLICE POWERS:
In accepting any franchise, the franchisee acknowledges that its rights
thereunder are subject to the police powers of the city to adopt and enforce
ordinances necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public, and it
agrees to comply with all applicable laws enacted by the city pursuant to such
power. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.108: USE OF RIGHTS OF WAY:
For the purposes of operating and maintaining a cable system in the city, a
franchisee may place and maintain within the rights of way such property and
equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the cable
system. Prior to construction of the cable system in the rights of way, the
franchisee shall procure all necessary permits, pay all applicable fees in
connection therewith and comply with all applicable laws, regulations,
resolutions and ordinances, including, but not limited to, land use and zoning
requirements. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.109: RELOCATION OF FACILITIES:
If at any time during the term of any franchise the city shall elect to alter
or change the grade or location of any street or other public way, the
franchisee shall, upon reasonable notice by the city, remove and relocate its
poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes and other facilities at its own
expense, and in each instance comply with the standards and specifications of
the city. However, a franchisee shall not be obligated to pay the cost of any
relocation that is required or made a condition of a private development and
may charge the expense of relocation to the developer. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.110: POLE OR CONDUIT AGREEMENTS:
No franchise shall relieve franchisee of any of its obligations involved in
obtaining pole or conduit agreements from any department of the city, any
utility company or from others maintaining facilities in the rights of way.
(Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.111: FRANCHISE FEES:
The franchisee shall pay the city franchise fees in accordance with the terms
of the franchise and applicable law. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.112: TAXES:
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the franchisee's obligation to pay
applicable local, state and federal taxes. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
PART 2. OBTAINING A CABLE FRANCHISE
3.13.201: APPLICATION:
   (1)   An applicant for an initial franchise shall submit to the city a
written application on a form provided by the city, at the time and place
specified by the city for accepting applications, and accompanied by the
designated application fee.
   (2)   The application fee shall be the amount established in the city's
consolidated fee schedule and shall accompany the application to cover costs
associated with processing the application, including, without limitation,
costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of
the applicant, notice and publication requirements, and document preparation
expenses.
   (3)   An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall
contain, at a minimum:
      (a)   The legal name and business address of the applicant;
      (b)   The name and contact information of the applicant's contact person;
      (c)   A statement as to the proposed franchise and information relating
to the characteristics and location of the proposed cable system;
      (d)   A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise
of the applicant in the cable system field;
      (e)   Information demonstrating the applicant's legal, technical and
financial ability to construct and operate the proposed cable system;
      (f)   A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a
partnership, members, if a limited liability company, or the percentage of
stock owned or controlled by each stockholder having a five percent (5%) or
greater interest, if a corporation;
      (g)   A list of officers, directors and key employees of the applicant,
together with a description of the background and experience of all such
persons;
      (h)   The names and addresses of any parent entity or subsidiary of the
applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in
whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant;
      (i)   A proposed construction and service schedule, designating the
proposed geographic areas within the franchise area to be constructed and
served by the applicant during the franchise term, and setting forth specific
benchmarks for determining when such construction shall be completed and
service commenced;
      (j)   A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications
of rates and charges to be made against customers and all rates and charges as
to each of any said classifications, including installation charges, service
charges, and special, extraordinary or other charges. The purchase price,
terms, and nature of any optional or required equipment, device, or other thing
to be offered for sale to any subscriber shall be described and explained in
detail;
      (k)   A specific description of applicant's planned system technical
design, upstream and downstream capacity and speed, provision for analog or
digital services or packages, distribution of fiber, planned count of
households per residential node, and any other information necessary to
demonstrate that the applicant's technology will be deployed so as to be able
to successfully offer cable services in the proposed locations;
      (l)   The applicant's proposed access channel capacity and capital
support;
      (m)   The requested term of the franchise;
      (n)   A statement whether the applicant holds an existing authorization
to access the rights of way and the basis for such authority or asserted
authority; and
      (o)   Any other reasonable information that the city may request.
   (4)   The city shall be allowed the opportunity to ask relevant follow up
questions and obtain further information from whatever source. A refusal by an
applicant to cooperate or provide requested information is sufficient grounds
for the city to deny an application.
   (5)   Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise and after
obtaining any additional information the city in its sole discretion deems
appropriate from any source, a hearing shall be scheduled to allow public
comment. At the hearing, the city council shall receive public comment
regarding the following:
      (a)   Whether the public will benefit from granting a franchise to the
applicant;
      (b)   Whether the applicant appears to have adequate legal, financial and
technical qualifications and capabilities to build, operate and maintain a
cable system in the city;
      (c)   Whether the applicant has any conflicting interests, either
financial or commercial, that will be contrary to the interests of the city;
      (d)   Whether the applicant will comply with all of the terms and
conditions placed upon a franchisee by the franchise, this chapter and other
lawfully applicable local laws and regulations; and
      (e)   Whether the applicant will comply with all relevant federal and
state laws and regulations pertaining to the construction, operation and
maintenance of the cable system.
   (6)   Within the time frame prescribed by applicable law, the city council
shall decide whether to grant a franchise and on what conditions. The city
council's decision shall be based upon the application, any additional
information submitted by the applicant or obtained by the city from any source
and public comments. The city council may grant one or more franchises or may
decline to grant any franchise. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
PART 3. CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
3.13.301: CUSTOMER SERVICE POLICY:
   (1)   A franchisee will first resolve customer inquiries and complaints
without delay and without involvement of the city. Where a given complaint is
not addressed by the franchisee to the customer's satisfaction, the city may
intervene.
   (2)   These standards are intended to be of general application. A
franchisee is free to exceed these standards for the benefit of its customers.
However, the franchisee shall be relieved of obligations hereunder if it is
unable to perform due to a force majeure event affecting a significant portion
of the franchise area. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.302: COURTESY AND ACCESSIBILITY:
   (1)   Courtesy: All employees of the franchisee shall be courteous,
knowledgeable and helpful and shall provide effective and satisfactory service
in all contacts with customers.
   (2)   Availability And Accessibility - In Person: The franchisee must
maintain, at a minimum, one customer service center located in Washington
County, Utah. This customer service location shall at all times allow customers
to make payments, return equipment or get assistance from knowledgeable staff.
The customer service center shall be open Monday through Saturday, excluding
legal holidays, with sufficient hours necessary to meet customer demand. The
customer service center will be staffed to meet all customer needs with on site
customer service representatives. If, however, the customer service center is
required to relocate, the franchisee shall be allowed a reasonable period of
time to establish a new location.
   (3)   Availability And Accessibility - On The Telephone:
      (a)   A CSR will be available to respond to customer inquiries during
normal business hours. The franchisee shall maintain local or toll free
telephone access lines that shall be available during normal business hours for
service/repair requests and billing inquiries.
      (b)   The franchisee shall retain sufficient CSRs and telephone line
capacity to ensure that, during normal operating conditions, telephone calls to
service/repair and billing inquiry lines are answered within thirty (30)
seconds or less, and that any transfers are made within thirty (30) seconds.
This standard shall be met no less than ninety percent (90%) of the time,
measured on a quarterly basis under normal operating conditions. Under normal
operating conditions, the total number of calls receiving busy signals shall
not exceed three percent (3%) of the total telephone calls.
      (c)   The franchisee shall not be required to acquire equipment or
perform surveys to measure compliance with any of the telephone answering
standards above unless and until the city requests such actions based on a
historical record of customer complaints indicating a clear failure to comply.
(Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.303: RESPONSIVENESS:
   (1)   The franchisee shall complete all standard aerial installations within
seven (7) days after an order has been placed, unless otherwise requested by
the customer. The franchisee shall schedule all standard underground
installations within seven (7) days after an order has been placed, unless
otherwise requested by the customer. "Standard" installations shall include
those that are located within one hundred fifty (150) aerial feet or seventy
five (75) underground trench feet of the franchisee's distribution system. This
standard must be met ninety five percent (95%) of the time under normal
operating conditions as measured on a quarterly basis. If the customer requests
a nonstandard installation, or the franchisee determines that a nonstandard
installation is required, the franchisee shall provide the customer in advance
with a total installation cost estimate and an estimated date of completion.
   (2)   Under normal operating conditions, all temporary cable drops shall be
converted to a permanent drop within no more than three (3) calendar weeks from
the initial installation or at a time mutually agreed upon between the
franchisee and customer.
   (3)   Customers requesting installation of cable service or repair service
to an existing installation may choose any available four (4) hour block of
time for the appointment during normal business hours.
   (4)   The franchisee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for
service under the provisions of this subsection when a technician arrives
within the agreed upon time. If the customer is absent when the technician
arrives, the technician shall leave written notification of timely arrival. A
record that notice was provided shall be kept by the franchisee.
   (5)   If a franchisee representative fails to keep an installation or
service appointment for any reason, the franchisee will contact the customer
before the end of the scheduled appointment and reschedule the appointment at a
time convenient for the customer.
   (6)   The franchisee shall respond to a customer's letter in writing within
two (2) weeks of receipt of the letter. The franchisee shall initiate
resolution to a customer's inquiry, complaint, general question or comment made
by telephone or e-mail within forty eight (48) hours.
   (7)   Any difficulties that cannot be resolved by the CSR shall be referred
to the appropriate supervisor who shall use his/her best efforts to contact the
customer within twenty four (24) hours of initial contact and resolve the
problem within a mutually agreeable time frame. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.304: REPAIRS AND OUTAGES:
   (1)   The franchisee shall interrupt service only for good cause and for the
shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions that the franchisee anticipates
will last more than four (4) hours shall occur during periods of minimum use of
the cable system as reasonably determined by the franchisee.
   (2)   If a customer calls to report poor signal quality or interruptions
attributable to the franchisee's equipment, the franchisee shall begin working
on the problem no later than the next day following the customer's call,
provided that the customer is available or at such later time as is convenient
for the customer. If an appointment is necessary, the customer may choose a
four (4) hour block of time during normal business hours.
   (3)   Upon discovery of an outage affecting three (3) or more customers, the
franchisee shall initiate its outage repair process within two (2) hours, under
normal operating conditions.
   (4)   A franchisee shall initiate repairs to customer reported service
interruptions, for any cause beyond the control of the franchisee, within
twenty four (24) hours after the conditions beyond its control have been
corrected.
   (5)   Under normal operating conditions, if after twenty four (24) hours
service is not restored to a customer, a franchisee shall, upon a customer's
request, provide a refund or credit or other compensation of equal or greater
value.
   (6)   The franchisee will track and record all outages and service
interruptions that occur within the franchise area. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.305: BILLS, CREDITS, REFUNDS AND DEPOSITS:
If a customer requests disconnection of any or all services, billing for
affected services shall end on the same day as the request, or on the future
date for which the disconnect is ordered. However, the customer may continue to
be billed for equipment until returned to the franchisee. The franchisee shall
issue a credit or refund to a customer within thirty (30) business days after
the close of the billing cycle following the return of the equipment and
request for disconnection. If a customer was required to provide a deposit,
that deposit must be returned when appropriate. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.306: TREATMENT OF PROPERTY:
   (1)   Removal or trimming of trees and shrubs in the right of way will be
subject to the regulations of the city.
   (2)   The franchisee shall repair any damage or restore any property to as
good a condition as before the work causing such damage or disturbance was
initiated. The franchisee shall repair, replace or compensate all property
owners for damages resulting from the franchisee's installation, construction,
service or repair activities.
   (3)   Except in the case of an emergency involving public safety or service
interruption to a large number of customers, the franchisee shall give
reasonable notice to property owners or legal tenants prior to entering upon
private premises, and the notice shall specify the work to be performed;
provided that, in the case of planned construction operations, such notice
shall be delivered or provided at least twenty four (24) hours prior to entry.
All work done in the right of way shall be subject to time requirements of the
permit.
   (4)   Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing access or entry to
private property, or any other property, where such right to access or entry is
not otherwise provided by law.
   (5)   For major construction or installation projects, the franchisee shall
notify by mail or door hanger the adjacent property owners/legal tenants in
advance of the right of way work. In the case of an emergency, the franchisee
shall attempt to contact the property owner or legal tenant in person, and in
the event personal contact is not made, the franchisee shall leave a door
hanger notice.
   (6)   The franchisee shall clean all areas surrounding any work site of
debris caused by the franchisee's activities. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.307: SERVICES FOR CUSTOMERS WITH DISABILITIES:
   (1)   For any customer with a disability, the franchisee shall upon a
customer request and at no charge deliver and/or pick up converters at the
customer's home.
   (2)   The franchisee shall provide TDD/TTY service with trained operators
who can provide assistance for hearing impaired customers at no charge.
   (3)   The franchisee shall comply with the Americans with disabilities act.
(Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.308: CUSTOMER INFORMATION:
   (1)   The franchisee shall provide to customers an accurate, comprehensive
service agreement and customer installation packet upon installation, including
the following information:
      (a)   Products and services offered by the franchisee, including channel
positions of programming carried on the cable system.
      (b)   The franchisee's complete range of service options and the prices
for those services and conditions of subscription to programming and other
services.
      (c)   Installation and service maintenance policies, including the
customer's and franchisee's responsibilities for equipment.
      (d)   Billing and complaint procedures for investigation and resolution
of customer service complaints, including the address and telephone number of
the franchisee's office(s), the franchisee's policies on deposits, credit
balances and returned check charges.
      (e)   Policies concerning protection of customer privacy as required
under law.
      (f)   The availability of a parental control/lock out device and the
procedures for channel blocking.
      (g)   Service termination procedure.
      (h)   A description of the manner that will be used to provide notice of
changes in rates, services or service terms and conditions.
      (i)   The phone number of the customer service department that is
responsible for handling cable questions and complaints for the franchisee.
This information shall be prominently displayed in the installation packet.
   (2)   The franchisee shall provide customers with written notification of
any changes in rates, programming, services or channel positions as soon as
possible in writing. Customers shall be given a description of the changes, a
phone number for questions and the effective date. Notice must be given to
customers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the
change is within the control of the franchisee.
   (3)   All officers, agents and employees of the franchisee, its contractors
and subcontractors who are in personal contact with customers shall have
visible identification cards bearing their name and photograph.
   (4)   Every vehicle of the franchisee, its contractors and subcontractors,
shall be clearly identified to the public as a vehicle of the franchisee. (Ord.
2011-09, 2011)
3.13.309: SAFETY:
   (1)   The franchisee shall install and locate its facilities, cable system
and equipment in compliance with all federal, state, local and company safety
standards, and in such manner as shall not endanger persons or property.
   (2)   Whenever the franchisee receives notice that an unsafe condition
exists with respect to its equipment, the franchisee shall investigate such
condition immediately, and shall take such measures as are necessary to remove
or eliminate any unsafe condition. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.310: COMPLAINTS TO THE CITY:
   (1)   Any customer shall be entitled to lodge any complaint directly with
the city. The customer may lodge the complaint either by calling the city or by
filing a written complaint, by letter or in electronic form.
   (2)   If the city decides that further action is warranted, the city may
intercede and attempt to help reach a resolution and/or require the franchisee
to address the inquiry in a timely manner. Upon request by the city, the
franchisee shall notify the city of the status of the inquiry and any
subsequent resolution.
   (3)   The franchisee shall maintain, in a manner consistent with the privacy
rights of customers, an accurate and comprehensive file of complaints regarding
the cable system or the franchisee's operation of the cable system, by number
and type and their disposition; service requests, identifying the number and
nature of the requests and their disposition; and outages, service
interruptions and their disposition. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.311: REMEDYING VIOLATIONS:
If the city has reason to believe that the franchisee has failed to comply with
any of these standards, or has failed to perform in a timely manner, or if
similar complaints repetitively arise, the city may require in writing that the
franchisee remedy the noncompliance. If the noncompliance is not remedied to
the satisfaction of the city, the city may opt to follow the liquidated damages
procedures or seek other remedies set forth in the franchise, or pursue any
other remedies at law or in equity. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
PART 4. REGULATIONS
3.13.401: ACCESS PROGRAMMING:
   (1)   The city supports the production of access programming dedicated to
the educational, civic and recreational needs and interests of the city's
residents. In connection therewith, the city desires to encourage the
production of quality local programming meeting the following objectives:
      (a)   Create a community telecommunications network for the purpose of
disseminating public, educational and governmental information and events to
the city's residents;
      (b)   Coordinate production of programming in cooperation with the city's
public, educational and governmental entities;
      (c)   Produce quality programming that will inform, educate, entertain
and enlighten the city's residents and keep them apprised of events and issues
in the community; and
      (d)   Foster community spirit and identity by utilizing cable
communications as a vehicle for sharing skills, talents and knowledge of the
city's residents.
   (2)   Consistent with the foregoing policy, and to the fullest extent
permitted by applicable law, the city may require a franchisee to provide,
support and/or accommodate access programming through such means as the city
deems suitable. The terms of such provision, support, and/or accommodation of
access programming shall be set forth in the franchise. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.402: FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Franchisee shall comply with the financial and insurance requirements set forth
in the franchise. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.403: OTHER AUTHORIZATIONS:
Franchisee shall comply with and obtain, at its own expense, all permits,
licenses and other authorizations required by federal, state and local laws,
rules, regulations and applicable resolutions and ordinances which now exist or
are hereafter lawfully adopted. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.404: LIQUIDATED DAMAGES:
Because it may be difficult to calculate the harm to the city in the event of a
breach of a franchise by a franchisee, the city may agree to liquidated damages
as a reasonable estimation of the actual damages to the city. The scope and
amount of any such liquidated damages shall be set forth in the franchise.
(Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.405: RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE CITY:
The right and power is reserved by the city to promulgate such additional rules
and regulations as it may find necessary in the exercise of its lawful police
powers and in furtherance of the terms and conditions of a franchise and this
chapter, and as permitted by applicable state and federal law. In the event of
a conflict between a franchise and this chapter, the franchise shall govern.
(Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.406: DELEGATION OF POWERS:
Any right or power of the city may be delegated by the city to any officer,
employee, department or board of the city, or to such other person or entity as
the city may designate to act on its behalf. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.407: DESIGN, FUNCTIONALITY AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
Franchisee shall design, construct, install, operate and maintain its cable
system in a manner consistent with all applicable federal, state and local laws
and regulations, FCC technical standards and the franchise. (Ord. 2011-09,
2011)
3.13.408: PROVISION OF CABLE SERVICE:
Franchisee shall offer and extend cable service to customers in accordance with
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and the franchise.
(Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.409: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (1)   All facilities constructed or operated under this chapter shall be
installed and maintained at such places in or upon such rights of way and
public places as shall not interfere with the free passage of traffic, and
shall conform to federal standards, state requirements and city regulations.
   (2)   Franchisee shall be subject to any and all requirements established by
the city with regard to the placement of franchisee's facilities and equipment
located in the rights of way and on other public property. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.410: STREET CUT OR REPAIR:
Whenever practical, the franchisee shall use boring rather than street cuts.
The franchisee shall guarantee the durability and structural integrity of any
street cut or repair made by it or its agents which is necessary for the
construction, installation, operation, repair or maintenance of franchisee's
facilities, provided that no action by an unrelated third party materially
affects the integrity of franchisee's street cut or repair. Franchisee shall
repair or replace, at no expense to the city, any failed street cut or repair
which was completed by franchisee or franchisee's agent(s). (Ord. 2011-09,
2011)
3.13.411: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
The franchisee shall, at all times, install, maintain and use commonly accepted
methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to
cause damage or injuries to the public. In furtherance thereof, the franchisee
must comply with the city's traffic control requirements, including, for
example, but without limitation, the use of signal devices, warning signs and
flaggers when appropriate. All of franchisee's structures, cables, lines,
equipment and connections in, over, under and upon the rights of way and public
ways or other places in the franchise area, wherever situated or located, shall
at all times be kept and maintained in a safe condition. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.412: REGULATION OF RATES AND CHARGES:
The city may regulate franchisee's rates and charges to the full extent
permitted by law. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.413: DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   (1)   The franchisee shall not deny cable service or otherwise discriminate
against customers or others on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, age, disability or other protected classes.
   (2)   Access to cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential
residential cable customers because of the income of the residents of the local
area in which such group resides. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.414: EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY:
The franchisee shall strictly adhere to and comply with the equal employment
opportunity requirements of federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.415: REIMBURSEMENT:
To the extent allowed by applicable law, the city may require a franchisee to
reimburse the city for the city's reasonable processing and review expenses in
connection with a sale or transfer of a franchise or a change in control of a
franchise or franchisee. In connection with the foregoing, the city will send
franchisee an itemized description of all such charges, and franchisee shall
pay such amount within thirty (30) days after the receipt of such description.
(Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.416: FRANCHISE RENEWAL:
Franchise renewals shall be conducted in accordance with applicable law. The
city and franchisee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at
any time during the term of a franchise. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.417: FRANCHISE REVOCATION:
Any franchise granted by the city may be revoked during the period of such
franchise, as provided in the franchise, subject to the procedural requirements
provided for therein. A failure by the franchisee to comply with any of the
material provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this code.
(Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
3.13.418: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   (1)   This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all
applicable federal, state and local laws, and shall apply to any franchise
hereafter accepted by a franchisee.
   (2)   This chapter supersedes or repeals the provision(s) of any ordinance
(s) or resolution(s) that is(are) inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (3)   The captions throughout this chapter are intended to facilitate the
reading hereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of
any part of this chapter.
   (4)   A franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligations to comply with
any or all of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of the
city to demand prompt compliance.
   (5)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all franchisees and
cable systems as permitted under applicable law. (Ord. 2011-09, 2011)
CHAPTER 14
CONDUIT FINANCING
SECTION:
3.14.101: City Purpose For Issuing Conduit Financing Obligations
3.14.102: Fees Imposed
3.14.103: Information Required
3.14.104: Credit Worthiness For Conduit Issues
3.14.101: CITY PURPOSE FOR ISSUING CONDUIT FINANCING OBLIGATIONS:
   (1)   Not For Profit Conduit Financing:
      (a)   The city will not issue conduit financing obligations for any not
for profit entity other than a Utah not for profit corporation possessing a
current determination from the internal revenue service that the entity
currently qualifies as exempt from federal taxation under section 501(c)(3) of
the internal revenue code.
      (b)   The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed project fulfills
or complements a legitimate city or county purpose as defined by state law or
reduces a public burden that is currently imposed on Utah governmental
entities. Specific attention and consideration will be given to projects which
expand opportunities or services for populations that are currently
underserved.
   (2)   For Profit Conduit Financing Obligations: The city may, at its
discretion, act as an issuer for conduit financing obligations for other
entities if the proposed project qualifies for financing under Utah's private
activity bond authority, including multi-family housing projects, pollution and
waste control projects, and qualifying small manufacturing projects.
   (3)   Conditions: The city shall not issue any type of conduit financing
obligation unless the following conditions are met:
      (a)   The issuance of the conduit financing obligation does not obligate
the city for payment of any portion of the debt obligation, other than that
expressly pledged by written agreement; and
      (b)   Any default by the recipient of the conduit financing funds
(applicant), whether a not for profit entity or for profit entity, will not
adversely affect the city's bond/credit rating. (Ord. 2015-10, 2015)
3.14.102: FEES IMPOSED:
The city shall impose and collect the fees set forth in the Ivins City
consolidated fee schedule. Whenever the city evaluates a proposal for the
issuance of debt or issues debt the city shall be compensated/reimbursed by the
applicant for the following:
   (1)   All costs incurred in reviewing the proposed issue, including outside
financial/legal review, counsel and document preparation;
   (2)   Any revenue lost to the city by virtue of the project;
   (3)   Any risk assumed by the city in issuing the debt; and
   (4)   All costs of issuance including reimbursement of city time devoted by
city officer and employees and resources provided by the city. Fees imposed
pursuant to this chapter shall not be waived. (Ord. 2015-10, 2015)
3.14.103: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Each applicant shall submit an application to the city on forms and in a format
specified by the city. Application forms shall be obtained from the director of
finance. No application shall be considered unless and until all information
specified in the application or requested by the city is provided and the
application fee has been paid. The city may request such additional information
as deemed necessary to evaluate the proposed issuance. (Ord. 2015-10, 2015)
3.14.104: CREDIT WORTHINESS FOR CONDUIT ISSUES:
The city will not act as an issuer on behalf of any third party unless the
following credit worthiness is established:
   (1)   Governmental entities must have a bond rating from a national rating
agency of "A" or higher.
   (2)   Private entities must have a bond rating from a national rating agency
of investment grade or higher or must provide credit enhancement in the form of
a direct pay letter of credit (LOC) or bond insurance in a form acceptable to
the city. Any LOC guarantee must be issued by a bank authorized to do business
in the state of Utah with a rating of no less than "A". Bond insurance shall be
by a national insurer acceptable to the city.
   (3)   Private entities proposing a direct private placement of the debt
issue must provide a letter from the purchaser describing the direct purchaser
as a sophisticated "accredited investor" within the meaning of section 2(15) of
the securities act of 1933. (Ord. 2015-10, 2015)
TITLE 4
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
Part 1. General Provisions
4.01.101: Short Title
4.01.102: Declaration Of Purpose
4.01.103: Scope
4.01.104: Existing Law Continued
4.01.105: Criminal Prosecution Right
4.01.106: Effect Of Headings
4.01.107: Severability
4.01.108: No Mandatory Duty; Civil Liability
4.01.109: General Rules Of Interpretation Of Ordinances
4.01.110: Definitions Applicable To Title
4.01.111: Acts Include Causing, Aiding And Abetting
Part 2. Service Requirements
4.01.201: Service Of Process
4.01.202: Constructive Notice Of Recorded Documents
Part 3. General Authority And Offenses
4.01.301: General Enforcement Authority
4.01.302: Adoption Of Policy And Procedures
4.01.303: Reserved
4.01.304: Reserved
4.01.305: Failure To Obey Subpoena
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.01.101: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM, the
ACE PROGRAM, or TITLE 4 OF THE IVINS CITY MUNICIPAL CODE. It may be cited and
pleaded under any such designation. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.01.102: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that the enforcement of the city code and applicable
state codes throughout the city is an important public service. Code
enforcement is vital to the protection of the public health, safety and quality
of life. The city council recognizes that enforcement starts with the drafting
of precise regulations that can be effectively applied in administrative code
enforcement hearings and judicial proceedings. The city council further finds
that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a combination of
judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain compliance with these
regulations. Failure to comply with an administrative code enforcement action
may require the city attorney to file a judicial action to gain compliance.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.01.103: SCOPE:
The provisions of this title may be applied to all violations of the city code
or applicable state codes which occur within the city. It has been designed as
an additional remedy for the city to use in achieving compliance with such
codes. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.01.104: EXISTING LAW CONTINUED:
The provisions of this title shall not invalidate any other title or ordinance,
but shall be read in conjunction with those titles and ordinances as an
additional remedy available for enforcement of those ordinances. (Ord. 2005-10,
2005)
4.01.105: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION RIGHT:
The city has sole discretion in deciding whether to file a civil or criminal
case for the violation of any of its ordinances. The city may choose to file
both, or one or the other. The enactment of this administrative remedy shall in
no way interfere with the city's right to prosecute city ordinance violations
as criminal offenses. The city may use any of the remedies available under the
law in both civil and criminal prosecution. If the city chooses to file both
civil and criminal charges for the same day of violation, no civil penalties
may be assessed, but all other remedies are available. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.01.106: EFFECT OF HEADINGS:
Title, chapter, part and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed
to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent
of the provisions of any title, chapter, part or section hereof. (Ord. 2005-10,
2005)
4.01.107: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision of
this title is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The city council hereby
declares that it would have adopted this title and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision thereof, irrespective of the
fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases,
portions, or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section
shall apply to all amendments heretofore or hereafter made to this title. (Ord.
2005-10, 2005)
4.01.108: NO MANDATORY DUTY; CIVIL LIABILITY:
It is the intent of the city council that in establishing performance standards
or establishing an obligation to act by a city officer or employee, these
standards shall not be construed as creating a mandatory duty for purposes of
tort liability if the officer or employee fails to perform his or her directed
duty or duties. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.01.109: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION OF ORDINANCES:
For purposes of this title:
   (1)   Any gender includes the other gender.
   (2)   "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
   (3)   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
   (4)   Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense, and
vice versa.
   (5)   Words and phrases used in this title and not specifically defined
shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.01.110: DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE TO TITLE:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this title, shall be
constructed as defined in this section, unless a different meaning is
specifically stated to apply:
ABATEMENT: Any action the city may take, or cause a responsible person to take,
on public or private property as may be necessary to remove or correct a
violation, including, but not limited to, demolition, removal, repair, boarding
and securing or replacement of property.
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR OR ACE
ADMINISTRATOR: Any person authorized by the city to supervise, administer the
administrative code enforcement hearing program, and enforce violations of the
city code or applicable state codes.
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER: An order issued by an administrative law
judge. The order may include an order to abate the violation, pay civil
penalties and administrative costs, or take any other action as authorized or
required by this title and applicable state codes.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE: The administrative law judge appointed by the mayor
and city council to preside over the administrative code enforcement hearings
established herein.
CITY: Ivins City, a Utah municipal corporation, and the area within the
territorial city limits of the city, and such territory outside of this city
over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional
or incorporation provisions or any law.
CITY CODE: The Ivins municipal code or other codes of Ivins City.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Ivins City.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERFORMANCE BOND: A bond posted by a responsible person to
ensure compliance with city code, applicable state codes, a judicial action, or
an administrative code enforcement order.
CODE ENFORCEMENT TAX LIEN: A lien recorded to collect outstanding civil
penalties, administrative fees and abatement costs.
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE: The fee schedule adopted by the city council that
sets forth civil penalties and costs applicable to enforcement of this title.
The consolidated fee schedule is on file in the office of the city recorder.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: Any person authorized to enforce violations of the city
code or applicable state codes.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Any person that holds a recorded mortgage or deed of
trust on a property.
GOOD CAUSE: Incapacitating illness; death; lack of proper notice;
unavailability due to unavoidable, unpreventable or extenuating emergency or
circumstance; if a required act causes an imminent and irreparable injury; and
acts of nature adverse to performing required acts.
IMMINENT LIFE SAFETY HAZARD: Any condition that creates a present, extreme and
immediate danger to life, property, health or public safety.
LEGAL INTEREST: Any interest that is represented by a document, such as a deed
of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien,
mechanic's lien, or other similar instrument that is recorded with the
Washington County recorder's office.
NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE: A document issued by the city, representing that a
property complies with the requirements outlined in the notice of violation.
NOTICE OF SATISFACTION: A document or form approved by the administrative law
judge or his or her designee, which indicates that all outstanding civil
penalties and costs have been either paid in full, or that the city has
negotiated an agreed amount, or that a subsequent administrative or judicial
decision has resolved the outstanding debt. In addition to the satisfaction of
the financial debt, the property must also be in compliance with the
requirements outlined in the notice of violation.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION: A written notice prepared by an enforcement official that
informs a responsible person of code violations and orders the responsible
person to take certain steps to correct the violations.
OATH: Includes affirmations and oaths.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, sergeant, officer, or employee of
any of them, or any other entity that is recognized by law as the subject of
rights or duties.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record owner of real property based on the county
assessor's records.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Any condition caused, maintained or permitted to exist that
constitutes a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, or that
significantly obstructs, injures or interferes with the reasonable or free use
of property in a neighborhood or community or by any considerable number of
persons. A "public nuisance" also has the same meaning as set forth in Utah
Code Annotated and this code.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who is responsible for causing or maintaining a
violation of the city code or applicable state codes. The property owner,
tenant, person with a legal interest in the real property, or person in
possession of the real property shall be liable for any violation maintained on
the property. In all cases, the property owner shall be considered a
"responsible person".
WRITTEN: Includes handwritten, typewritten, photocopied, computer printed or
facsimile. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.01.111: ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING, AIDING AND ABETTING:
Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful in this title, it shall include
causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting such act or omission. (Ord. 2005-10,
2005)
PART 2. SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
4.01.201: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
   (1)   Whenever service is required to be given under this title for
enforcement purposes, the document shall be served by any of the following
methods, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically stated to
apply:
      (a)   Personal service;
      (b)   Regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the
owner or other responsible person;
      (c)   Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. If
not inhabited, the notice must also be mailed as in subsection (1)(b) of this
section. The form of the posted notice shall be approved by the ACE
administrator or his or her designee; or
      (d)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation where the identity
or whereabouts of the person to be served are unknown and cannot be ascertained
through reasonable diligence, where service is impracticable under the
circumstances, or where there exists good cause to believe that the person to
be served is avoiding service of process.
   (2)   Service by regular mail in the manner described above shall be deemed
served on the fifth day after the date of mailing.
   (3)   If service complies with the requirements of this section, it shall be
deemed a valid service even if a party claims not to have received the service
and it shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this title.
   (4)   The failure to serve all responsible persons shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.01.202: CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE OF RECORDED DOCUMENTS:
Whenever a document is recorded with the Washington County recorder as
authorized or required by this title or applicable state codes, recordation
shall provide constructive notice of the information contained in the recorded
documents. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 3. GENERAL AUTHORITY AND OFFENSES
4.01.301: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
Whenever the ACE administrator or any enforcement official finds that a
violation of the city code or applicable state codes has occurred or continues
to exist, the appropriate administrative enforcement procedure may be used as
outlined in this title. The ACE administrator or enforcement official has the
authority and power necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of the
city code and applicable state codes. These powers include the power to issue
notices of violation and administrative citations, inspect public and private
property, abate public and private property, and use whatever judicial and
administrative remedies are available under the city code or applicable state
codes. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.01.302: ADOPTION OF POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
The administrative law judge is authorized to develop policies and procedures
relating to the hearing procedures, scope of hearings, subpoena powers, and
other matters relating to the administrative code enforcement hearings program.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.01.303: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-10, 2013)
4.01.304: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2013-10, 2013)
4.01.305: FAILURE TO OBEY SUBPOENA:
It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to obey a subpoena issued for
an administrative code enforcement hearing. Failure to obey a subpoena
constitutes contempt and may be prosecuted as a class B misdemeanor. (Ord.
2005-10, 2005)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
Part 1. Administrative Abatement
4.02.101: Authority
4.02.102: Notice Of Violation
4.02.103: Failure To Bring Property Into Compliance
4.02.104: Inspections
Part 2. Emergency Abatement
4.02.201: Authority
4.02.202: Procedures
4.02.203: Notice Of Emergency Abatement
Part 3. Demolitions
4.02.301: Authority
4.02.302: Procedures
Part 4. Administrative Citations
4.02.401: Declaration Of Purpose
4.02.402: Authority
4.02.403: Procedures
4.02.404: Contents Of Administrative Citation
4.02.405: Civil Penalties Assessed
Part 5. Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Procedures
4.02.501: Declaration Of Purpose
4.02.502: Authority And Scope Of Hearings
4.02.503: Request For Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
4.02.504: Default Hearings And Orders
4.02.505: Notification Of Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
4.02.506: Disqualification Of Administrative Law Judge
4.02.507: Powers Of Administrative Law Judge
4.02.508: Procedures At Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
4.02.509: Failure To Attend Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
4.02.510: Administrative Code Enforcement Order
4.02.511: Failure To Comply With Administrative Code Enforcement Order
Part 6. Administrative Enforcement Appeals
4.02.601: Appeal Of Administrative Code Enforcement Order
PART 1. ADMINISTRATIVE ABATEMENT
4.02.101: AUTHORITY:
Any condition caused, maintained or permitted to exist in violation of any
provisions of the city code or applicable state codes that constitutes a
violation may be abated pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. (Ord.
2005-10, 2005)
4.02.102: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   (1)   Whenever the ACE administrator or any enforcement official determines
that a violation of the city code or applicable state codes has occurred or
continues to exist, the ACE administrator or enforcement official may choose to
proceed under the administrative abatement procedures. If this procedure is
used, a notice of violation shall be issued to a responsible person. The notice
of violation shall include the following information:
      (a)   Name of property owner;
      (b)   Street address of violation;
      (c)   Date violation observed;
      (d)   All code sections violated and description of condition of the
property that violates the applicable codes;
      (e)   A statement explaining the type of remedial action required to
permanently correct outstanding violations, which may include corrections,
repairs, demolition, removal or other appropriate action;
      (f)   Specific date to correct the violations listed in the notice of the
violation, which date shall be at least ten (10) days from the date of service;
      (g)   Explanation of the consequences should the responsible person fail
to comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice of
violation, which may include, but is not limited to, criminal prosecution,
civil penalties, revocation of permits, recordation of the notice of violation,
withholding of future municipal permits, abatement of the violation, recovery
of costs, and any other legal remedies;
      (h)   That civil penalties will begin to accrue immediately on expiration
of the date to correct violations;
      (i)   The amount of the civil penalty on each violation and that the
penalty will accrue daily until the property is brought into compliance;
      (j)   That only one notice of violation is required for any twelve (12)
month period, and that civil penalties begin immediately upon any subsequent
violations of the notice. The responsible person may request a hearing on the
renewed violations by following the same procedure as provided for the original
notice;
      (k)   Procedures to request a hearing as provided in section
4.02.503 of this chapter and consequences for failure to request one.
   (2)   The notice of violation shall be served by one of the methods of
service listed in section
4.01.201 of this title.
   (3)   More than one notice of violation may be issued against the same
responsible person, if it encompasses different dates or different violations.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.103: FAILURE TO BRING PROPERTY INTO COMPLIANCE:
   (1)   If, after service of the notice of violation, a responsible person
fails to remove or correct the noticed violation and bring the property into
compliance within the time set forth on the notice of violation, civil
penalties shall be owed to the city for each and every subsequent day of
violation.
   (2)   Failure to comply with the notice of violation is a class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.104: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the responsible person served with a notice of
violation to request an inspection when a noticed violation has been corrected
and the property brought into compliance. It is prima facie evidence that the
violation remains on the property if no inspection is requested. Civil
penalties accumulate daily until the property has been inspected and a notice
of compliance is issued. Reinspection fees shall be assessed if more than one
inspection is necessary. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 2. EMERGENCY ABATEMENT
4.02.201: AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Whenever the ACE administrator determines that an imminent life safety
hazard exists that requires immediate correction or elimination, the
administrator may exercise the following powers without prior notice to the
responsible person:
      (a)   Order the immediate vacation of any tenants, and prohibit occupancy
until all repairs are completed;
      (b)   Post the premises as unsafe, substandard or dangerous;
      (c)   Board, fence or secure the building or site;
      (d)   Raze and grade that portion of the building or site to prevent
further collapse, and remove any hazard to the general public;
      (e)   Make any minimal emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any
imminent life safety hazard; or
      (f)   Take any other action appropriate to eliminate the emergency.
   (2)   The ACE administrator or authorized representative has the authority,
based on cause, to enter the property without a search warrant or court order
to accomplish the above listed acts to abate the safety hazard.
   (3)   The responsible person shall be liable for all costs associated with
the abatement of the imminent life safety hazard. Costs may be recovered
pursuant to this title. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.202: PROCEDURES:
   (1)   The ACE administrator shall pursue only the minimum level of
correction or abatement as necessary to eliminate the immediacy of the hazard.
Costs incurred by the city during the emergency abatement process shall be
assessed and recovered against the responsible person through the procedures
outlined in the "remedies" section of this title.
   (2)   The ACE administrator may also pursue any other administrative or
judicial remedy to abate any remaining violations. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.203: NOTICE OF EMERGENCY ABATEMENT:
After an emergency abatement, the city shall notify the property owner or
responsible person of the abatement action taken and shall include an itemized
statement of costs for the abatement action. This notice shall be served within
ten (10) days of completion of the abatement. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 3. DEMOLITIONS
4.02.301: AUTHORITY:
Whenever the ACE administrator, chief building inspector or public safety
director determines that a property or building requires demolition, any one of
them may demolish or remove the offending structure, or exercise any or all of
the powers listed herein once appropriate notice has been given to a
responsible person pursuant to the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous
buildings or international fire code as required under state law. The
responsible person shall be liable for all costs associated with the
demolition. Costs may be recovered pursuant to this title. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.302: PROCEDURES:
   (1)   Once the ACE administrator has determined that the chief building
inspector or the fire chief has complied with all of the notice requirements of
the applicable laws, the property will be abated pursuant to the abatement
remedy. Costs incurred by the city during the demolition process shall be
assessed and recovered against the responsible person through the procedures
outlined in the "remedies" section of this title.
   (2)   The ACE administrator may also pursue any other administrative or
judicial remedy. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 4. ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
4.02.401: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
   (1)   The city council finds that there is a need for an alternative method
of enforcement for minor violations of the city code and applicable state
codes. The city council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement
is an administrative citation program.
   (2)   The procedures established in this part shall be in addition to
criminal, civil, or any other legal remedy established by law that may be
pursued to address violations of the city code or applicable state codes. (Ord.
2005-10, 2005)
4.02.402: AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Any person violating the city code or applicable state codes, where
said violation is deemed minor by the ACE administrator, may be issued an
administrative citation by an enforcement official as provided herein.
   (2)   A civil penalty shall be assessed by means of an administrative
citation issued by the enforcement official, and shall be payable to the city.
   (3)   Penalties assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be
collected in accordance with the procedures specified in the "remedies" section
of this title. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.403: PROCEDURES:
   (1)   Upon discovering any violation of the city code or applicable state
codes, an enforcement official may issue an administrative citation to a
responsible person in the manner prescribed in this part. The administrative
citation shall be issued on a form approved by the administrative law judge.
   (2)   If the responsible person is a business, the enforcement official
shall attempt to locate the business owner and issue an administrative citation
to the business owner. If the enforcement official can only locate the manager
of the business, the administrative citation may be given to the manager of the
business. A copy of the administrative citation may also be mailed to the
business owner or any other responsible person in the manner prescribed in
section
 4.01.201 of this title.
   (3)   Once the responsible person has been located, the enforcement official
shall attempt to obtain the signature of that person on the administrative
citation. If the responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative
citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the
citation and subsequent proceedings.
   (4)   If the enforcement official is unable to locate the responsible person
for the violation, then the administrative citation shall be mailed to the
responsible person in the manner prescribed in section
4.01.201 of this title.
   (5)   If no one can be located at the property, then the administrative
citation may be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property and a
copy subsequently mailed to the responsible person in the manner prescribed in
section
4.01.201 of this title.
   (6)   The enforcement official shall sign the administrative citation.
   (7)   The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive
notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this part.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.404: CONTENTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The date, location and explanation of the violations.
   (2)   The code sections violated and the titles of those sections.
   (3)   The amount of civil penalty imposed for each violation.
   (4)   An explanation of how the civil penalty shall be paid, the time period
by which the civil penalty shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to
pay the civil penalty.
   (5)   Identify the right to and the procedures for requesting an
administrative code enforcement hearing.
   (6)   The signature of the enforcement official and, if possible, the
signature of the responsible person. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.405: CIVIL PENALTIES ASSESSED:
   (1)   Civil penalties shall be assessed immediately for each violation
listed on the administrative citation. The penalties shall be those established
in the consolidated fee schedule.
   (2)   Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the
violations, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.
   (3)   The failure of any person to correct the cited violations and to pay
the civil penalties assessed by an administrative citation within the time
specified on the citation may result in the following:
      (a)   Additional citations being issued for the uncorrected violations;
      (b)   The ACE administrator referring the matter to the city attorney to
file a claim with the small claims court; and/or
      (c)   The city may pursue any other legal or administrative remedy to
correct the violations and collect civil penalties as provided for in this
title. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 5. ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING PROCEDURES
4.02.501: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that there is a need to establish uniform procedures for
administrative code enforcement hearings conducted pursuant to this title. It
is the purpose and intent of the city council to afford due process of law to
any person who is directly affected by an administrative action. Due process of
law includes notice, an opportunity to request and participate in an
administrative hearing, and an explanation of the reasons justifying the
administrative action. These procedures are also intended to establish a forum
to efficiently, expeditiously and fairly resolve issues raised in any
administrative code enforcement action. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.502: AUTHORITY AND SCOPE OF HEARINGS:
Enforcement of city code violations may be conducted through the administrative
code enforcement procedures established by this title, presided over by the
administrative law judge. The administrative law judge shall develop policies
and procedures to regulate the hearing process for any violation of the city
code and applicable state codes that are handled pursuant to the administrative
abatement procedures, the emergency abatement procedures, the demolition
procedures, or the administrative citation procedures. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.503: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   (1)   A person served with one of the following documents or notices has the
right to request an administrative code enforcement hearing, if the request is
filed within ten (10) calendar days from the date of service of one of the
following notices:
      (a)   Notice of violation;
      (b)   Notice of itemized statement of costs;
      (c)   Administrative citation; or
      (d)   Notice of emergency abatement.
   (2)   The request for hearing shall be made in writing and filed with the
administrative law judge. The request shall contain the case number, the
address of the violation and the signature of the responsible party.
   (3)   As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of the
request for hearing, the administrative law judge shall schedule a date, time
and place for the hearing.
   (4)   Failure to request a hearing as provided shall constitute a waiver of
the right to a hearing and a waiver of the right to challenge the action. (Ord.
2005-10, 2005)
4.02.504: DEFAULT HEARINGS AND ORDERS:
   (1)   If the responsible person fails to request a hearing before the
expiration of the ten (10) day deadline, the case shall be set for a default
hearing to be scheduled by the administrative law judge. The responsible person
shall be notified of the date, time and place of the hearing by one of the
methods listed in section
4.01.201 of this title.
   (2)   A default hearing shall be scheduled for all cases that have
outstanding or unpaid civil penalties, administrative fees and/or abatement
costs due to the city before collection, if a hearing on that case has not
already been held.
   (3)   At the default hearing, the responsible person shall have the
opportunity to present evidence to show that "good cause" exists, as defined in
section
4.01.110 of this title, to do one or more of the following:
      (a)   Waive or reduce the civil penalties which have accumulated;
      (b)   Postpone an abatement action by the city; or
      (c)   Excuse the responsible person's failure to request a hearing within
the ten (10) day period.
   (4)   If the responsible person fails to establish good cause to take one or
more of the actions set forth in subsection (3) of this section, the
administrative law judge shall review the notice of violation and any other
relevant information included in the case file. The administrative law judge
shall not accept any other evidence.
   (5)   If the evidence shows that the violations existed, the administrative
law judge shall enter an order requiring abatement of the violations, and the
payment of all penalties, fees and costs. Penalties shall continue to accrue
until the city issues a notice of compliance stating when the violations were
actually abated. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.505: NOTIFICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   (1)   Written notice of the day, time and place of the hearing shall be
served to a responsible person as soon as practicable prior to the date of the
hearing.
   (2)   The format and contents of the hearing notice shall be in accordance
with rules and policies promulgated by the administrative law judge.
   (3)   The notice of hearing shall be served by any of the methods of service
listed in section
4.01.201 of this title. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.506: DISQUALIFICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:
The administrative law judge is subject to disqualification for bias,
prejudice, interest or any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified
in a court of law. Rules and procedures for disqualification and replacement
shall be promulgated by the administrative law judge. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.507: POWERS OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:
   (1)   The administrative law judge has the authority to hold hearings,
determine if violations of the city code or applicable state codes exist, order
compliance with the city code or applicable state code, and enforce compliance
as provided in this title on any matter subject to the provisions of this
title.
   (2)   The administrative law judge may continue a hearing based on good
cause shown by one of the parties to the hearing. The administrative law judge
must enter on the record the good cause on which a continuance is granted.
   (3)   The administrative law judge, at the request of any party to the
hearing, may sign subpoenas for witnesses, documents and other evidence where
the attendance of the witness for the admission of evidence is deemed necessary
to decide the issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena,
including witness and mileage fees, shall be borne by the party requesting the
subpoena. Said costs may be recovered by the city from the responsible party
where the administrative law judge finds that a violation existed. The
administrative law judge shall develop policies and procedures relating to the
issuance of subpoenas in administrative code enforcement hearings, including
the form of the subpoena and related costs.
   (4)   The administrative law judge has continuing jurisdiction over the
subject matter of an administrative code enforcement hearing for the purposes
of: granting a continuance; ordering compliance by issuing an administrative
code enforcement order using any remedies available under the law; ensuring
compliance of that order, which includes the right to authorize the city to
enter and abate a violation; modifying an administrative code enforcement
order; or, where extraordinary circumstances exist, granting a new hearing.
   (5)   The administrative law judge may require a responsible person to post
a code enforcement performance bond to ensure compliance with an administrative
code enforcement order. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.508: PROCEDURES AT ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   (1)   Administrative code enforcement hearings are intended to be informal
in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply; however, an
informal exchange of discovery may be required. Any such request shall be in
writing. Failure to request discovery shall not be a basis for a continuance.
Complainant information is protected and shall not be released unless the
complainant is a witness at the hearing. The procedure and format of the
administrative hearing shall follow the procedures promulgated by the
administrative law judge.
   (2)   The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative code
enforcement hearing to establish the existence of a violation of the city code
or applicable state codes. The burden to prove any raised defenses shall be
upon the party raising any such defenses.
   (3)   The standard of proof to be used by the administrative law judge in
deciding the issues at an administrative hearing is whether the preponderance
of the evidence shows that the violations exist.
   (4)   Each party shall have the opportunity to cross examine witnesses and
present evidence in support of his or her case. A written declaration signed
under penalty of perjury may be accepted in lieu of a personal appearance.
   (5)   All administrative enforcement hearings shall be open to the public
and shall be recorded as determined by the city. At the discretion of the
administrative law judge, administrative enforcement hearings may be held at
the location of the violation.
   (6)   The responsible person has a right to be represented by an attorney.
If an attorney will be representing the responsible person at the hearing,
notice of the attorney's name, address and telephone number must be given to
the city at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. If notice is not given,
the hearing may be continued at the city's request, and all costs of the
continuance assessed to the responsible person.
   (7)   No new hearing shall be granted, unless the administrative law judge
determines that extraordinary circumstances exist which justify a new hearing.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.509: FAILURE TO ATTEND ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
Any party whose property or actions are the subject of any administrative code
enforcement hearing and who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to have
waived the right to a hearing and will result in a default judgment for the
city; provided, that proper notice of the hearing has been provided. (Ord.
2005-10, 2005)
4.02.510: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
   (1)   A responsible person and the city may enter into a stipulated
agreement, which shall be signed by both parties. Such agreement shall be
entered as the administrative code enforcement order. Entry of such agreement
shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative code enforcement
hearing and the right to appeal.
   (2)   After all evidence and testimony are presented, the administrative law
judge shall issue an administrative code enforcement order that affirms,
modifies or rejects the notice or citation. The administrative law judge may
increase or decrease the total amount of civil penalties and costs that are due
pursuant to this title.
   (3)   The administrative law judge may issue an administrative code
enforcement order that requires a responsible person to cease and desist from
violating the city code or applicable state codes and to take any necessary
corrective action.
   (4)   The administrative law judge may order the city to enter the property
and abate all violations, which may include removing animals kept in violation
of the city code.
   (5)   The administrative law judge may revoke a kennel permit, an animal
license, or the right to possess animals as provided in the city code.
   (6)   As part of the administrative code enforcement order, the
administrative law judge may establish specific deadlines for the payment of
civil penalties and costs, and condition the total or partial assessment of
civil penalties on the responsible person's ability to complete compliance by
specified deadlines.
   (7)   The administrative law judge may schedule subsequent review hearings
as may be necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing to ensure
compliance with the administrative code enforcement order.
   (8)   The administrative law judge may order the responsible person to post
a performance bond to ensure compliance with the administrative code
enforcement order.
   (9)   The administrative code enforcement order shall become final on the
date of the signing of the order.
   (10)   The administrative code enforcement order shall be served on all
parties by any one of the methods listed in section
4.01.201 of this title. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.02.511: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any responsible person to fail to comply with
the terms and deadlines set forth in an administrative code enforcement order.
A violation of this section shall be a class B misdemeanor.
   (2)   Upon the failure of the responsible person to comply with the terms
and deadlines set forth in the administrative code enforcement order, the city
may use all appropriate legal means to recover the civil penalties and costs to
obtain compliance. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 6. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT APPEALS
4.02.601: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
   (1)   Any person adversely affected by an administrative code enforcement
order made in the exercise of the provisions of this title may file a petition
for review to the district court. A petition for review shall be barred unless
it is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative code
enforcement order.
   (2)   No person may challenge in district court an administrative law
judge's decision until that person has exhausted his or her administrative
remedies.
   (3)   Within one hundred twenty (120) days after filing a petition for
review, the party petitioning for appeal shall request a copy of the record of
the proceedings, including transcripts of hearings when necessary. The
administrative law judge shall not submit copies of files or transcripts to the
reviewing court until the party petitioning for appeal has paid all required
costs. The petitioning party's failure to properly arrange for copies of the
record, or to pay the full costs for the record, within one hundred twenty
(120) days after the petition for review was filed, shall be grounds for
dismissal of the petition.
   (4)   If a transcript of a hearing cannot be prepared because the tape
recording is incomplete or unintelligible, the district court may, in its
discretion, remand the matter to the administrative law judge for a
supplemental proceeding to complete the record. The district court may limit
the scope of the supplemental proceeding to issues that, in the court's
opinion, need to be clarified.
   (5)   The district court's review is limited to the record of the
administrative code enforcement decision that is being appealed. The court
shall not accept nor consider any evidence that is not part of the record of
that decision.
   (6)   The district court shall:
      (a)   Presume that the administrative law judge's decision and orders are
valid;
      (b)   Review the record to determine whether or not the decision or order
was arbitrary, capricious or illegal; and
      (c)   Affirm the administrative code enforcement order if it is supported
by substantial evidence. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REMEDIES
SECTION:
Part 1. Recordation Of Notices Of Violation And
   Administrative Code Enforcement Orders
4.03.101: Declaration Of Purpose
4.03.102: Authority
4.03.103: Procedures For Recordation
4.03.104: Service Of Notice Of Recordation
4.03.105: Failure To Request Hearing
4.03.106: Notice Of Satisfaction; Procedures
4.03.107: Withholding Of Municipal Permits
4.03.108: Cancellation Of Recorded Notice Of Violation Or Order
Part 2. Administrative Civil Penalties
4.03.201: Authority
4.03.202: Procedures For Assessing Civil Penalties
4.03.203: Determination Of Civil Penalties
4.03.204: Modification Of Civil Penalties
4.03.205: Failure To Pay Penalties
Part 3. Abatement Of Violation
4.03.301: Authority To Abate
4.03.302: Procedures For Abatement
Part 4. Recovery Of Costs
4.03.401: Declaration Of Purpose
4.03.402: Authority
4.03.403: Notification Of Assessment Of Reinspection Fees
4.03.404: Itemized Statement Of Costs
4.03.405: Failure To Timely Pay Costs
Part 5. Performance Bond
4.03.501: Performance Bond
Part 6. Injunction
4.03.601: Civil Violations; Injunctions
PART 1. RECORDATION OF NOTICES OF VIOLATION
   AND ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDERS
4.03.101: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of
enforcement for violations of the city code and applicable state codes that are
found to exist on real property. The city council further finds that an
appropriate method of enforcement for these types of violations is the issuance
and recordation of notices of violation and administrative code enforcement
orders. The procedures established herein shall be in addition to any criminal,
civil, or other remedies established by law that may be pursued to address the
violation of the city code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.102: AUTHORITY:
Whenever the ACE administrator determines that a property or violation has not
been brought into compliance as required in this title, the ACE administrator
has the authority to record the notice of violation and/or administrative code
enforcement order with the Washington County recorder's office. (Ord. 2005-10,
2005)
4.03.103: PROCEDURES FOR RECORDATION:
   (1)   Once the ACE administrator has issued a notice of violation to a
responsible person, and the property remains in violation after the deadline
established in the notice of violation, and no request for an administrative
hearing has been filed, the ACE administrator shall record a notice of
violation with the Washington County recorder's office.
   (2)   If an administrative hearing is held, and an order is issued in the
city's favor, the ACE administrator shall record the administrative code
enforcement order with the Washington County recorder's office.
   (3)   The recordation shall include the name of the property owner, the
parcel number, the legal description of the parcel, and a copy of the notice of
violation or order.
   (4)   The recordation does not encumber the property, but merely places
future interested parties on notice of any continuing violation found upon the
property. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.104: SERVICE OF NOTICE OF RECORDATION:
A notice of the recordation shall be served on the responsible person and the
property owner pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in section
4.01.201 of this title. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.105: FAILURE TO REQUEST HEARING:
The failure of any person to file a request for an administrative code
enforcement hearing when served with a notice of violation shall constitute a
waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and shall not affect the
validity of the recorded notice of violation. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.106: NOTICE OF SATISFACTION; PROCEDURES:
   (1)   When violations have been corrected, the responsible person or
property owner may request an inspection of the property from the ACE
administrator and the issuance of a notice of compliance or notice of
satisfaction, as the case may be.
   (2)   Upon receipt of a request for inspection, the ACE administrator or an
enforcement official shall reinspect the property as soon as practicable to
determine whether the violations listed in the notice of violation or
administrative code enforcement order have been corrected, and whether all
necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been performed.
   (3)   The ACE administrator shall serve a notice of satisfaction to the
responsible person or property owner in the manner provided in section
4.01.201 of this title, if the ACE administrator determines that:
      (a)   All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation or
administrative code enforcement order have been corrected;
      (b)   All necessary permits have been issued and finalized;
      (c)   All administrative fees and costs have been paid; and
      (d)   All civil penalties assessed against the property have been paid or
satisfied.
   (4)   If the ACE administrator denies a request to issue a notice of
satisfaction, upon request the ACE administrator shall serve the responsible
person with a written explanation setting forth the reasons for the denial. The
written explanation shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in
section
4.01.201 of this title. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.107: WITHHOLDING OF MUNICIPAL PERMITS:
The city may withhold business licenses or permits for any alteration, repair
or construction pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on the
property, or any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real
property or the structure when the ACE administrator or any enforcement
official has served a notice of violation upon the responsible party. The city
may withhold permits until a notice of satisfaction has been issued by the ACE
administrator. The city may not withhold permits that are necessary to obtain a
notice of satisfaction or that are necessary to correct serious health and
safety violations. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.108: CANCELLATION OF RECORDED NOTICE OF VIOLATION OR ORDER:
The ACE administrator, an enforcement official, or the responsible person may
record the notice of satisfaction with the Washington County recorder's office.
Recordation of the notice of satisfaction shall have the effect of canceling a
recorded notice of violation and/or administrative code enforcement order.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 2. ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES
4.03.201: AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of the city code or applicable
state codes may be subject to the assessment of civil penalties for each
violation.
   (2)   Each and every day a violation of any provision of the city code or
applicable state codes exists is a separate violation subject to the assessment
of civil penalties.
   (3)   Civil penalties cannot be assessed when a criminal case has been filed
for the same date and violation, because fines will be assessed with the
criminal case. However, all other civil and administrative remedies are
available.
   (4)   Interest shall be assessed per the consolidated fee schedule on all
outstanding civil penalties, administrative fees and/or abatement cost balances
until the case has been paid in full.
   (5)   Civil penalties for violations of any provision of the city code or
applicable state codes shall be assessed pursuant to the consolidated fee
schedule. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.202: PROCEDURES FOR ASSESSING CIVIL PENALTIES:
   (1)   If a responsible person fails to bring a violation into compliance
within the number of days prescribed in the notice of violation after service
of the notice of violation, civil penalties shall be owed to the city for each
and every subsequent day of violation.
   (2)   Civil penalties are assessed and owing immediately for any violation
of the city code or applicable state codes for an administrative citation.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.203: DETERMINATION OF CIVIL PENALTIES:
   (1)   Civil penalties shall be assessed per violation per day pursuant to
the consolidated fee schedule for a notice of violation.
   (2)   Civil penalties shall continue to accrue until all noticed violations
have been brought into compliance and a notice of compliance or notice of
satisfaction, as the case may be, has been issued by the ACE administrator or
enforcement official. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.204: MODIFICATION OF CIVIL PENALTIES:
   (1)   Upon completion of the notice of violation or administrative code
enforcement order, the administrative law judge may modify the civil penalties
on a finding of good cause.
   (2)   Civil penalties may be waived or modified by the administrative law
judge if there is a finding of good cause based on the responsible person's
claim of legal nonconforming or conditional use; and
      (a)   The city's verification of the claim; or
      (b)   The responsible person's filing of an application for the
conditional use before expiration of the date to correct and said conditional
use is approved by the city. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.205: FAILURE TO PAY PENALTIES:
The failure of any person to pay civil penalties assessed within the specified
time is a violation of this title and may result in the ACE administrator
pursuing any legal remedy to collect the civil penalties as provided in the
law. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 3. ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION
4.03.301: AUTHORITY TO ABATE:
The ACE administrator is authorized to enter upon any property or premises to
abate the violation of the city code and applicable state codes. The ACE
administrator is authorized to assess all costs for the abatement to the
responsible person and use any remedy available under the law to collect the
costs. If additional abatements are necessary within two (2) years, treble
costs may be assessed against the responsible person for the actual abatement.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.302: PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT:
   (1)   Once the procedures set forth in this title have been completed, the
violation may be abated by city personnel or by a private contractor acting
under the direction of the city.
   (2)   An enforcement official, city personnel, authorized representative
(including a private contractor) may enter upon private property in a
reasonable manner to abate the ordinance violation as specified in the notice
of violation or administrative code enforcement order.
   (3)   If the responsible person abates the violation before the city
performs the actual abatement pursuant to a notice of violation or
administrative code enforcement order, the ACE administrator may still assess
all costs incurred by the city against the responsible person.
   (4)   When the abatement is completed, a report describing the work
performed and an itemized account of the total abatement costs shall be
prepared by the ACE administrator. The report shall contain the names and
addresses of the responsible persons of each parcel and the tax parcel number.
   (5)   The ACE administrator shall serve the notice of costs and the itemized
bill of costs by registered mail to the last known address of the responsible
person. The notice shall demand full payment within twenty (20) days to the
city.
   (6)   The ACE administrator shall schedule an itemized bill for costs
hearing, if requested in writing by any or all responsible persons. (Ord. 2005-
10, 2005)
PART 4. RECOVERY OF COSTS
4.03.401: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
   (1)   The city council finds that costs incurred by enforcement officials
and other city personnel to correct violations should be recovered from the
responsible person.
   (2)   The city council further finds that the assessment of costs is an
appropriate method to recover costs incurred for investigating violations,
abating violations, reinspecting properties, title searches, preparing and
serving notices, preparing for hearings, attending hearings, administrative law
judge fees, recording documents, collecting civil penalties and costs, and
otherwise administering this program. The assessment and collection of costs
shall not preclude the imposition of any administrative or judicial civil
penalties or fines for violations of the city code or applicable state codes.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.402: AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Whenever costs are incurred by the city on a property to obtain
compliance with provisions of the city code and applicable state codes, the ACE
administrator may assess costs against the responsible person.
   (2)   Once a notice of violation has been issued, the property will be
inspected one time. Any additional inspections shall be subject to reinspection
fees pursuant to the city fee schedule. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.403: NOTIFICATION OF ASSESSMENT OF REINSPECTION FEES:
   (1)   Notification of reinspection fees shall be provided on the notice of
violation served to the responsible person.
   (2)   Reinspection fees assessed or collected pursuant to this title shall
not be included in any other costs assessed.
   (3)   The failure of any responsible person to receive notice of the
reinspection fees shall not affect the validity of any other fees imposed
herein. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.404: ITEMIZED STATEMENT OF COSTS:
   (1)   When the city itself has abated weeds, garbage, refuse or unsightly or
deleterious objects or structures, the itemized statement of costs shall set
forth all of the expenses incurred by the city in carrying out such abatement.
   (2)   When the city has employed the assistance of the administrative
abatement procedures set forth in this title to cause the abatement of weeds,
garbage, refuse, or unsightly or deleterious objects or structures, the
itemized statement of costs shall also include all of the expenses incurred by
the city in employing such administrative assistance to cause such abatement.
   (3)   The costs set forth in the itemized statement of costs shall be in
accordance with the city consolidated fee schedule. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.03.405: FAILURE TO TIMELY PAY COSTS:
The failure of any person to pay assessed costs by the deadline specified in an
administrative code enforcement order, an itemized statement of costs, or any
other invoice for costs shall result in a late fee calculated at the rate of
one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month on the unpaid balances. (Ord. 2005-
10, 2005)
PART 5. PERFORMANCE BOND
4.03.501: PERFORMANCE BOND:
   (1)   As part of any notice, order or action, the administrative law judge
has the authority to require responsible persons to post a performance bond to
ensure compliance with the city code, applicable state codes, administrative
code enforcement order, or any judicial action.
   (2)   If the responsible person fails to comply with the notice, order or
action, the bond will be forfeited to the city. The bond will not be used to
offset the other outstanding costs and fees associated with the case. (Ord.
2005-10, 2005)
PART 6. INJUNCTION
4.03.601: CIVIL VIOLATIONS; INJUNCTIONS:
In addition to any other remedy provided under the city code or state codes,
including criminal prosecution or administrative remedies, any provision of the
city code may be enforced by injunction issued in the district court upon a
suit brought by the city. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
CHAPTER 4
RECOVERY OF CODE ENFORCEMENT PENALTIES AND COSTS
SECTION:
Part 1. Code Enforcement Tax Lien
4.04.101: Declaration Of Purpose
4.04.102: Procedures For Tax Liens Without Judgment
4.04.103: Procedures For Tax Liens With Judgment
4.04.104: Cancellation Of Code Enforcement Tax Lien
Part 2. Judgment Lien
4.04.201: Entry Of Judgment Lien
Part 3. Writ Of Execution
4.04.301: Recovery Of Costs By Writ Of Execution
Part 4. Writ Of Garnishment
4.04.401: Recovery Of Costs By Writ Of Garnishment
Part 5. Allocation Of Funds Collected
4.04.501: Abatement Superfund
4.04.502: Repayment To Abatement Superfund
4.04.503: Code Enforcement Administrative Fees And Costs Fund
4.04.504: Allocation Of Civil Penalties
PART 1. CODE ENFORCEMENT TAX LIEN
4.04.101: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that recordation of code enforcement tax liens will
assist in the collection of costs incurred by the city in abating, or causing
to be abated, weeds, garbage, refuse or unsightly or deleterious objects or
structures. The city council further finds that collection of such costs is
important in deterring future violations and maintaining the integrity of the
city's code enforcement system. The procedures established in this part shall
be used to complement other administrative or judicial remedies that may be
pursued to address violations of the city code or applicable state codes. (Ord.
2005-10, 2005)
4.04.102: PROCEDURES FOR TAX LIENS WITHOUT JUDGMENT:
   (1)   Once the city has abated, or caused to be abated, weeds, garbage,
refuse, or unsightly or deleterious objects or structures from a property, the
ACE administrator shall prepare three (3) copies of an itemized statement of
costs, which itemizes all costs incurred in causing the removal and destruction
of the violations and deliver them to the city treasurer within ten (10) days
after completion of the work of removing the violations.
   (2)   The ACE administrator shall send, by registered mail, to the property
owner's last known address, a copy of the itemized statement of costs informing
him or her that a code enforcement tax lien is being recorded for the amount of
such costs. Payment shall be due within twenty (20) calendar days from the date
of mailing.
   (3)   Upon receipt of the itemized statement of costs, the city treasurer
shall record a code enforcement tax lien against the property with the county
treasurer's office pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-11-4.
   (4)   The failure of any person with a financial interest in the property to
actually receive the notice of the lien shall not affect the validity of the
lien or any proceedings taken to collect the outstanding costs of abatement.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.04.103: PROCEDURES FOR TAX LIENS WITH JUDGMENT:
Once a judgment has been obtained from the appropriate court assessing costs
against the responsible person, the ACE administrator may record a code
enforcement tax lien against any real property owned by the responsible person.
(Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.04.104: CANCELLATION OF CODE ENFORCEMENT TAX LIEN:
Once payment in full is received for the outstanding civil penalties and costs,
or the amount is deemed satisfied pursuant to a subsequent administrative or
judicial order, the ACE administrator shall either record a notice of
satisfaction of judgment, or provide the property owner or financial
institution with the notice of satisfaction of judgment so that it can record
this notice with the Washington County recorder's office. The notice of
satisfaction of judgment shall include the same information as provided for in
the original code enforcement tax lien. Such notice of satisfaction of judgment
shall cancel the code enforcement tax lien. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 2. JUDGMENT LIEN
4.04.201: ENTRY OF JUDGMENT LIEN:
After obtaining a judgment, the ACE administrator may enter a judgment lien
against the property by:
   (1)   Recording such judgment with the Washington County recorder pursuant
to Utah Code Annotated section 78-22-1; and
   (2)   Recording such judgment in the registry of judgments pursuant to Utah
Code Annotated section 78-22-1.5. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 3. WRIT OF EXECUTION
4.04.301: RECOVERY OF COSTS BY WRIT OF EXECUTION:
After obtaining a judgment, the ACE administrator may collect the obligation by
use of all appropriate legal means. This may include the execution on personal
property owned by the responsible person by filing a writ with the applicable
court. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 4. WRIT OF GARNISHMENT
4.04.401: RECOVERY OF COSTS BY WRIT OF GARNISHMENT:
After obtaining a judgment, the ACE administrator may collect the obligation by
use of all appropriate legal means. This may include the garnishment of
paychecks, financial accounts, and other income or financial assets by filing a
writ with the applicable court. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
PART 5. ALLOCATION OF FUNDS COLLECTED
4.04.501: ABATEMENT SUPERFUND:
There is hereby established a revolving fund to be known as the "abatement
superfund", to defray costs of administrative and judicial abatements. The fund
shall be reimbursed by collection from the property or property owner as
specified in this title and by the courts. The city auditor shall establish
accounting procedures to ensure proper account identification, credit and
collection. This fund may be operated and used in conjunction with procedures
ordered or authorized under the abatement provision of this title. (Ord. 2005-
10, 2005)
4.04.502: REPAYMENT TO ABATEMENT SUPERFUND:
All monies recovered from the sale or transfer of property or by payment for
the actual abatement costs shall be paid to the city treasurer, who shall
credit the appropriate amount to the abatement superfund. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.04.503: CODE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND COSTS FUND:
Administrative fees and administrative costs, except for actual abatement
costs, collected pursuant to this part shall be deposited in the code
enforcement administrative fees and costs fund, as established by the ACE
administrator for the enhancement of the city's code enforcement efforts and to
reimburse city departments for investigative costs and costs associated with
the hearing process. Fees and costs deposited in this fund shall be
appropriated and allocated in a manner determined by the ACE administrator. The
city auditor shall establish accounting procedures to ensure proper account
identification, credit and collection. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
4.04.504: ALLOCATION OF CIVIL PENALTIES:
Civil penalties collected pursuant to this part shall be deposited in the
general fund of the city. Civil penalties deposited in this fund shall be
appropriated and allocated in a manner determined by the city manager and the
city council. The city auditor shall establish accounting procedures to ensure
proper account identification, credit and collection. (Ord. 2005-10, 2005)
TITLE 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
5.01.101: Definitions
5.01.101: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title:
BUSINESS: Means and includes all activities engaged in within this municipality
carried on for the purpose of gain or economic profit, except that the acts of
employees rendering service to employers shall not be included in the term
"business", unless otherwise specifically provided.
EACH SEPARATE PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate establishment or place of
operation, whether or not operating under the same name, within the
municipality, including a home or other place of lodging if the same is held
out by advertisements, listings or otherwise as the establishment or place of
operation of a person engaging in the business of selling tangible, personal
property at either retail or wholesale, or both, in the municipality.
EMPLOYEE: The operator, owner or manager of a place of business and any persons
employed by such person in the operation of such place of business in any
capacity and also any salesperson, agent or independent contractor engaged in
the operation of the place of business in any capacity.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tangible
personal property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods or
property and the rendering of personal services for others for a consideration
by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business, occupation or
other calling, except the rendering of personal services by an employee to his
employer under any contract of personal employment.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate location maintained or operated by the
licensee within this municipality from which business activity is conducted or
transacted.
WHOLESALE: A sale of tangible personal property by wholesalers to retail
merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for resale, and does not
include a sale by wholesalers or retailers to users or consumers not for
resale, except as otherwise specified.
WHOLESALER: A person doing a regularly organized wholesale or jobbing business
and selling to retail merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers, for the
purpose of resale. (Prior Code § 9-111)
CHAPTER 2
BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
SECTION:
5.02.101: Business License Required
5.02.102: Exemptions To License
5.02.103: Reciprocal Recognition Of Licenses
5.02.104: Applications For License
5.02.105: Fees
5.02.106: Inspections Of New Businesses
5.02.107: Issuance Of Business License
5.02.108: Branch Establishments; Separate License Required
5.02.109: Joint License Allowed When
5.02.110: Display
5.02.111: Transfer Of License Prohibited
5.02.112: Payment Dates
5.02.113: Renewal
5.02.114: Revocation Or Denial Of Business License
5.02.101: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be a Class B misdemeanor for any person to transact, engage in or
carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or to operate a vending,
pinball or coin operated machine or to engage in mobile catering without first
receiving the type of business license required by this title. (Ord. 2010-09,
2010)
5.02.102: EXEMPTIONS TO LICENSE:
   (1)   No license requirement shall be imposed under section
5.02.101 of this chapter on any person engaged in business for a nonprofit
purpose which is tax exempt under the laws of the United States and the State,
nor shall any license requirement be imposed on any person engaged in a
business specifically exempted from Municipal taxation and fees by the laws of
the United States or the State; nor shall any license requirement be imposed
upon any person not maintaining a place of business within this Municipality.
(Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
   (2)   No license shall be required for home based businesses that do not
involve children in any way. (Ord. 2017-13, 2017)
   (3)   No license shall be required for operation of any vehicle or equipment
in this Municipality when:
      (a)   Such vehicle is merely passing through the Municipality;
      (b)   Such vehicle is used exclusively in intercity or interstate
commerce. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.02.103: RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION OF LICENSES:
No license shall be required of any person whose only business activity in this
Municipality is the mere delivery in the Municipality of property sold by him
at a regular place of business maintained by him outside the Municipality
where:
   (1)   Such person's business is at the time of such delivery licensed by the
Utah municipality or county in which such place of business is situated; and
   (2)   The authority licensing such business grants to licensees of this
Municipality making deliveries within its jurisdiction the same privileges,
upon substantially the same terms, as are granted by this section; and
   (3)   Neither the property delivered nor any of the facilities by which it
was manufactured, produced or processed are subject to inspection by authority
of this Municipality for compliance with health or sanitary standards
prescribed by this Municipality. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.02.104: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
   (1)   All applications for license shall include:
      (a)   The name and home address of the person applying for the license;
      (b)   The registered name of the business, if applicable;
      (c)   The Federal tax identification number of the business;
      (d)   The type of business to be engaged in;
      (e)   The location of the place of business;
      (f)   A State tax number, if applicable;
      (g)   A State contractor's number, if applicable;
      (h)   Proof that the business is State licensed or registered, if
applicable;
      (i)   For businesses involving children in any way, a current criminal
background check from Utah BCI and, if required to be licensed by the State,
proof of State licensure;
      (j)   A space for the applicant or applicant's authorized agent to sign
under penalty of law that all the information contained therein is true. (Ord.
2017-13, 2017)
   (2)   In the event that the license application relates to a coin operated
machine or device, the application shall identify the machine or device to
which it applies and the location thereof. (Ord. 2009-13, 2009)
5.02.105: FEES:
Fees for business licenses will be charged in accordance with the City
consolidated fee schedule. No business license fee will be charged for a home
based business, unless the combined offsite impact of the home based business
and the primary residential use materially exceeds the offsite impact of the
primary residential use alone. (Ord. 2017-13, 2017)
5.02.106: INSPECTIONS OF NEW BUSINESSES:
Prior to the issuance of a new business license required by this chapter, the
applicant shall permit inspections to be made of the prospective place of
business by the appropriate City department and/or other governmental agency to
ensure compliance with Building, Fire and Health Codes. (Ord. 2009-13, 2009)
5.02.107: ISSUANCE OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
   (1)   An applicant for a business license shall fill out the application in
full and sign it as verification under penalty of law that all information
contained therein is true.
   (2)   The application shall be completed and fees paid.
   (3)   Copies of the application shall be submitted to the appropriate City
staff for their review.
   (4)   After staff review and approval of the completed application, a
business license certificate shall be issued to the applicant. (Ord. 2009-13,
2009)
5.02.108: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS; SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
A separate license must be obtained for each separate place of business in the
Municipality and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in
the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in
such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing places used in
connection with or incident to a business licensed under this chapter shall not
be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (Ord.
2009-13, 2009)
5.02.109: JOINT LICENSE ALLOWED WHEN:
Whenever any person is engaged in two (2) or more businesses at the same
location within the Municipality, such person shall not be required to obtain
separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses, but shall be issued
one (1) license which shall specify on its face all such businesses. The
license tax to be paid shall be computed at the highest license fee applicable
to any of the businesses being conducted at such location. The sale of beer or
any other product or service requiring an additional license shall be subject
to such additional licensing requirement. Where two (2) or more persons conduct
separate businesses at the same location, each such person shall obtain a
license for such business. (Ord. 2009-13, 2009)
5.02.110: DISPLAY:
   (1)   Every certificate of license issued under this title shall be posted
by the licensee in a conspicuous place upon the wall of the building, room or
office of the place of business so that the same may be easily seen. When such
certificate of license has expired, it shall be removed by the licensee from
such place in which it has been posted, and no certificate of license which is
not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted upon the wall or
any part of any room within the place of business. If the licensee's business
is such that a license cannot be displayed due to the transient or mobile
nature of the business, then the licensee shall carry the license on his person
ready to be shown on request by an authorized officer during all such time or
times while the licensee is engaged in or pursuing the business for which a
license is granted.
   (2)   In the event the license is for a coin operated machine or device, the
certificate shall be attached or displayed in the immediate vicinity of the
machine for which it has been issued. (Ord. 2009-13, 2009)
5.02.111: TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No license granted or issued under any ordinance of this Municipality shall be
assigned or transferred to any other person. It shall not be deemed to
authorize any person other than therein named to do business or to authorize
any other business, calling, trade or profession than is therein named, unless
by permission of the Governing Body. (Ord. 2009-13, 2009)
5.02.112: PAYMENT DATES:
All license fees shall be due and payable as follows, except as may be
otherwise provided in the applicable ordinance:
   (1)   License fees shall be payable for each calendar year in advance. The
license shall commence on the date of issuance, shall become delinquent if not
renewed on or before December 31 of each year, and shall expire if not renewed
on or before January 31 of the following year.
   (2)   One-half (1/2) of the annual license fee shall be payable for all
licenses issued by the City pursuant to applications made after July 1 of each
year.
   (3)   Renewal license fees shall be due prior to January 1 of the renewal
year. An amount twice the renewal license fee shall be payable for all licenses
renewed when a license is in a delinquent status. (Ord. 2011-05, 2011)
5.02.113: RENEWAL:
All business licenses are valid for the period of time specified on the license
and require annual renewal by the applicant. To renew a business license, the
licensee shall submit a renewal application to the City, along with payment of
the renewal fee set forth in the consolidated fee schedule, prior to the
payment dates set forth above. In the event a business license is not renewed
on or before January 31 of the year following its issuance, it shall expire and
automatically become null and void. (Ord. 2011-05, 2011)
5.02.114: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
   (1)   Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Code or of any
ordinance of this Municipality shall be revoked and any application denied
because of:
      (a)   The failure of the licensee or applicant to comply with the
requirements of this chapter or any ordinance of the Municipality;
      (b)   Unlawful activities conducted or permitted on the premises where
the business is conducted; or
      (c)   The license was obtained by fraud or deceit.
   (2)   The City shall notify the applicant in writing of the denial or
revocation of a license and the reason for such denial or revocation.
   (3)   A license denial or revocation may be appealed to the City's
Administrative Law Judge by filing written notice of appeal with the City
Recorder within ten (10) days of the notice of denial or revocation. The City's
Administrative Law Judge shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days of the
notice of appeal. (Ord. 2009-13, 2009)
CHAPTER 3
HOME OCCUPATION BUSINESSES
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-13, 2017)
CHAPTER 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
Part 1. Policy; License Types; Authority Of City To Regulate; Zoning
5.04.101: Policy
5.04.102: State Store
5.04.103: Licenses Requiring The City's Consent
5.04.104: Licenses Issued By The City
Part 2. Regulation Of City Issued Licenses
5.04.201: Off Premises Beer Retailer License
5.04.202: Temporary Beer Event Permit
Part 3. City Consent And Licensing Application Processes
5.04.301: Local Consent
5.04.302: Application For Off Premises Beer Retailer License
Part 4. Approval Process; Term Of License; Renewal
5.04.401: Local Consent Review And Decision
5.04.402: License Application Review And Decision
5.04.403: Grounds For Denial Of An Application
5.04.404: Term Of License; Renewal
Part 5. Licensee Requirements; Violations; Penalties; Appeal
5.04.501: Licensee Requirements
5.04.502: Violations
5.04.503: Inspections
5.04.504: Penalty
5.04.505: Grounds For Suspending Or Revoking A License
5.04.506: Process For Suspending Or Revoking A License
5.04.507: Appeal
PART 1. POLICY; LICENSE TYPES; AUTHORITY OF CITY TO REGULATE; ZONING
5.04.101: POLICY:
It is the policy of Ivins City to permit the operation of establishments
serving alcoholic beverages in a manner consistent with the provisions of title
32B of the Utah code, as amended from time to time, entitled "the alcoholic
beverage control act" (the "act"). It is also the policy of Ivins City to place
the primary responsibility for maintaining order and preventing breaches of the
peace within establishments selling and serving alcoholic beverages on the
owners and managers of those establishments. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.102: STATE STORE:
This state license only requires the state to consult with the local authority
and is only allowed in the following zoning districts: community commercial (C-
1) and commercial with light manufacturing (CLM). (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.103: LICENSES REQUIRING THE CITY'S CONSENT:
   (1)   Resort licenses, including resort sublicenses. This license is only
allowed in the resort commercial (RC) zoning district.
   (2)   Full service restaurant license. This license is only allowed in the
following zoning districts: community commercial (C-1); neighborhood commercial
(CN); resort commercial (RC); commercial professional and research (CPR); and
resort mixed use (RMU).
   (3)   Limited service restaurant license. This license is only allowed in
the following zoning districts: community commercial (C-1); neighborhood
commercial (CN); resort commercial (RC); commercial professional and research
(CPR); and resort mixed use (RMU).
   (4)   Club license. This license is only allowed in the following zoning
districts: community commercial (C-1); and resort commercial (RC).
   (5)   Airport lounge license. Ivins City has no airport nor is an airport a
permitted or conditional use in the city. As a result, there is no zoning
district in which this license is allowed.
   (6)   On premises banquet license. This license is only allowed in the
following zoning districts: community commercial (C-1); resort commercial (RC);
and resort mixed use (RMU).
   (7)   On premises beer retailer license, including taverns. This license is
only allowed in the following zoning districts: community commercial (C-1); and
resort commercial (RC).
   (8)   Reception center license. This license is only allowed in the
following zoning districts: community commercial (C-1); resort commercial (RC);
and resort mixed use (RMU).
   (9)   Beer only restaurant license. This license is only allowed in the
following zoning districts: community commercial (C-1); neighborhood commercial
(CN); resort commercial (RC); commercial professional and research (CPR); and
resort mixed use (RMU).
   (10)   Event permits. This license is only allowed in the following zoning
districts: community commercial (C-1); and resort commercial (RC).
   (11)   Special use permits. Zoning is limited to the site for the primary
commercial or religious use as authorized by the city.
   (12)   Package agencies. Zoning is only allowed in the commercial with light
manufacturing (CLM) zoning district.
   (13)   Liquor warehousing license. This license is only allowed in the
commercial with light manufacturing (CLM) zoning district.
   (14)   Beer warehousing license. This license is only allowed in the
commercial with light manufacturing (CLM) zoning district.
   (15)   Manufacturing licenses. This license is only allowed in the
commercial with light manufacturing (CLM) zoning district. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
   (16)   Manufacturing licenses, including winery manufacturing licenses,
distillery manufacturing licenses, brewery manufacturing licenses, and local
industry representative licenses. These licenses are only allowed in the
commercial with light manufacturing (CLM) zoning district.
   (17)   Hotel license, including sublicenses. This license is only allowed in
the resort commercial (RC) zoning district. (Ord. 2016-22, 2016)
5.04.104: LICENSES ISSUED BY THE CITY:
   (1)   Off premises beer retailer license. This license is only allowed in
the following zoning districts: community commercial (C-1); neighborhood
commercial (CN); and resort commercial (RC).
   (2)   Temporary beer event permit. This license is only allowed in the
following zoning districts: community commercial (C-1); and resort commercial
(RC). (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
PART 2. REGULATION OF CITY ISSUED LICENSES
5.04.201: OFF PREMISES BEER RETAILER LICENSE:
   (1)   Permitted Sales: An off premises beer retailer license shall entitle
the licensee to sell beer on the premises described therein in original
containers, not to exceed one quart, for consumption off the premises.
   (2)   Applicability: An off premises beer retailer license may be issued by
the city to a general food store or a convenience store.
   (3)   Beer Sales As Percent Of Sales: Each off premises beer retailer
licensee shall maintain at least seventy percent (70%) of its total monetary
gross receipts from the sale of products other than beer.
   (4)   Bonding Requirements: Each applicant for an off premises beer retailer
license shall post a cash or corporate surety bond in the penal sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), payable to the city, which the licensee has
procured and must maintain for so long as the license is in effect. The bond
shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon the
licensee's faithful compliance with this chapter. No part of any cash or
corporate bond so posted may be withdrawn during the period the license is in
effect. A bond filed by the licensee may be forfeited if the license is
revoked.
   (5)   Prohibited Actions: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or
provide beer for consumption off the premises without first having obtained an
off premises beer retailer license from the city. It shall also be unlawful for
an off premises beer retailer licensee to permit the consumption of beer or
other alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises.
   (6)   Employment Of Minors: An off premises beer retailer licensee may
employ persons eighteen (18) years of age through twenty (20) years of age to
transact the sale of or handle beer in its sealed original containers, provided
they are under the supervision of a person at least twenty one (21) years of
age and who is on the premises. Said licensee may also employ persons sixteen
(16) years of age through seventeen (17) for the handling of beer, exclusive of
transactions, in its sealed original containers, provided they are under the
supervision of a person at least twenty one (21) years of age and who is on the
premises. Said activity is limited to locating or transporting beer upon the
premises.
   (7)   Record Requirements: An off premises beer retailer licensee shall
maintain records which shall disclose the gross sale of beer each year. Such
records shall be available for inspection and audit by an authorized city
employee at any time following the end of each year and for eighteen (18)
months thereafter. Failure of a licensee to properly maintain the required
record, or failure to submit such records for inspection and audit, shall be
cause for suspension or revocation of an off premises beer retailer license.
   (8)   Shoplifting Controls: An off premises beer retailer licensee shall
make every reasonable effort to limit the potential for theft of alcoholic
beverages from licensed premises. A clear, unobstructed view of all portions of
the interior shall be available at all times from a point within the licensed
premises at or near the main public entrance. An alcoholic beverage inventory
shrinkage record shall be kept by the licensee and made available at any time
upon request to the public safety director or other city staff for inspection
or audit. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.202: TEMPORARY BEER EVENT PERMIT:
   (1)   Operational Restrictions: Each temporary beer event permittee shall
abide by all of the operational restrictions set forth in the act.
   (2)   Bonding Requirements: Each applicant for a temporary beer event permit
shall post a cash or corporate surety bond in the penal sum of five hundred
dollars ($500.00), payable to the city, which the licensee has procured and
must maintain for so long as the permit is in effect. The bond shall be in a
form approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon the permittee's faithful
compliance with this chapter, the act, and the rules and regulations of the
commission. No part of any cash or corporate bond so posted may be withdrawn
during the period the permit is in effect. A bond filed by the permittee may be
forfeited if the permit is revoked.
   (3)   Duration Of Permit: The duration of any temporary beer event permit
granted hereunder shall not exceed thirty (30) days. The sale of beer under a
series of permits issued to the same person may not exceed a total of ninety
(90) days in any one calendar year. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
PART 3. CITY CONSENT AND LICENSING APPLICATION PROCESSES
5.04.301: LOCAL CONSENT:
All applications for the city to sign a local consent as part of a state
alcohol application shall be governed as follows:
   (1)   Local Consent Application Requirements:
      (a)   Name, current address and telephone number of the applicant.
      (b)   Applicant's business name and entity type (individual/sole
proprietor, corporation, partnership, limited liability company), business
address and business telephone.
      (c)   Mailing address (if different from the business address) for
official correspondence, licensing renewal, etc.
      (d)   A copy of applicant's current business license issued by Ivins
City.
      (e)   A completed copy of applicant's full state application for the type
of license desired, including a scaled eight and one- half inch by eleven inch
(81/2" x 11") site plan or floor plan highlighting areas for storage, sale and
consumption. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.302: APPLICATION FOR OFF PREMISES BEER RETAILER LICENSE:
All applications for the city to issue an off premises beer retailer license or
a temporary beer event permit shall be governed as follows:
   (1)   License Application Requirements:
      (a)   Name, current address and telephone number of the applicant.
      (b)   Applicant's business name and entity type (individual/sole
proprietor, corporation, partnership, limited liability company), business
address and business telephone.
      (c)   Mailing address (if different from the business address) for
official correspondence, licensing renewal, etc.
      (d)   Federal tax identification number, state sales tax number, state
payroll withholding number, and department of workforce services number.
      (e)   BCI criminal background check.
      (f)   The type of beer license desired.
      (g)   A scaled eight and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11") site
plan or floor plan highlighting areas for storage, sale and consumption, as
applicable.
      (h)   A copy of applicant's current business license issued by Ivins
City.
      (i)   Evidence of proximity to any community location identified in
section 32B-1-202(2) of the act. The location and proximity restrictions set
forth in section 32B-1-202(2) of the act are hereby expressly incorporated
herein by this reference as being applicable to the city issuing an off
premises beer retailer license or a temporary beer event permit.
      (j)   A statement verifying that the applicant meets all of the
requirements of this chapter and the act.
      (k)   A signed statement that the applicant has read, understands and
will comply with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations that are currently
in force or that may be amended from time to time by the state, Washington
County health department and the city relating to alcoholic beverages.
      (l)   A signed consent form granting any authorized representative of the
city, including law enforcement, the unrestricted right to enter the licensed
premises during business hours.
      (m)   A sworn statement signed by the applicant that all the facts
included in the application are true.
   (2)   Business Entities: If the applicant is a partnership, limited
liability company, association or corporation, the applicant shall provide the
above information with respect to any shareholder owning more than twenty
percent (20%) of the business entity and each partner, limited liability
company member, association member, corporate officer or director, although the
application need only be signed by a single partner, manager, member or
officer. If the establishment for which the applicant seeks a license will be
managed or operated by a person other than the applicant, the city shall also
require that the agent, manager or operator submit an application for the
purpose of a background investigation, and, if the manager or operator does not
meet the requirements of this chapter, the city may deny the applicant's
request for a license.
   (3)   Application Fee: The fee for reviewing and processing an application
for consent or licensing shall be as set forth on the city's consolidated fee
schedule. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
PART 4. APPROVAL PROCESS; TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWAL
5.04.401: LOCAL CONSENT REVIEW AND DECISION:
An application for the city to sign a local consent as part of a state alcohol
application shall be reviewed administratively by the city's technical review
committee (TRC). The TRC shall review the application to make certain it is
complete, that the required fee has been paid, and that there is nothing that
would prevent the city from signing the local consent. Within ten (10) business
days of the city's receipt of an application for local consent, the city
manager shall either execute the local consent form, provided as part of
applicant's packet of documents for the state, or shall issue a refusal to
execute the local consent stating the reasons therefor. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.402: LICENSE APPLICATION REVIEW AND DECISION:
An application for a city off premises beer retailer license shall be reviewed
initially by the city's technical review committee (TRC). The TRC shall, within
ten (10) business days of the city's receipt of the application, make a
recommendation to the city council. The city council shall place the item on
its next regularly scheduled meeting agenda to decide whether or not to issue
the requested license. In the event the final decision is a denial, then the
body shall also state the grounds for such denial. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.403: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF AN APPLICATION:
In the event of a denial of the requested license by the city council, the city
attorney shall prepare, and cause to be served upon the applicant, a letter of
denial upon a finding of any of the following grounds:
   (1)   The application was incomplete.
   (2)   The application fee was not paid.
   (3)   The premises to be licensed does not comply with the applicable zoning
regulations and/or building codes applicable at the time of application.
   (4)   The applicant did not meet the licensee qualifications.
   (5)   The applicant misrepresented or concealed information required to be
provided with the application.
   (6)   The proposed premises did not meet health codes and the applicant did
not provide reasonable assurances that it would be brought into compliance upon
approval of the application.
   (7)   The applicant holds other licenses under this chapter that are not in
good standing or on which such licensed premises have occurred in violation of
the requirements of this chapter or the act.
   (8)   The applicant did not hold a current Ivins City business license.
   (9)   The proposed premises did not meet the location/proximity restrictions
of section 32B-1-202(2) of the act. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.404: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWAL:
   (1)   Term: An off premises beer retailer license issued by the city, no
matter when issued, shall expire December 31 of each year.
   (2)   Renewal: On or before November 1 of each year, applicant must submit
an application and fee for renewal of their city license. All renewal
applications must disclose if any of the information on the original license
application has changed and, if so, must update all information that has
changed before a renewal license can be issued.
      (a)   If no information has changed and there have been no violations of
this chapter, the city's business license official shall issue the renewal.
      (b)   If information has changed, or there have been violations of this
chapter within the past license term, then the renewal application shall go
through the same approval process as for approval of an initial license.
      (c)   If an applicant fails to meet any of the requirements for renewal,
the city shall issue a revocation of the city license. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
PART 5. LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS; VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; APPEAL
5.04.501: LICENSEE REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Display Of License: Every licensee shall display a copy of the license
or permit obtained from the city in a prominent place on the premises. Every
licensee shall also display any licenses or permits obtained from the state as
may be required in the act.
   (2)   Illumination: Licensed premises shall be kept illuminated at all times
while occupied or open for business. Outdoor and signage illumination must
conform to city code.
   (3)   Employee Requirements: Any employee handling alcoholic beverages must
be twenty one (21) years of age or older, unless otherwise specified in the
act. Servers of alcohol must wear a unique identification badge showing the
employee's first name, initials, or a number assigned by the employer.
Employees may not consume or be under the influence of alcoholic beverages
while on duty.
   (4)   Training: The city may revoke or refuse to renew a license if any
individual who manages operations, supervises servers or serves an alcoholic
beverage fails to complete and pass an alcohol training and education seminar
as required by the act or fails to provide evidence of that training as part of
the application for a license or for a renewal. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.502: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee, employee or agent of
any licensee to cause or permit to be caused on his or her premises any of the
following:
   (1)   To sell any alcoholic beverages if unlicensed or after a license has
been denied, suspended or revoked.
   (2)   To sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is intoxicated or
under the influence of any intoxicating beverage.
   (3)   To fail to have the license issued under this chapter or the act
displayed in a prominent place on the premises.
   (4)   Except as specifically provided in the act, minors may not sell,
dispense, or furnish alcohol. All licensees may prohibit minors from entering
the premises at their discretion by posting a sign at the entrance stating that
minors are not permitted inside.
   (5)   To sell beer except in the manner for which a license has been issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or the act.
   (6)   To advertise the sale of alcoholic beverages except under such
regulations established by the Utah alcoholic beverage control commission and
as provided in this code.
   (7)   To refuse entry on the premises of any authorized person to perform an
inspection under this chapter or the act.
   (8)   Acts or conduct on the licensee's premises which are considered
contrary to the public welfare and morals, as defined by the act, are
prohibited. Licensees may not engage in or permit any form of gambling on the
premises. A licensee may not knowingly allow a person on the licensed premises
to sell, distribute, possess, or use a controlled substance or use, deliver or
possess with the intent to deliver drug paraphernalia. It is the responsibility
of the licensee to maintain proper order and decorum within their establishment
by taking appropriate action to prohibit disorderly or prohibited conduct on
the premises by any patron or employee. Failure of the licensee to do so may
subject the licensee to possible revocation of the license. (Ord. 2014-21,
2014)
5.04.503: INSPECTIONS:
All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by any officer, agent or
peace officer of the city, the alcoholic beverage control commission, or the
Utah department of health. At any time during which licensees are open for the
transaction of business and upon presentation of credentials, said officer
shall immediately be admitted onto the premises and permitted without hindrance
or delay to inspect completely the entire premises and all books and records of
the licensee. Every licensee shall, at the request of the Utah department of
health, furnish samples of the beer offered for sale. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.504: PENALTY:
Any person committing any violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a class
B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to the penalty applicable to a
class B misdemeanor. Any person violating the act shall be subject to the
penalties of the act. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.505: GROUNDS FOR SUSPENDING OR REVOKING A LICENSE:
   (1)   The applicant no longer holds a current Ivins City business license.
   (2)   The applicant no longer meets the licensee qualifications,
requirements or restrictions or no longer meets the licensing requirements of
this chapter or the act.
   (3)   The applicant failed to disclose any material changes in status on the
renewal application, including, but not limited to, a change in license status
with the state.
   (4)   The proposed premises no longer meets health codes and the applicant
has not provided reasonable assurances that it will be brought into compliance
upon approval of the application.
   (5)   The applicant holds licenses under this chapter that are no longer in
good standing or on which a violation of the requirements of this chapter or
the act have occurred.
   (6)   It is discovered that the applicant committed a violation of this
chapter or the act.
   (7)   It is discovered that the applicant attempted to transfer the license
to another person or entity in violation of the act. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.506: PROCESS FOR SUSPENDING OR REVOKING A LICENSE:
Upon the city's technical review committee making a finding of a ground for
suspending or revoking a license, the city attorney shall prepare, and cause to
be served upon the licensee, written notice of intent to suspend or revoke the
licensee's license and shall specify therein the grounds for such suspension or
revocation. If the notice of intent is served by mail it shall be deemed served
after five (5) days from date of mailing.
   (1)   Request For Hearing: After a notice of intent to suspend or revoke has
been issued to a licensee, the licensee has ten (10) business days from date of
service, or deemed service, within which the licensee may submit a written
request for hearing before the body that issued the initial license for the
purpose of determining the sufficiency of grounds to suspend or revoke the
license. If no written request for hearing is received by the city within the
time allowed, then the city attorney shall prepare, and cause to be served upon
the licensee, a written letter of suspension or revocation, as the case may be,
which shall include direction to the licensee to immediately cease and desist
all alcohol activities until such time as a new license is obtained. In the
event a licensee does submit a timely request for hearing, the body that issued
the initial license shall hold a hearing and make specific findings as to
whether or not there are sufficient grounds for suspending or revoking a
license and, if sufficient grounds are found to suspend or revoke the license,
shall order such suspension or revocation and direct licensee to immediately
cease and desist from all alcohol activities until such time as a new license
is obtained. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
5.04.507: APPEAL:
In the event a licensee does file a timely written request for hearing,
following which an order suspending or revoking licensee's license is issued,
the licensee may file with the city recorder a written appeal within ten (10)
days of the entry of the adverse order. In the event a timely appeal is filed,
then the matter shall be set for hearing before the city's administrative law
judge pursuant to title 2, chapter 5 of this code. (Ord. 2014-21, 2014)
CHAPTER 5
CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
SECTION:
5.05.101: Definitions
5.05.102: Use Of Person's Name Without Consent For Soliciting Contributions
Prohibited; Exception
5.05.103: Use Of Name Without Consent On Stationery Or As One Who Contributed
To Organization Prohibited
5.05.104: Violation; Penalty
5.05.101: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Any organization that is benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary, or one purporting to be such.
CONTRIBUTION: The promise or grant of any money or property of any kind or
value.
PERSON: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership,
corporation or any combination of them.
PROFESSIONAL FUNDRAISER: Any person who, for compensation or any other
consideration, plans, conducts or manages the solicitation of contributions for
or on behalf of any charitable organization or any other person, or who engages
in the business of, or holds himself out to persons as independently engaged in
the business of soliciting contributions for such purpose, but shall not
include a bona fide officer or employee of a charitable organization.
PROFESSIONAL SOLICITOR: Any person who is employed or retained for compensation
by a professional fundraiser to solicit contributions in this municipality for
charitable purposes. (Prior Code § 13-1061)
5.05.102: USE OF PERSON'S NAME WITHOUT CONSENT FOR SOLICITING CONTRIBUTIONS
PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
No charitable organization, professional fundraiser or professional solicitor,
seeking to raise funds for charitable purposes, shall use the name of any other
person for the purpose of soliciting contributions without the written consent
of the person; provided, that this section shall not apply to religious
corporations or organizations, charities, agencies and organizations operated,
supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious corporation or
organization. (Prior Code § 13-1062)
5.05.103: USE OF NAME WITHOUT CONSENT ON STATIONERY OR AS ONE WHO CONTRIBUTED
TO ORGANIZATION PROHIBITED:
It is deemed to be a violation of this chapter to use, without written consent,
the name of a person for the purpose of soliciting contributions if the
person's name is listed on any stationery, advertisement, brochure or
correspondence, or a charitable organization, or his name is listed or referred
to as one who has contributed to, sponsored or endorsed the charitable
organization or its activities. (Prior Code § 13-1063)
5.05.104: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. (Prior Code § 13-1064)
CHAPTER 6
OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
5.06.101: Offensive Business; Permit Required
5.06.102: Permits; Issuance
5.06.103: Existing Offensive Businesses And Facilities
5.06.104: Control Of Animal And Fowl Facilities
5.06.101: OFFENSIVE BUSINESS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (1)   No person shall commence or change the location of an offensive
business or establishment in or within one mile of the limits of this
municipality without first filing an application for a permit to do so with the
city recorder.
   (2)   "Offensive businesses", within the meaning of this chapter, shall
include, but not be limited to, packing houses, dairies, tanneries, canneries,
renderies, junk or salvage yards, bone factories, slaughterhouses, butcher
shops, soap factories, foundries, breweries, distilleries, livery stables,
blacksmith shops, or any other enterprise or establishment which creates
excessive odors, fumes, smoke, gases or noises.
   (3)   The application for a permit shall specify the location at which the
business or establishment is to be operated and maintained or the new location
to which it is to be moved. The application shall describe the type of activity
which will be conducted and describe the manner in which the business or
establishment shall eliminate, control or modify the emission by the business
of the undesirable odors, fumes, noises and other noisome features and the
manner in which it shall be screened from public view, if its appearance is
offensive. (Prior Code § 10-241)
5.06.102: PERMITS; ISSUANCE:
   (1)   The city recorder shall cause a study to be made of the proposed
business or relocation of any offensive business or establishment by the board
of health and by personnel engaged in the inspection of buildings and other
facilities. A report and recommendation shall be made to the governing body.
The governing body, after review, may grant to the applicant an opportunity to
be heard and present additional facts. Thereafter the governing body may:
      (a)   Deny the application;
      (b)   Recommend a modification thereof;
      (c)   Grant a limited permit to enter into the business or make the
change of location subject to the requirement that the business or facility
conform to standards established by the governing body with reference to
controlling the offensive features of the business.
   (2)   In the event a permit is granted, it shall be subject to revocation
either upon failure of the operator or owner to conduct his business in the
manner specified by the governing body at the time of the granting of the
permit, or because a change of circumstances makes the continued operation or
maintenance of the business or facility a public nuisance.
   (3)   The governing body shall have power to revoke or modify the permission
to operate and maintain the business in such a manner as it deems necessary for
the public good. (Prior Code § 10-242)
5.06.103: EXISTING OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES:
   (1)   The governing body may require an investigation of any existing
offensive business or facility to determine whether or not it should be
permitted to remain in existence in or within one mile of the municipal limits.
If the governing body determines that the continuation of the business or
facility has become a nuisance to persons situated within the municipal limits,
or that ample control is not being exercised to minimize the creation of
excessive odors, fumes, smoke, gases and noise, it shall notify the owner or
operator thereof that the governing body is considering revoking or modifying
the operator's license.
   (2)   If the governing body decides to require a modification of the manner
in which the business or facility is to be maintained, it shall specify the
standards or specifications to which the enterprise must conform or otherwise
lose its license to engage thereafter in the business or activity. (Prior Code
§ 10-243)
5.06.104: CONTROL OF ANIMAL AND FOWL FACILITIES:
   (1)   The governing body shall have the power to prohibit or control the
location and management of any offensive, unwholesome business or establishment
in or within one mile of the municipality and may compel the owner of any
pigsty, privy, barn, corral, furbearing animal farm, feed yard, poultry farm or
other unwholesome or nauseous house or place to cleanse, abate or remove the
same.
   (2)   The governing body may on its own initiative and shall, on complaint
of a member of the public, examine the operation, control or location of any
business or facility for the purpose of determining whether or not the
operation of such business or facility should be improved so as to minimize the
offensive and unwholesome characteristics or whether the business or activity
should be moved or abated.
   (3)   In the event that the governing body decides that the business or
facility should be abated, removed or controlled, it shall notify the owner or
operator of the business or facility of such fact.
   (4)   After a hearing, the governing body may issue a limited license
wherein it may prescribe the specifications and standards which must be
followed by the business or facility in order to be permitted to continue in
operation.
   (5)   Upon determination by the governing body that the business or facility
is a nuisance, it shall have power to order the abatement or removal of the
facility or establishment. If the owner fails to conform to such order, the
governing body shall have the power to bring all necessary legal proceedings to
force removal, abatement or adherence to standards. (Prior Code § 10-244)
CHAPTER 7
RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
SECTION:
5.07.101: Purpose
5.07.102: No Other City License Or Approval Required
5.07.103: Definitions
5.07.104: Exemptions From Chapter
5.07.105: Solicitation Prohibited
5.07.106: Registration Of Solicitors
5.07.107: Application Form
5.07.108: Written Disclosures
5.07.109: When Registration Begins
5.07.110: Issuance Of Certificates
5.07.111: Form Of Certificate And Identification Badge
5.07.112: Maintenance Of Registry
5.07.113: Nontransferability Of Certificates
5.07.114: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of Certificate Of Registration
5.07.115: Appeal
5.07.116: Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
5.07.117: "No Solicitation" Notice
5.07.118: Duties Of Solicitors
5.07.119: Time Of Day Restrictions
5.07.120: Buyer's Right To Cancel
5.07.121: Penalties
5.07.101: PURPOSE:
   (1)   Residents of the city have an inalienable interest in their personal
safety, well being, and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability
to provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief,
political or charitable activities, and goods and services lawfully in
commerce. The city has a substantial interest in protecting the well being,
tranquility, personal safety, and privacy of its citizens, which includes the
ability to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property.
The city also has a substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or
otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as criminal activity.
   (2)   There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the
city and its citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this chapter on the
rights of those who are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of city
officials derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and
property from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens
regarding door to door solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement
officers and those affected by door to door canvassing and solicitation, as
well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional
protections afforded and denied persons seeking to engage in door to door
solicitation, the city adopts this chapter to promote the city's substantial
interests in:
      (a)   Respecting citizens' decisions regarding privacy in their
residences;
      (b)   Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
      (c)   Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious
belief, political position or charitable activities; and
      (d)   Permitting truthful and nonmisleading door to door solicitation
regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
   (3)   The city finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in
this chapter are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the city interests
referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights of those
regulated. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
5.07.102: NO OTHER CITY LICENSE OR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   (1)   Registered solicitors and persons exempt from registration need not
apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit or registration from the city
to engage in door to door solicitation.
   (2)   Any business licensed by the city under another city ordinance that
uses employees, independent contractors or agents for door to door solicitation
in an effort to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to the business,
shall be required to have such solicitors obtain a certificate, unless
otherwise exempt from registration.
   (3)   Those responsible persons or entities associated with registered
solicitors need not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit or
registration from the city, provided they do not establish a temporary or fixed
place of business in the city.
   (4)   Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other
requirement of federal, state or other local government law regarding any
license, permit or certificate that a registered solicitor is otherwise
required to have or maintain. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
5.07.103: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ADVOCATING: Speech or conduct intended to inform, promote or support religious
belief, political position or charitable activities.
APPEALS OFFICER: The city council or designee of the city responsible for
receiving the information from the city and appellant regarding the denial or
suspension of a certificate and issuing a decision as required by this chapter.
APPELLANT: The person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a
certificate, either personally as an applicant or registered solicitor, or on
behalf of the applicant or registered solicitor.
APPLICANT: An individual who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and not a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity who
applies for a certificate permitting door to door solicitation.
APPLICATION FORM: A standardized form provided by the city to an applicant to
be completed and submitted as part of registration.
BCI: An original or copy, dated no older than one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to the date of the application, of either: a) a Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification verified criminal history report
personal to the applicant or equivalent report prepared by the corresponding
public safety agency of the applicant's home state if the applicant is not a
Utah resident; or b) verification by the Utah department of public safety
bureau of criminal identification that no criminal history rising to the level
of a disqualifying status exists for the applicant in Utah and the applicant's
home state if the applicant is not a Utah resident.
BUSINESS: A commercial enterprise licensed by the city as a person or entity
under this title, having a fixed or temporary physical location within the
city.
CERTIFICATE: A temporary, annual or renewal certificate permitting door to door
solicitation in the city applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of this
chapter.
CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES: Advocating by persons or entities that either are, or
support, a charitable organization.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: (1) Includes any person, joint venture, partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, association, group or other entity:
      (a)   That is:
      (i)   A benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane,
patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public
health, environmental or conservation, or civic organization;
      (ii)   For the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or
firefighter fraternal association; or
      (iii)   Established for any charitable purpose; and
      (b)   That is tax exempt under applicable provisions of the internal
revenue code of 1986, as amended, and qualified to solicit and receive tax
deductible contributions from the public for charitable purposes.
   (2)   "Charitable organization" includes a chapter, branch, area or office,
or similar affiliate or any person soliciting contributions within the state
for a charitable organization that has its principal place of business outside
the city or state of Utah 1 .
COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL: A person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen
(18) years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage
in rational thought, conversation and conduct.
COMPLETED APPLICATION: A fully completed application form, a BCI, two (2)
copies of the original identification relied on by the applicant to establish
proof of identity, and the tendering of fees.
CRIMINALLY CONVICTED: The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of no
contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not
been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal
conviction is that offense of which the applicant or registered solicitor was
convicted, without regard to the reduced status of the charge after completion
of conditions of probation or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in
abeyance or diversion agreement.
DISQUALIFYING STATUS: Anything specifically defined in this chapter as
requiring the denial or suspension of a certificate, and any of the following:
   (1)   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted
of:
      (a)   Felony homicide;
      (b)   Physically abusing, sexually abusing or exploiting a minor;
      (c)   The sale or distribution of controlled substances; or
      (d)   Sexual assault of any kind;
   (2)   Criminal charges currently pending against the applicant or registered
solicitor for:
      (a)   Felony homicide;
      (b)   Physically abusing, sexually abusing or exploiting a minor;
      (c)   The sale or distribution of controlled substances; or
      (d)   Sexual assault of any kind.
   (3)   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of
a felony within the last ten (10) years;
   (4)   The applicant or registered solicitor has been incarcerated in a
federal or state prison within the past five (5) years;
   (5)   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of
a misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of:
      (a)   Moral turpitude; or
      (b)   Violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
   (6)   A final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant or
registered solicitor within the last five (5) years indicating that: a) the
applicant or registered solicitor had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation; or b) that a debt of the applicant or registered solicitor
was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 United States Code 523(a)(2),
(a)(4), (a)(6) or (a)(19);
   (7)   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently on parole or
probation to any court, penal institution or governmental entity, including
being under house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
   (8)   The applicant or registered solicitor has an outstanding arrest
warrant from any jurisdiction; or
   (9)   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently subject to a
protective order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: The practice of engaging in or attempting to engage
in conversation with any person at a residence, whether or not that person is a
competent individual, while making or seeking to make or facilitate a home
solicitation sale, or attempting to further the sale of goods and/or services.
ENTITY: Includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or
other lawful entity, organization, society or association.
FEES: The cost charged to the applicant or registered solicitor for the
issuance of a certificate and/or identification badge, which shall not exceed
the reasonable costs of processing the application and issuing the certificate
and/or identification badge.
FINAL CIVIL JUDGMENT: A civil judgment that would be recognized under state law
as a judgment to which collateral estoppel would apply.
GOODS: One or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise, perishables
of any kind, subscriptions or manufactured products offered, provided or sold.
HOME SOLICITATION: To make or attempt to make a sale of goods or services by a
solicitor at a residence by means of door to door solicitation, regardless of:
   (1)   The means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
   (2)   The time of delivery of the goods or services; or
   (3)   The previous or present classification of the solicitor as a
solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or similar designation.
LICENSING OFFICER: The city employee or agent responsible for receiving from an
applicant or registered solicitor the completed application and either
granting, suspending or denying the applicant's certificate.
NO SOLICITATION SIGN: A reasonably visible and legible sign that states "no
soliciting", "no solicitors", "no salespersons", "no trespassing" or words of
similar import.
POLITICAL POSITION: Any actually held belief, or information for, against or in
conjunction with any political, social, environmental or humanitarian belief or
practice.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has been issued a current certificate by
the city.
REGISTRATION: The process used by the city licensing officer to accept a
completed application and determine whether or not a certificate will be
denied, granted or suspended.
RELIGIOUS BELIEF: Any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption, presumption
or position, or religious doctrine, dogma or practice, regardless of whether or
not the belief or information is endorsed by any other person or public or
private entity.
RESIDENCE: Any living unit contained within any building or structure that is
occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the
city, together with the lot or other real property on which the living unit is
located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street or public rights of
way.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON OR ENTITY: That person or entity responsible to provide the
following to an applicant, registered solicitor and the competent individual in
a residence to whom a sale of goods or services is made or attempted to be made
by means of a home solicitation sale:
   (1)   Maintaining a state sales tax number, a special events sales tax
number, computing the sales taxes owing from any sale of goods or services,
paying the sales taxes, and filing any required returns or reports;
   (2)   Facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to
cancel the sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law; and
   (3)   Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those
persons who timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights
or law.
SALE OF GOODS OR SERVICES: The conduct and agreement of a solicitor and the
competent individual in a residence regarding a particular goods or service
that entitles the consumer to rescind the same within three (3) days under any
applicable federal, state or local law.
SERVICES: Those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided or sold
to a competent individual of a residence.
SOLICITING, SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: Any of the following activities:
   (1)   Seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or
consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought;
   (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase
insurance, subscriptions to publications, or publications;
   (3)   Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value
for the benefit of any person or entity;
   (4)   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or
services;
   (5)   Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence for the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding
religious belief, political position, charitable conduct or a home solicitation
sale;
   (6)   Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of
soliciting, such as hawking or peddling.
SOLICITOR OR SOLICITORS: A person(s) engaged in door to door solicitation.
SUBMITTED IN WRITING: The information for an appeal of a denial or suspension
of a certificate, submitted in any type of written statement to the city
offices by certified, registered, priority, overnight or delivery confirmation
mail, facsimile, or hand delivery.
SUBSTANTIATED REPORT: An oral, written or electronic report:
   (1)   That is submitted to and documented by the city;
   (2)   By any of the following:
      (a)   A competent individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or
other city employees with publicly available identification of their name,
address, and any other reliable means of contact;
      (b)   City law enforcement or licensing officer; or
      (c)   Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level
of government;
   (3)   That provides any of the following information regarding a registered
solicitor:
      (a)   Documented verification of a previously undisclosed disqualifying
status of a registered solicitor;
      (b)   Probable cause that the registered solicitor has committed a
disqualifying status which has not yet been determined to be a disqualifying
status;
      (c)   Documented, eyewitness accounts that the registered solicitor has
engaged in repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrate failure by the
registered solicitor to adhere to the requirements of this chapter; or
      (d)   Probable cause that continued licensing of the registered solicitor
creates exigent circumstances that threaten the health, safety or welfare of
any individuals or entities within the city.
WAIVER: The written form provided to applicant by the city wherein applicant
agrees that the city may obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on
the applicant for licensing purposes under this chapter, and which contains
applicant's notarized signature. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006; amd. Ord. 2012-06, 2012)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 13-22-2(1)(a), (1)(b) (charitable solicitation act).
5.07.104: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER:
The following are exempt from registration under this chapter:
   (1)   Persons specifically invited to a residence by a competent individual
prior to the time of the person's arrival at the residence;
   (2)   Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the
state permits them to engage in door to door solicitation to offer goods or
services to an occupant of the residence;
   (3)   Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a previously made
order, or persons providing services at a residence pursuant to a previously
made request by a competent individual;
   (4)   Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any religious belief, or political position regardless of
whether goods, services or any other consideration is offered or given, with or
without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge or purchase; and
   (5)   Persons representing a charitable organization. The charitable
exemption shall apply to students soliciting contributions to finance
extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs;
provided, that the solicitation has been approved in writing by the school
administration, and that such student solicitors carry current picture student
identification from the educational institution for which they are soliciting.
Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the duties and
prohibitions outlined in sections
5.07.117,
5.07.118 and
5.07.119 of this chapter while advocating or soliciting. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
5.07.105: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted or exempted pursuant to the terms and
provisions of this chapter, the practice of being in and upon a private
residence within the city by solicitors, for the purpose of home solicitation
sales or to provide goods or services, is prohibited and is punishable as set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
5.07.106: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS:
Unless otherwise exempt under this chapter, all persons desiring to engage in
door to door solicitation within the city, prior to doing so, shall submit a
completed application to the licensing officer and obtain a certificate. (Ord.
2006-21, 2006)
5.07.107: APPLICATION FORM:
The licensing officer shall provide a standard application form for use for the
registration of solicitors. Upon request to the licensing officer, or as
otherwise provided, any person or entity may obtain in person, by mail, or
facsimile, a copy of this application form. Each application form shall require
disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the following information,
documentation and fee:
   (1)   Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant has
received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this chapter.
   (2)   Contact Information:
      (a)   Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former
names or aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
      (b)   Applicant's telephone number, home address and mailing address, if
different;
      (c)   If different from the applicant, the name, address, and telephone
number of the responsible person or entity; and
      (d)   The address by which all notices to the applicant required under
this chapter are to be sent.
   (3)   Proof Of Identity: An in-person verification by the licensing officer
of the applicant's true identity by use of any of the following which bear a
photograph of said applicant:
      (a)   A valid driver's license issued by any state;
      (b)   A valid passport issued by the United States;
      (c)   A valid identification card issued by any state;
      (d)   A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States
military.
Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to
establish proof of identity shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 2006-21,
2006)
   (4)   Proof Of Registration With Department Of Commerce: The applicant shall
provide proof that either the applicant, or the responsible person or entity,
has registered with the Utah department of commerce. (Ord. 2012-06, 2012)
   (5)   Special Events Sales Tax Number: The applicant shall provide a special
events sales tax number for either the applicant, or for the responsible person
or entity for which the applicant will be soliciting.
   (6)   Marketing Information:
      (a)   The goods or services offered by the applicant, including any
commonly known, registered or trademarked names;
      (b)   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits,
registrations, or other qualifications required by federal or state law to
promote, provide, or render advice regarding the offered goods or services.
(Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
   (7)   BCI Background Check: The applicant shall provide an original or a
copy of a "BCI" background check, as defined in section
 5.07.103 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-06, 2012)
   (8)   Responses To Questions Regarding "Disqualifying Status": The applicant
shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the
application form:
      (a)   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of:
         (i)   Felony homicide;
         (ii)   Physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor;
         (iii)   The sale or distribution of controlled substances; or
         (iv)   Sexual assault of any kind;
      (b)   Are any criminal charges currently pending against the applicant
for:
         (i)   Felony homicide;
         (ii)   Physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor;
         (iii)   The sale or distribution of controlled substances; or
         (iv)   Sexual assault of any kind;
      (c)   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a felony within the
last ten (10) years;
      (d)   Has the applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison
within the past five (5) years;
      (e)   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within
the past five (5) years involving a crime of:
         (i)   Moral turpitude; or
         (ii)   Violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
      (f)   Has a final civil judgment been entered against the applicant
within the last five (5) years indicating that:
         (i)   The applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation; or
         (ii)   That a debt of the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy
pursuant to 11 United States Code section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6) or (a)(19);
      (g)   Is the applicant currently on parole or probation to any court,
penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest
or subject to a tracking device;
      (h)   Does the applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any
jurisdiction; or
      (i)   Is the applicant currently subject to a protective order based on
physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction;
   (9)   Fee: The applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the
city, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application
and issuing the certificate and/or identification badge.
   (10)   Execution Of Application: The applicant shall execute the application
form, stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on
the present knowledge and belief of the applicant, the information provided is
complete, truthful and accurate. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
5.07.108: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the
applicant of the following:
   (1)   The applicant's submission of the application authorizes the city to
verify information submitted with the completed application including:
      (a)   The applicant's address;
      (b)   The applicant's and/or responsible person or entity's state tax
identification and special use tax numbers, if any;
      (c)   The validity of the applicant's proof of identity;
   (2)   The city may consult any publicly available sources for information on
the applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any outstanding
warrants, protective orders or civil judgments;
   (3)   Establishing proof of identity is required before registration is
allowed;
   (4)   Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant
with a completed application;
   (5)   The applicant must submit a BCI background check with a completed
application;
   (6)   To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, the applicant's
BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not
available for public inspection;
   (7)   The city will maintain copies of the applicant's application form,
proof of identity and identification badge. These copies will become public
records available for inspection on demand at the city offices whether or not a
certificate is denied, granted or renewed;
   (8)   The criteria for disqualifying status, denial or suspension of a
certificate under the provisions of this chapter;
   (9)   That a request for a temporary certificate will be granted or denied
the same business day that a completed application is submitted. (Ord. 2006-21,
2006)
5.07.109: WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS:
The licensing officer shall not begin the registration process unless the
applicant has submitted a completed application. The original identification
submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned after the licensing
officer verifies the applicant's identity. A copy of the identification may be
retained by the licensing officer. If an original BCI background check is
submitted by the applicant, the licensing officer shall make a copy of the BCI
and return the original to the applicant. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
5.07.110: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES:
The licensing officer shall review the completed application submitted by the
applicant and issue a certificate in accordance with the following:
   (1)   Temporary Certificate:
      (a)   A temporary certificate shall issue allowing the applicant to
immediately begin door to door solicitation upon the following conditions:
         (i)   Applicant's submission of a completed application;
         (ii)   Applicant's submission of the required fee;
         (iii)   Applicant establishes proof of identity;
         (iv)   The applicant's representations on the application form do not
affirmatively show a disqualifying status;
         (v)   The BCI does not affirmatively show a disqualifying status; and
         (vi)   The applicant has not previously been denied a certificate by
the city, or had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
      (b)   A temporary certificate will automatically expire after twenty five
(25) calendar days from issuance, or upon grant or denial of an annual
certificate, whichever period is shorter.
   (2)   Annual Certificate: Within twenty five (25) calendar days of the
issuance of a temporary certificate, the city shall:
      (a)   Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the
truthfulness and completeness of the information submitted by the applicant,
including, but not limited to, those disclosed with the application form.
      (b)   Issue written notice to the applicant and the responsible person or
entity, if any, that the applicant either:
         (i)   Will be issued an annual certificate, eligible for renewal one
year from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate; or
         (ii)   Will not be issued an annual certificate for reasons cited in
section
5.07.114 of this chapter.
   (3)   Renewal Certificate: An annual certificate shall be valid for one year
from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate and shall expire at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the anniversary date of issuance. Any annual
certificate that is not suspended, revoked or expired may be renewed upon the
request of the registered solicitor and the submission of a new completed
application and payment of the fee, unless any of the conditions for the
denial, suspension or revocation of a certificate are present as set forth in
section
5.07.114 of this chapter, or a disqualifying status is present. (Ord. 2006-21,
2006)
5.07.111: FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
   (1)   Certificate Form: Should the licensing officer determine that the
applicant is entitled to a certificate, the licensing officer shall issue a
certificate to the applicant. The certificate shall list the name of the
registered solicitor and the responsible person or entity, if any, and the date
on which the certificate expires. The certificate shall be dated and signed by
the license officer. The certificate shall be carried by the registered
solicitor at all times while soliciting in the city.
   (2)   Identification Badge: With both the temporary and annual certificates,
the city shall issue each registered solicitor an identification badge that
shall be worn prominently on his or her person while soliciting in the city.
The identification badge shall bear the name of the city and shall contain: a)
the name of the registered solicitor; b) address and phone number of the
registered solicitor, or the name, address and phone number of the responsible
person or entity is provided; c) a recent photograph of the registered
solicitor; and d) the date on which the certificate expires. (Ord. 2006-21,
2006)
5.07.112: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The licensing officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a
copy or record of every completed application received and the certificate or
written denial issued by the city. The applicant's BCI background check shall
remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public
inspection. The licensing officer may furnish to the head of the city's law
enforcement agency a listing of all applicants, those denied, and those issued
a certificate. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
5.07.113: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATES:
Certificates shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and shall list
the responsible party or entity, if any. The certificate shall be
nontransferable. A registered solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to
facilitate home solicitation sales with different: a) goods or services; or b)
responsible person or entity, from those designated in the originally submitted
completed application, shall submit a written change request to the licensing
officer. A new certificate based on the amended information shall issue for the
balance of time remaining on the solicitor's previous certificate before the
amendment was filed. Before the new certificate is given to the registered
solicitor, the registered solicitor shall obtain a revised identification badge
from the city, after payment of the fee for the identification badge. (Ord.
2006-21, 2006)
5.07.114: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
   (1)   Denial: Upon review, the licensing officer shall refuse to issue a
certificate to an applicant for any of the following reasons:
      (a)   Denial Of Temporary Certificate:
         (i)   The application form is not complete;
         (ii)   The applicant fails to establish proof of identity, provide a
BCI or pay the fees;
         (iii)   The completed application or BCI indicates that the applicant
has a disqualifying status; or
         (iv)   The applicant has previously been denied a certificate by the
city, or has had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
      (b)   Denial Of Annual Certificate:
         (i)   The information submitted by the applicant at the time of the
granting of the temporary certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         (ii)   Since the submission of the completed application, the
applicant is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying
status;
         (iii)   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         (iv)   Since the submission of the application, the city has received
a substantiated report regarding the past or present conduct of the applicant;
         (v)   Since the submission of the application, the city or other
governmental entity has either criminally convicted or obtained a civil
injunction against the applicant for violating this chapter or similar federal,
state or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying
status; or
         (vi)   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that: a) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud or intentional misrepresentation; or b) that a debt of
the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 United States
Code section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6) or (a)(19).
      (c)   Denial Of Annual Certificate Renewal:
         (i)   The information submitted by the applicant when seeking renewal
of a certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         (ii)   Since the submission of the renewal application, the applicant
is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
         (iii)   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         (iv)   Since the submission of the application or granting of a
certificate, the city has received a substantiated report regarding the past or
present conduct of the solicitor;
         (v)   The city or other governmental entity has either criminally
convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the applicant for violating
this chapter or similar federal, state or municipal laws in a manner rising to
the level of a disqualifying status; or
         (vi)   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that:
            (A)   The applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation; or
            (B)   That a debt of the applicant was nondischargeable in
bankruptcy pursuant to 11 United States Code section 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6)
or (a)(19).
   (2)   Suspension Or Revocation: The city shall either suspend or revoke a
certificate when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a certificate
occurs.
   (3)   Notice Of Denial Or Suspension: Upon determination of the licensing
officer to deny an applicant's completed application or to suspend a registered
solicitor's certificate, the city shall cause written notice to be sent to the
applicant or registered solicitor by the method indicated in the completed
application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or suspension,
the documentation or information the city relied on to make the decision, the
availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon one business
day's notice to the city, and the date upon which the denial or suspension of
the certificate shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant or
registered solicitor shall have ten (10) business days from the receipt of the
notice of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The denial or suspension of
the certificate shall be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from
the date the notice is sent, unless that suspension is because of exigent
circumstances outlined in subsection (3)(d) of the definition of "substantial
report", as defined in section
5.07.103 of this chapter, in which case, the suspension is effective
immediately. The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless and until
the order is rescinded, overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to be
contrary to equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a certificate
automatically results in its revocation. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
5.07.115: APPEAL:
An applicant or registered solicitor whose certificate has been denied or
suspended shall have the right to appeal to the city council or its designee.
Any appeal must be submitted by either the applicant, the responsible person or
entity, or legal counsel for either, who: a) documents the relationship with
the applicant or responsible person or entity; or b) is licensed or authorized
by the state to do so, and makes the assertion of an agency relationship. The
following procedures and requirements shall apply:
   (1)   Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the city recorder with a
copy to the licensing officer within ten (10) business days of the decision
from which the appeal is taken. Such appeal shall describe in detail the nature
of the appeal, the action complained of and the grounds for appeal.
   (2)   Upon request of the applicant or registered solicitor, within one
business day, the city will make available any information upon which it relied
in making the determination to either deny or suspend the certificate.
   (3)   The appeals officer shall review, de novo, all written information
submitted by the applicant or registered solicitor to the licensing officer,
any additional information relied upon by the licensing officer as the basis
for denial, suspension or revocation, and any additional information supplied
by the city, applicant or registered solicitor. Any additional information
submitted by any party to the appeal to the appeals officer shall be
simultaneously submitted to the opposing party. If desired, any party shall
have three (3) business days to submit rebuttal documentation to the appeals
officer regarding the additional information submitted by the opposing party.
   (4)   The appeals officer will render a decision no later than fifteen (15)
calendar days from the date the appeal was taken, unless an extension of time
is agreed upon by the parties. In the event that any party to the appeal
submits rebuttal information as allowed in subsection (3) of this section, the
fifteen (15) calendar days shall be extended to include the additional three
(3) days for rebuttal.
      (a)   The denial or suspension of the certificate shall be reversed by
the appeals officer, if, upon review of the written appeal and information
submitted, the appeals officer finds that the licensing officer made a material
mistake of law or fact in denying or suspending the applicant or registered
solicitor's certificate.
      (b)   If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that the
licensing officer properly denied or suspended the certificate of the applicant
or registered solicitor, the denial or suspension of the certificate shall be
affirmed and constitute a determination that the suspended certificate is
revoked.
      (c)   The decision of the appeals officer shall be delivered to the
applicant or registered solicitor by the means designated in the completed
application, or as otherwise agreed upon when the appeal was filed.
   (5)   After the ruling of the appeals officer, the applicant or solicitor is
deemed to have exhausted all administrative remedies with the city.
   (6)   Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the applicant, solicitor
or city's right to seek relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord.
2006-21, 2006)
5.07.116: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   (1)   No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
   (2)   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to
face solicitation: a) the name of the solicitor; b) the name and address of the
entity with whom the solicitor is associated; and c) the purpose of the
solicitor's contact with the person and/or competent individual. This
requirement may be satisfied through the use of the badge and an informational
flier.
   (3)   No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other
than his or her true and correct name.
   (4)   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the
granting of a certificate of registration implies any endorsement by the city
of the solicitor's goods or services or of the individual solicitor. (Ord.
2006-21, 2006)
5.07.117: "NO SOLICITATION" NOTICE:
   (1)   Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse
solicitors by displaying a "no solicitation" sign which shall be posted on or
near the main entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the
sidewalk leading to the residence.
   (2)   The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute
notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to
receive and/or does not invite solicitors.
   (3)   It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each
residence for the presence of any such notice.
   (4)   The provisions of this section shall apply also to solicitors who are
exempt from registration pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2006-21, 2006)
5.07.118: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS:
   (1)   Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for
any "no soliciting" sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a
solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to, "no
solicitation" signs. If such sign or placard is posted, such solicitor shall
desist from any efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall
immediately depart from such property. Possession of a certificate of
registration does not in any way relieve any solicitor of this duty.
   (2)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person soliciting or
advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner
attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a "no
solicitation" sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or
attempting to engage in advocating, a home solicitation sale, door to door
soliciting or soliciting.
   (3)   It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor through ruse,
deception or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit or to take action
calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
   (4)   Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence
or dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.
   (5)   The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical
contact with, or touch, another person without the person's consent.
   (6)   The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without their
explicit consent.
   (7)   The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person
and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their
lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
   (8)   The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 2006-
21, 2006)
5.07.119: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a
residence before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.,
Mountain Standard Time, unless the solicitor has express prior permission from
the resident to do so. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
5.07.120: BUYER'S RIGHT TO CANCEL:
In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to
provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or
solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer's signature to a written
statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the third
business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of "buyer's
right to cancel" shall be in the form required by Utah Code Annotated section
70C-5-103, or a current version thereof, or any state or federal law modifying
or amending such provision. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
5.07.121: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a jail sentence of not to exceed six (6)
months. (Ord. 2006-21, 2006)
CHAPTER 8
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
Part 1. General Provisions
5.08.101: Purpose
5.08.102: Findings
5.08.103: Definitions
Part 2. Location Regulations
5.08.201: Zoning
5.08.202: Sexually Oriented Business; Additional Location Requirements
5.08.203: Method Of Measurement
5.08.204: Single Location And Name
5.08.205: Moving Of Business Location
Part 3. Licensing Provisions
5.08.301: Business Categories
5.08.302: Hours Of Operation
5.08.303: Business License Required
5.08.304: Business License Application; Disclosure
5.08.305: License And Work Permit Fees
5.08.306: Business License Term
5.08.307: License Display
5.08.308: Issuance Of Business License For Sexually Oriented Business
5.08.309: Transfer Of Ownership Of Business License Prohibited
5.08.310: Change In Information
Part 4. Additional Building Regulations
5.08.401: Regulations Pertaining To Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films Or
Videos
5.08.402: Stage Requirements
Part 5. Employee Regulations
5.08.501: Employee Work Permit Required
5.08.502: Sexually Oriented Business Employee Work Permits
5.08.503: Sexually Oriented Business Employee Work Permit Application;
Disclosure
5.08.504: State Licensing Exemption
5.08.505: Sexually Oriented Business Employee Work Permit; Issuance And Term
5.08.506: Change In Employee Information
5.08.507: License Fees
5.08.508: License Display
5.08.509: Sexually Oriented Business Employee Conduct
5.08.510: Activities Of Patrons
Part 6. General Applicability,
   Actions For Violations, Defenses
5.08.601: Applicability Of Regulations To Existing Businesses
5.08.602: Injunctions
5.08.603: Suspension
5.08.604: Revocation
5.08.605: Hearing, Revocation, License Denial, Suspension; Appeal
5.08.606: Violation; Penalty
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
5.08.101: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in
order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens
of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city.
The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of or reasonable access to any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it
is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by
adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of
this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.102: FINDINGS:
Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in
case law and in reports made available to the city council, and on the findings
incorporated in the cases of Pap's A.M. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000);
City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v.
American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501
U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); Heideman v. South
Salt Lake City, 348 F.3d 1182 (10th Cir. 2003); O'Connor v. City and County of
Denver, 894 F.2d 1210 (10th Cir. 1990); City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4,
L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); Z.J. Gifts D-2, L.L.C. v. City of Aurora, 136 F.3d
683 (10th Cir. 1998); Dodger's Bar & Grill, Inc. v. Johnson County, 98 F.3d
1262 (10th Cir. 1996); Sundance Assocs. v. Reno, 139 F.3d 804 (10th Cir. 1998);
Dodger's Bar & Grill, Inc. v. Johnson County, 32 F.3d 1436 (10th Cir. 1994);
American Bush v. City of South Salt Lake, 2006 P.3d (2006 UT 40); and other
cases; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually
oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona - 1979;
Tucson, Arizona - 1990; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles,
California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Adams County, Colorado - 1998;
Denver, Colorado - 1998; Environmental Research Group to the American Center
for Law & Justice - 1996; Manatee County, Florida - 1987; Indianapolis, Indiana
- 1984; Kansas City, Kansas - 1998; Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Saint Paul,
Minnesota - 1988; Las Vegas, Nevada - 1978; Ellicottville, New York - 1998;
Islip, New York - 1980; New York City, New York - 1994; Times Square, New York
- 1994; New Hanover, North Carolina - 1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986;
Amarillo, Texas - 1977; Austin, Texas - 1986; Beaumont, Texas - 1982; Cleburne,
Texas - 1997; Dallas, Texas - 1997; El Paso, Texas - 1986; Fort Worth, Texas -
1986; Houston, Texas - 1983 and 1997; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; Bellevue,
Washington - 1998; Des Moines, Washington - 1984; Seattle, Washington - 1989;
Saint Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993; and also on findings from the paper
entitled "Strip Clubs According To Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual
Violence", by Kelly Holsopple, program director, freedom and justice center for
prostitution resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Proponent Testimony - Sexually
Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View, by David Sherman, presented to the
Michigan house committee on ethics and constitutional law, January 12, 2000,
Proponent Testimony - Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View, by David
Sherman, presented to the Ohio senate judiciary committee on civil justice,
December 3, 2002; Proponent Testimony - Sexually Oriented Businesses: An
Insider's View, presented to the Ohio house civil and commercial law committee,
April 28, 2004; and Proponent Testimony - Sexually Oriented Businesses: An
Insider's View, by Carolyn McKenzie, presented to the Ohio house civil and
commercial law committee, April 28, 2004, the city council finds:
   (1)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and
unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by unlicensed operators of
the establishments. Further, there is presently no effective mechanism in this
city to make the owners and operators of these establishments responsible for
the activities that occur on their premises.
   (2)   Certain employees of unregulated "sexually oriented businesses"
defined in this chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in higher
incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other
establishments.
   (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex shows.
   (4)   Offering and providing such unregulated space encourages such
activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.
   (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other
sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the
premises of such sexually oriented businesses (or for the purpose of purchasing
or selling illicit drugs).
   (6)   Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring
in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis,
gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes,
hepatitis, salmonella, campylobacter and shigella infections, chlamydia,
mycoplasmal and ureoplasmal infections, trichomoniasis and chancroid.
   (7)   According to research from the Kaiser family foundation, an estimated
six hundred fifty thousand (650,000) to nine hundred thousand (900,000)
Americans are infected with HIV. The number of new HIV infections occurring
each year is now about forty one thousand (41,000). Men and women of all races
are most likely to be infected by sexual contact.
   (8)   Relevant statistics revealed that one thousand six hundred seventy two
(1,672) AIDS cases had been reported in Utah as of January 1, 1999. Utah has
required HIV case reporting since 1989, and shows one thousand five hundred
fifty (1,550) people living with HIV (762) or AIDS (788) in the state.
   (9)   The center for disease control and prevention estimates that as many
as one in three (3) people with HIV do not know they are infected.
   (10)   The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the
United States reported annually has risen, with thirty three thousand six
hundred thirteen (33,613) cases reported in 1982 and forty five thousand two
hundred (45,200) through November of 1990.
   (11)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported
annually remains at a high level, with over five hundred thousand (500,000)
cases being reported in 1990.
   (12)   The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22,
1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to
infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her
newborn.
   (13)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as
well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
See, e.g., findings of U.S. department of health and human services.
   (14)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities.
   (15)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in
the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented
films.
   (16)   The findings noted herein raise substantial governmental concerns.
   (17)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics that
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial
governmental concerns.
   (18)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place
the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the
sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a
heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually
oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and
welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It
is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual
operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of
the premises and activities occurring therein.
   (19)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on
premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in
curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in sexually
oriented businesses.
   (20)   Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help
reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the
identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from
working in such establishments.
   (21)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the sexually
oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the
significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and will prevent the
further secondary effects of dissemination of illegal obscenity, child
pornography, and to minors, materials harmful to them.
   (22)   It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees
who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who
are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
   (23)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use has been convicted of a
sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may
engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter.
   (24)   The barring of such individuals from employment in sexually oriented
businesses for a specified period of years serves to prevent distribution of
illegal material, to prevent conduct which leads to the transmission of
sexually transmitted diseases, and to preclude the establishment of criminal
enterprises within the city.
   (25)   The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the
city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.103: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in this section
shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a
different meaning is clearly indicated by the context:
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image
producing devices, are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial
establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space
to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the
following:
   (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas";
   (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use or
marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.
ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant bottle club, or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
regularly features:
   (1)   Persons who appear seminude;
   (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
   (3)   Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT MOTEL: A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which:
   (1)   Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and which
regularly provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and which
advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means
of a sign visible from the public right of way, or by means of any off premises
advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or
leaflets, radio or television; and
   (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten
(10) hours; or
   (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a time
period of less than ten (10) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which
are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly
shown for any form of consideration.
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons
who appear live in a state of seminudity or live performances which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
BUSINESS LICENSE OFFICIAL: The city business license officer or his designee.
CONTROLLING INTEREST: The power, directly or indirectly, to direct the
operation, management or policies of a business or entity, or to vote twenty
percent (20%) or more of any class of voting securities of a business. The
ownership, control or power to vote twenty percent (20%) or more of any class
of voting securities of a business shall be presumed, subject to rebuttal, to
be the power to direct the management, operation or policies of the business.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS ON: The dominant or principal
theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phase
refers to films which are "distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on"
the exhibition or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas". The films so described are those whose dominant or principal
character and theme are the exhibition or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE AND EMPLOYMENT: Describes and pertains to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full
time, part time or contract basis, whether or not the person is designated an
employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise. "Employee" does not
include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT: Includes any of the following:
   (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
   (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
   (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
   (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
HEARING OFFICER: The mayor of Ivins City or a designee of the mayor.
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an
applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In case
of an "employee", it shall mean the person in whose name the employee license
has been issued.
OPERATE OR CAUSE TO OPERATE: To cause to function or to put or keep in a state
of doing business.
OPERATOR: Any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is
authorized to exercise overall operational control of the business or who
causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business. A person may
be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business
whether or not that person is an owner, part owner or licensee of the business.
PARK: Public land which has been designated for park or recreational
activities, including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails,
swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts,
pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or similar public land
within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city
park and recreation authorities, including, but not limited to, the following
existing parks and facilities: Ivins City park, Unity park and other city
facilities, such as, but not limited to, trails, parking lots, playgrounds and
ball fields.
PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee salary, tip, gratuity, profit,
reward, or any other form of consideration.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity.
PLACE OPEN TO PUBLIC VIEW: An area capable of observance by persons from the
general community, where an expectation for privacy is not reasonably
justified, and includes a dedicated roadway, sidewalk, a parking lot, any
public way, a theater, a restaurant, a movie theater, any room in a hotel or
motel other than a guestroom, or any other place where an expectation for
privacy is not reasonably justified.
PROTECTED USES: Churches, public libraries, public parks or parkways, public
recreation centers, public and private schools, and any residence or
residential district.
REGULARLY FEATURES OR REGULARLY SHOWN: A consistent or substantial course of
conduct such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial
portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business
of the sexually oriented business.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which any opaque clothing covers no more than the
genitals, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, vulva, and the female
breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult motion
picture theater, adult novelty store, adult theater, adult video store, adult
cabaret, and adult motel.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Includes:
   (1)   Human male genitals in a state of sexual arousal; or
   (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered anus, anal cleft or
cleavage, male or female genitals, or a female breast.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Includes any of the following offenses as they are
defined by applicable Utah state statute:
   (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity
or illegal pornographic materials; sale, distribution or display of harmful
material to a minor; sexual abuse; sexual abuse of a child; sexual exploitation
of children; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; sexual battery; rape; indecent exposure; indecency with a child;
the crimes of criminal pandering, tax violations, embezzlement or racketeering,
if such crimes are directly related to the operation of a sexually oriented
business; sexual assault; molestation of a child; or distribution of a
controlled substance; criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit
any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving the same elements from any
jurisdiction if the offenses were committed in the state of Utah, regardless of
the exact title of the offense; for which:
      (a)   Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
      (b)   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
      (c)   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any twenty four (24) month period.
   (2)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY: Acts of, or simulating, masturbation, sexual
intercourse, sexual copulation with a person or a beast, fellatio, cunnilingus,
bestiality, pederasty, buggery, sodomy, and/or excretory functions as part of
or in connection with any of the foregoing.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the
following:
   (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
   (2)   The transfer of securities which constitutes a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
   (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
VIEWING ROOM: The room, booth or area where a patron of a sexually oriented
business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette or
other video reproduction. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
PART 2. LOCATION REGULATIONS
5.08.201: ZONING:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business at any
location within the city not zoned for such business. Businesses regulated by
this chapter shall not be located closer than six hundred feet (600') to each
other and not closer than six hundred feet (600') to protected uses. (Ord.
2006-36, 2006)
5.08.202: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS; ADDITIONAL LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any business licensed as a sexually oriented business to be
located within six hundred feet (600') of a business licensed for the
consumption of alcohol or liquor. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.203: METHOD OF MEASUREMENT:
The six hundred foot (600') limitation is measured from the nearest property
line of the business regulated by this chapter to the nearest property line of
the other sexually oriented business or business licensed for the sale or
consumption of alcohol, or area of protected use. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.204: SINGLE LOCATION AND NAME:
It is unlawful:
   (1)   To conduct business under a license issued pursuant to this chapter at
any location other than the licensed premises; or
   (2)   For any sexually oriented business to do business in the city under
any name other than the business name specified in the application. (Ord. 2006-
36, 2006)
5.08.205: MOVING OF BUSINESS LOCATION:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business, as regulated herein, to
relocate or otherwise move its location or area of operation. A sexually
oriented business wishing to relocate must submit the appropriate application
for a license as required under this chapter. Such application shall be
reviewed under the terms and conditions of this chapter and applicable city
ordinances. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
PART 3. LICENSING PROVISIONS
5.08.301: BUSINESS CATEGORIES:
The categories of sexually oriented businesses are adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, and adult theater. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.302: HOURS OF OPERATION:
All premises licensed to operate a sexually oriented business shall only
operate between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. of the following day. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.303: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful:
   (1)   For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid
sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter;
   (2)   For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a
person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this chapter;
   (3)   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business
without having secured a sexually oriented business work permit pursuant to
this chapter; or
   (4)   Sexually oriented business licenses will be limited to one for each
six thousand (6,000) residents of the city. Any available license will be
issued on a first come, first serve basis. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.304: BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION; DISCLOSURE:
   (1)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, the application shall include the full legal name, address and
state of incorporation of the business. Each officer, director, general
partner, or other person who owns a controlling interest in the business, or
who will participate directly in decisions relating to management and control
of the business, shall sign the license application as an applicant. Each
applicant must be qualified under this chapter and each applicant shall be
considered a licensee if a license is granted.
   (2)   Upon filing a completed application for a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business work permit, the business license
official shall issue a temporary license to the applicant, which temporary
license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant the
license.
   (3)   An application shall not be considered complete unless it contains the
following information:
      (a)   The full legal name and any other names or aliases used by the
applicant;
      (b)   The applicant's date and place of birth;
      (c)   Present business address and telephone number;
      (d)   Identification issued by a federal or state governmental agency
with the individual's colored photograph, signature and physical description;
      (e)   Fingerprints on a form provided by a public safety department;
      (f)   The identity of each individual authorized by the corporation
partnership or noncorporate entity to receive service of process. If the
application is for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall
be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to
a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6").
   (4)   Each applicant must provide a statement of whether the applicant has
been convicted of, or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to, a "specified
criminal activity", as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified
criminal activity involved; the date, place, and jurisdiction of each.
   (5)   In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real
property upon which the business or proposed business is or is to be located,
the application must be accompanied by a notarized statement from the legal or
equitable owner of the possessory interest in the property specifically
acknowledging the type of business for which the applicant seeks a license to
operate a sexually oriented business on the property. In addition to furnishing
such notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish the name, address and
phone number of the owner of record of the property, as well as the copy of the
lease or rental agreement pertaining to the premises on which the business is
or will be located. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.305: LICENSE AND WORK PERMIT FEES:
   (1)   Each applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall be
required to pay a regulatory license fee as set forth in the consolidated fee
schedule as adopted from time to time by the city council.
   (2)   This fee shall be in addition to the other licenses and fees required
to do business in the city. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.306: BUSINESS LICENSE TERM:
A license shall be issued for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months. All
sexually oriented business licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year
regardless of when issued. The license fees required shall not be prorated for
any portion of the year. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.307: LICENSE DISPLAY:
Any sexually oriented business located within the boundaries of the city must
display the license granted pursuant to this chapter in a prominent public
location within the business premises. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.308: ISSUANCE OF BUSINESS LICENSE FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS:
   (1)   Under no circumstances shall the total time for the city to issue a
license or issue a written intent to deny an application for a license exceed
thirty (30) days from the receipt of a completed application. The business
license official shall issue a license to the applicant unless the official
finds one or more of the following to be true by a preponderance of the
evidence:
      (a)   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age, or any higher
age, if the license sought required a higher age.
      (b)   The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed on the applicant
in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      (c)   The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request
for information specifically authorized by this chapter.
      (d)   The license fees required by this chapter have not been paid.
      (e)   All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid.
      (f)   Each applicant must provide a statement of whether the applicant
has been convicted of, or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to, a "specified
criminal activity", as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified
criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. The fact
that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification pursuant to this section.
   (2)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee,
the expiration date, and, if the license if for a sexually oriented business,
the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business
license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the
sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. (Ord.
2006-36, 2006)
5.08.309: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF BUSINESS LICENSE PROHIBITED:
Sexually oriented business licenses granted under this chapter shall not be
transferable. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.310: CHANGE IN INFORMATION:
The licensee shall submit, in writing, any change in the information required
to be submitted under this chapter for either a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business work permit to the business license
official within fourteen (14) days after such change. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
PART 4. ADDITIONAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
5.08.401: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR
VIDEOS:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of
less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, films,
videocassettes, or other video reproductions characterized by an emphasis on
the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements. It shall be unlawful for a person
having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty.
   (1)   Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall
contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all manager stations,
viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, video cameras and monitors installed
for monitoring purposes and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain
video reproduction equipment. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally
prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall
not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to
some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or
with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of
all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches (±6"). The business license official may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared.
   (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
   (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
or viewing room may be made without the prior approval of the business license
official.
   (4)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on
the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section.
   (5)   The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle, as
measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any
employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or
open for business.
   (6)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on
the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed
premises.
   (7)   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on
the premises, to ensure that not more than one person is present in a viewing
room at any time. No person shall enter a viewing room that is occupied by
another person.
   (8)   It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any employee who discovers
two (2) or more patrons in a viewing room or discovers any person making or
attempting to make an opening of any kind between viewing rooms, to immediately
escort such persons from the premises.
   (9)   It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any employee who discovers
an opening of any kind between viewing rooms, to immediately secure such rooms
and prevent entry into them by any patron until such time as the wall between
the rooms has been repaired, to remove the opening. Removal and repairing of
openings between viewing rooms shall be in a manner that is as structurally
substantial as the original wall construction.
   (10)   It shall be the duty of the operator, at least once each business
day, to inspect the walls between viewing rooms for openings of any kind.
   (11)   It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in
well lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following:
      (a)   No loitering is permitted in viewing rooms;
      (b)   The occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person;
      (c)   Sexual activity on the premises is prohibited;
      (d)   The making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited;
      (e)   Violators will be required to leave the premises; and
      (f)   Violations of subsections (11)(b), (11)(c) and/or (11)(d) of this
section are unlawful.
   (12)   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that floor coverings
in viewing rooms are nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or
carpeting.
   (13)   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that all wall surfaces
and seating surfaces in viewing rooms are constructed of, or permanently
covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material.
   (14)   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that the premises are
clean and sanitary. Such duty shall be fulfilled if the operator complies with
the following cleaning procedures:
      (a)   The operator shall maintain a regular cleaning schedule of at least
two (2) cleanings per day, documented by appropriate logs.
      (b)   The operator shall provide an employee to check all areas for
garbage, trash, body fluids and excrement and to remove and clean all areas
with a disinfectant. All solid waste generated by the business shall be
collected from the premises for disposal at a lawful solid waste disposal
facility at least once each week. Prior to disposal, solid waste shall be
stored in a manner that prevents access by animals or members of the public and
which will not facilitate the creation of a health nuisance.
      (c)   Thorough cleaning of the entire interior of any room providing
patron privacy shall be done using a disinfectant. Cleaning shall include
floors, walls, doors, seating, monitors, video cameras, and windows and other
surfaces.
   (15)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises in which patrons are permitted, including the interior of each
viewing room, but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose. A manager's station shall not exceed forty (40) square feet of
floor area. If the premises has two (2) or more manager stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager stations.
The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the
manager's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that a least one
employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that
any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it
shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in this subsection remains unobstructed by the doors,
curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosure at
all times that any patron is present on the premises. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.402: STAGE REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for an employee to knowingly or
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of
seminudity, unless the employee is at least three feet (3') from patrons and
customers and on a stage at least two feet (2') from the floor. (Ord. 2006-36,
2006)
PART 5. EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS
5.08.501: EMPLOYEE WORK PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to act as a sexually oriented business employee,
without first obtaining a sexually oriented business work permit, as specified
in this part. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.502: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE WORK PERMITS:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to employ, or for any
individual to be employed as, a sexually oriented business employee unless that
employee first obtains a sexually oriented business employee work permit. (Ord.
2006-36, 2006)
5.08.503: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE WORK PERMIT APPLICATION;
DISCLOSURE:
   (1)   Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented
business employee work permit, the business license official shall issue a
temporary license to the applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon
the final decision of the city to deny or grant the work permit. An application
shall be considered complete when it contains the following information:
      (a)   The correct legal name of each applicant;
      (b)   Present business address and telephone number;
      (c)   Identification issued by a federal or state governmental agency
with the individual's date of birth, colored photograph, signature and physical
description;
      (d)   The individual's fingerprints on a form provided by the public
safety department; and
      (e)   A statement for each applicant whether the applicant has been
convicted of, or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to, a "specified criminal
activity", as defined herein, and if so, the specified criminal activity
involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. The fact that a conviction
is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification pursuant to this
section.
   (2)   A license or permit required by this chapter is in addition to any
other licenses or permits required by the city, county or state to engage in
the business or occupation. Persons engaged in the operation of an adult
oriented business or in employment in an adult oriented business shall comply
with all other applicable local, state and federal laws, ordinances and
statutes, including zoning ordinances, as may be required.
   (3)   The information provided by an applicant in connection with an
application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the city on
a confidential basis, except that such information may be disclosed only to law
enforcement agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety
function, or as may be required by governing law or court order. The
information provided by a sexually oriented business license applicant in
connection with the application for a license under this chapter shall be
maintained by the business license official. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.504: STATE LICENSING EXEMPTION:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sex therapist or similar
individual licensed by the state to provide bona fide sexual therapy or
counseling, a licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse, psychiatrist or
psychologist while providing professional services for which they are licensed,
nor shall it apply to any educator licensed by the state for activities in the
classroom. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.505: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE WORK PERMIT; ISSUANCE AND TERM:
   (1)   Within thirty (30) days of the initial filing date of the receipt of a
completed application, the business license official shall either issue a
license or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant.
The business license official shall approve the issuance of a license unless
one or more of the following is found by a preponderance of evidence to be
true:
      (a)   The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age;
      (b)   The applicant has failed to provide information required for
issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
      (c)   The required license application fee has not been paid; or
      (d)   The applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal
activity", as defined herein, or has been shown to have committed two (2) or
more violations of section
5.08.509 of this chapter within the previous year.
   (2)   Sexually oriented business employee work permits may be obtained at
any time throughout the year. All employee work permits shall expire on the
last day of the twelfth month following issuance.
   (3)   Sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business
employee work permits may be renewed only by making application and payment of
a fee as provided for in this chapter. Application for renewal should be made
at least ninety (90) days before the expiration date of said licenses and work
permits, and when made less than ninety (90) days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license or work permit will not be affected. (Ord. 2006-
36, 2006)
5.08.506: CHANGE IN EMPLOYEE INFORMATION:
Any change in the information required to be submitted under this chapter for a
sexually oriented business work permit will be given, in writing, to the
business license official within fourteen (14) days after such change. (Ord.
2006-36, 2006)
5.08.507: LICENSE FEES:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business employee work permit shall be
required to pay yearly regulatory license fees pursuant to the consolidated fee
schedule as adopted by the city council. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.508: LICENSE DISPLAY:
A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's work permit on
his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working and
shall, while working on the sexually oriented business premises, produce such
work permit for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other
city official performing functions connected with the enforcement of this
chapter. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.509: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business licensee or sexually oriented
business employee to knowingly or intentionally:
   (1)   Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years, or the age of
twenty one (21) years if required by any applicable alcohol ordinance, on the
business premises;
   (2)   Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the business premises;
   (3)   Allow, offer or agree to the illegal possession, use, sale or
distribution of controlled substances on the licensed premises;
   (4)   Permit, commit, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor or commit activities harmful to the minor
to occur on the licensed premises;
   (5)   Permit, commit, offer or agree to permit any live specified sexual
activity as defined by city ordinances or state statutes in the presence of any
customer or patron;
   (6)   Permit, offer or agree to, a patron or customer to masturbate within
or upon the premises of a sexually oriented business;
   (7)   Appear in a state of nudity before a patron on the premises of a
sexually oriented business; or
   (8)   Refuse to permit city officers or agents who are performing functions
connected with the enforcement of this chapter to inspect the portions of the
sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter, at any time the sexually
oriented business is occupied by patrons or open for business. A licensee's
knowing or intentional refusal to permit such an inspection shall constitute a
violation of this section. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to
areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use
as a permanent or temporary habitation. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.510: ACTIVITIES OF PATRONS:
It is unlawful for any patron to knowingly or intentionally:
   (1)   Touch in any manner a sexually oriented business employee while the
sexually oriented business employee is seminude;
   (2)   Place any money or object on or within the costume or person of any
sexually oriented business employee while the sexually oriented business
employee is seminude; or
   (3)   Appear in a state of nudity before another person on the premises of a
sexually oriented business. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
PART 6. GENERAL APPLICABILITY, ACTIONS
   FOR VIOLATIONS, DEFENSES
5.08.601: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS TO EXISTING BUSINESSES:
   (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described in this chapter, whether the described activities were
established before or after the effective date hereof, and regardless of
whether such persons and businesses are currently licensed to do business in
the city.
   (2)   Upon adoption, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the
activities of all sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business
employees described herein, whether such businesses or activities were
established or commenced before, on, or after the effective date hereof. All
existing sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees
are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation or
employment for a period of ninety (90) days following the effective date
hereof. Within said ninety (90) days, all sexually oriented businesses and
sexually oriented business employees must make application for a license
pursuant to this chapter. Within said ninety (90) days, sexually oriented
businesses must make any necessary changes to the interior configurations of
the regulated business premises to conform to this chapter. (Ord. 2006-36,
2006)
5.08.602: INJUNCTIONS:
An entity or individual who, without a valid license, operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business or who employs or is employed as an
employee of a sexually oriented business, or who operates such a business or
functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to the civil and criminal
violations provided in this chapter, and any other remedy available at law or
in equity. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.603: SUSPENSION:
The city shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually oriented
business license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it is
determined that the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated
this chapter or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this chapter. The
city shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend a sexually oriented
business employee work permit if it is determined that the employee has
knowingly violated this chapter. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
5.08.604: REVOCATION:
   (1)   The business license official shall issue a written intent to revoke a
sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee
work permit if a cause of suspension as provided in section
5.08.605 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months.
   (2)   The business license official shall issue a written intent to revoke a
sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee
work permit if the official determines that a licensee or an employee, with the
knowledge of the licensee:
      (a)   Knowingly gave false or misleading information in the application
or in any document or diagram related to the operation of the sexually oriented
business;
      (b)   Knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances
on the premises;
      (c)   Knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
      (d)   Knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period
of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
      (e)   A licensee has been convicted, pled guilty, or pled nolo contendere
to a "specific criminal activity", as defined in this chapter;
      (f)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any specified
sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises; or
      (g)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city of taxes or fees
related to the sexually oriented business.
   (3)   The fact that any conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the revocation of the license.
   (4)   For the purposes of this chapter, an act by a sexually oriented
business employee that constitutes grounds for revocation of that employee's
work permit shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business for purposes of
denial, suspension or revocation proceedings only if the hearing officer
determines by a preponderance of evidence that an officer, director or general
partner, or an employee who managed, supervised or controlled the operation of
the business, knowingly allowed such act to occur on the sexually oriented
business premises.
   (5)   When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this
chapter, the business license official revokes a license, the revocation shall
continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business license for one year from the date the revocation becomes effective;
provided, that, if the conditions of section 5.08.605 of this chapter are met,
a provisional license will be granted pursuant to that section. If, subsequent
to revocation, the enforcement officer finds that the basis for the revocation
found in subsections (2)(a), (2)(d) and (2)(g) of this section has been
corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least
ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
If the license was revoked under subsection (2)(b), (2)(c), (2)(e) or (2)(f) of
this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the
appropriate number of years required under this chapter has elapsed. (Ord.
2006-36, 2006)
5.08.605: HEARING, REVOCATION, LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION; APPEAL:
   (1)   If the business license official determines that facts exist for
denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this chapter, the city
shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the city's
intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds therefor,
by personal delivery, or by certified mail.
      (a)   The notification shall be directed to the most current business
address or other mailing address on file with the business license official for
the respondent. Within ten (10) working days of receipt of such notice, the
respondent may provide to the business license official a written response that
shall include a statement of reasons why the respondent believes the license
should not be denied, suspended or revoked.
      (b)   Within five (5) days of the receipt of respondent's written
response, the business license official shall notify respondent in writing of
the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension or revocation proceeding.
Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of respondent's written response,
the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing, at which respondent shall have the
opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by
counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross examine
any of the city's witnesses. The hearing shall take no longer than two (2)
days, unless extended to meet the requirements of due process and proper
administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a written opinion
within five (5) days after the hearing. If a court action challenging the
city's decision is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court
a transcript of the hearing within ten (10) days after the issuance of the
hearing officer's written opinion.
      (c)   If a written response from respondent is not received by the
business license official within the time stated in subsection (1)(a) of this
section or if, after a hearing, the hearing officer concludes that grounds as
specified in this chapter exist for denial, suspension or revocation of the
license, then such denial, suspension or revocation shall become final five (5)
days after the hearing officer sends, by certified mail, written notice to the
respondent that the license has been denied, suspended or revoked. Such notice
shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the hearing officer finds
that no grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a license, then
within five (5) days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall immediately
withdraw the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license and shall notify the
respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. The hearing officer
shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant.
   (2)   An applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a
license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall
have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon
the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise
enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension or revocation, the city
shall immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license. The
provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of
the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented
business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the
aggrieved party's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the
city's enforcement.
   (3)   Sexually oriented businesses or sexually oriented business employees
operating or working under temporary licenses or de facto temporary licenses
shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-36,
2006)
5.08.606: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
In addition to revocation or suspension of a license as provided in this
chapter, the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a class B
misdemeanor. Each day of a violation shall be considered a separate offense.
The prosecuting agency shall have the discretion to charge any offense under
this chapter as an infraction. (Ord. 2006-36, 2006)
CHAPTER 9
TAXI SERVICE
SECTION:
5.09.101: Definitions
5.09.102: License Required
5.09.103: Application
5.09.104: Written Disclosures
5.09.105: When Licensing Process Begins
5.09.106: Issuance Of Licenses
5.09.107: Taxi Driver's License And Identification Badge
5.09.108: Display Of License And Rates
5.09.109: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of License
5.09.110: Appeal
5.09.111: Rules And Regulations
5.09.101: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BCI BACKGROUND: An original or copy, dated no older than one hundred eighty
(180) days prior to the date of the application, of either: a) a Utah
department of public safety bureau of criminal identification verified criminal
history report personal to the applicant; or b) verification by the Utah
department of public safety bureau of criminal identification that no criminal
history rising to the level of a disqualifying status exists for the applicant.
COMPLETED APPLICATION: A fully completed application form, a BCI, proof of
identity, and the tendering of fees.
CRIMINALLY CONVICTED: The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of no
contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not
been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal
conviction is that offense of which the applicant was convicted, without regard
to the reduced status of the charge after completion of conditions of probation
or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in abeyance or diversion
agreement.
DISQUALIFYING STATUS: Anything specifically defined in this chapter as
requiring the denial or suspension of a certificate, and any of the following:
   (1)   The applicant has been criminally convicted of, or currently has
criminal charges pending for felony homicide, physical or sexual abuse or
assault of any kind, or the sale or distribution of controlled substances.
   (2)   The applicant has been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within
the past five (5) years involving a crime of moral turpitude, the use, sale or
distribution of controlled substances, or violent or aggravated conduct
involving persons or property.
   (3)   The applicant is an alcohol restricted driver or has been criminally
convicted within the past five (5) years of any of the following: automobile
homicide; reckless driving; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol;
drinking alcohol while driving; or driving with an open container of alcohol in
the vehicle.
FEES: The cost charged to an applicant for the issuance of a license and/or
identification badge, which shall not exceed the reasonable costs of processing
the application and issuing the license and/or identification badge.
LICENSING OFFICER: The city employee or agent responsible for receiving from an
applicant the completed application and either granting, suspending or denying
the applicant's license.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON OR ENTITY: That person or entity responsible for the taxi
service business and to whom the taxi service business license is issued.
TAXI SERVICE: Transporting persons within the city for hire by means of any
motor vehicle, but does not include what is commonly known as motor bus
operations with a seating capacity of fifteen (15) persons or more. (Ord. 2010-
13, 2010)
5.09.102: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every taxi service having a place of business in Ivins City must, prior to
engaging in business as a taxi service in Ivins City:
   (1)   Obtain a business license from the city; and
   (2)   Have each of its taxi drivers obtain a taxi driver's license from the
city. (Ord. 2010-13, 2010)
5.09.103: APPLICATION:
   (1)   Taxi Service Business License: Application for a taxi service business
license shall be made on the city's business license or home occupation
business license application form, whichever is applicable. In the event the
place of business for a taxi service is located in a residential zoning
district within the city, then the business shall be subject to and governed by
the regulations for home occupation businesses.
      (a)   In addition, an applicant for a taxi service business license shall
provide:
         (i)   Proof of having in place an insurance policy with a minimum
limit of liability for such insurance of a combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage of not less than seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars ($750,000.00) to protect the public and fares from claims for injuries,
including accidental death, and property damage which may arise in the
operation of the taxi service;
         (ii)   A list of all taxicabs that will be used in the taxi service
business with year, make and vehicle identification number for each vehicle;
and
         (iii)   Proof of recent (not older than 60 days) safety inspections
for each vehicle performed by a state licensed facility.
   (2)   Taxi Driver's License: Application for a taxi driver's license shall
be made on a separate form that includes the following:
      (a)   Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant
has received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this chapter.
      (b)   Contact Information:
         (i)   Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former
names or aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
         (ii)   Applicant's telephone number, home address and mailing address,
if different;
         (iii)   If different from the applicant, the name, address, and
telephone number of the responsible person or entity; and
         (iv)   The address by which all notices to the applicant required
under this chapter are to be sent.
      (c)   Proof Of Identity And Taxicab Endorsement: An in person
verification by the licensing officer of the applicant's true identity by use
of a valid Utah driver's license having a taxicab endorsement.
      (d)   BCI Background: The applicant shall provide an original or a copy
of a "BCI background", as defined herein.
      (e)   Responses To Questions Regarding "Disqualifying Status": The
applicant shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements
on the application form:
         (i)   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of, or currently has
criminal charges pending for felony homicide, physical or sexual abuse or
assault of any kind, or the sale or distribution of controlled substances.
         (ii)   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor
within the past five (5) years involving a crime of moral turpitude, or violent
or aggravated conduct involving persons or property.
      (f)   Fee: The applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by
the city, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the
application and issuing the license and/or identification badge.
      (g)   Execution Of Application: The applicant shall sign the application
form, stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on
the present knowledge and belief of the applicant, the information provided is
complete, truthful and accurate. (Ord. 2010-13, 2010)
5.09.104: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application form for taxi driver's license shall be accompanied by written
disclosures notifying the applicant of the following:
   (1)   The applicant's submission of the application authorizes the city to
verify information submitted with the completed application including:
      (a)   The applicant's address;
      (b)   The responsible person or entity's state tax identification
numbers;
      (c)   The validity of the applicant's proof of identity;
   (2)   The city may consult any publicly available sources for information on
the applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any outstanding
warrants, protective orders or civil judgments;
   (3)   Establishing proof of identity is required before licensing is
allowed;
   (4)   Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant
with a completed application;
   (5)   The applicant must submit a BCI background check with a completed
application;
   (6)   To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, the applicant's
BCI background shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not
available for public inspection;
   (7)   The city will maintain copies of the applicant's application form and
identification badge. These copies will become public records available for
inspection on demand at the city offices whether or not a license is denied,
granted or renewed;
   (8)   The criteria for disqualifying status, denial or suspension of a
certificate under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-13, 2010)
5.09.105: WHEN LICENSING PROCESS BEGINS:
The licensing officer shall not begin the licensing process unless the
applicant has submitted a completed application. The original identification
submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned after the licensing
officer verifies the applicant's identity. A copy of the identification may be
retained by the licensing officer. If an original BCI background is submitted
by the applicant, the licensing officer shall make a copy of the BCI background
and return the original to the applicant. (Ord. 2010-13, 2010)
5.09.106: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES:
The licensing officer shall review the completed application submitted by the
applicant or taxi driver and issue the applicable license in accordance with
the following:
   (1)   Business License:
      (a)   The licensing officer shall issue a business license to the
applicant upon the following conditions:
         (i)   Applicant's submission of a completed application;
         (ii)   Applicant's submission of the required fee;
         (iii)   The applicant has not previously been denied a license by the
city, or had a license revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
   (2)   Taxi Driver's License:
      (a)   The licensing officer shall issue a taxi driver's license to each
driver of a licensed taxi service business upon the following conditions:
         (i)   The taxi driver's submission of a completed application;
         (ii)   The taxi driver's submission of the required fee;
         (iii)   The taxi driver establishes proof of identity;
         (iv)   The taxi driver's representations on the application form do
not affirmatively show a disqualifying status;
         (v)   The taxi driver's BCI background does not affirmatively show a
disqualifying status; and
         (vi)   The taxi driver has not previously been denied a license by the
city, or had a license revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
   (3)   Renewals: Licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year
and shall expire on December 31 of the year the license was issued. Any annual
certificate that is not suspended, revoked or expired may be renewed upon the
request of the applicant by submitting a completed renewal application and
payment of the fee, unless a disqualifying status is present. (Ord. 2010-13,
2010)
5.09.107: TAXI DRIVER'S LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
A taxi driver who is granted a taxi driver's license hereunder shall be issued
a license to be conspicuously displayed inside the taxicab and an
identification badge that shall be worn prominently on his or her person while
engaged in taxi service in the city. The taxi driver's license and
identification badge shall bear the name of the city and shall contain: a) the
name of the licensed taxi driver; b) address and phone number of the taxi
service business; c) a recent photograph of the taxi driver; and d) the date on
which the license expires. (Ord. 2010-13, 2010)
5.09.108: DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND RATES:
Each taxi driver shall display in a conspicuous place in the inside of the
taxicab which he or she is operating where the same may be easily read by every
person riding therein, a copy of the taxi driver's license and a schedule of
the rates or, if the rates are based on zones, the zone map determining the
charges to be assessed. It shall be unlawful for any taxi driver to charge
rates different from those so prescribed. (Ord. 2010-13, 2010)
5.09.109: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   (1)   Denial: Upon review, the licensing officer shall refuse to issue a
license to an applicant for any of the following reasons:
      (a)   The application form is not complete;
      (b)   The applicant fails to establish proof of identity, provide a BCI
background or pay the fees;
      (c)   The completed application or BCI background indicates that the
applicant has a disqualifying status; or
      (d)   The applicant has previously been denied a certificate by the city,
or has had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
   (2)   Suspension Or Revocation: The city shall either suspend or revoke a
certificate when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a certificate
occurs.
   (3)   Notice Of Denial Or Suspension: Upon determination of the licensing
officer to deny an applicant's completed application or to suspend or revoke a
license, the city shall cause written notice to be sent to the applicant or
licensee by the method indicated in the completed application. The notice shall
specify the grounds for the denial or suspension, the documentation or
information the city relied on to make the decision, the availability of the
documentation for review by applicant upon one business day's notice to the
city, and the date upon which the denial or suspension of the certificate shall
take effect. It shall further state that the applicant or licensee shall have
ten (10) business days from the receipt of the notice of denial or suspension
to appeal the same. The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless and
until the order is rescinded, overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to
be contrary to equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a license
automatically results in its revocation. (Ord. 2010-13, 2010)
5.09.110: APPEAL:
An applicant or taxi driver whose license has been denied or suspended may
appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the city recorder's office within ten
(10) days of the final decision denying or suspending a license. The notice of
appeal shall contain the person's or claimant's name, mailing address, daytime
telephone number, the grounds for the appeal and the relief sought. Any person
filing an appeal has the burden of proving that the final decision denying or
suspending a license was procedurally or legally incorrect. Upon receipt of the
notice of appeal, the matter shall be scheduled for a hearing before the city's
administrative law judge as soon as possible. At the hearing, the
administrative law judge shall allow the appellant, or their legal
representative, to present any relevant evidence. An appeal may be used to
waive, modify or amend any requirement, provision or term of this chapter. As
soon as reasonably practicable following the hearing, the administrative law
judge shall issue a final written decision which shall be effective on the date
of the order. (Ord. 2010-13, 2010)
5.09.111: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   (1)   Conduct Of Taxi Driver: It shall be unlawful for a taxi driver, while
engaged in operating a taxicab, to obstruct any street or sidewalk, make any
loud or unusual noise, disturbance or outcry, use any indecent, profane or
obscene language, or be guilty of any disorderly conduct, or to harass, vex,
annoy or disturb any passenger or other person, or to interfere with, obstruct
or impede the free passage of passengers or other persons to or from any depot,
theater, home, hotel, public resort, or any other building or place, or to
seize or grasp, or interfere with any person or package carried by or belonging
to passengers or persons.
   (2)   Direct Route: Any taxi driver employed to carry passengers to a
definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the
passenger safely and expeditiously to his or her destination.
   (3)   Additional Passengers: Whenever a taxi driver is transporting a
passenger or passengers, such passenger(s) shall have the exclusive right to
full and free use of the passenger compartment and it shall be unlawful for the
taxi driver to solicit or carry any additional passengers therein, except with
the consent of the passenger(s) then being transported.
   (4)   Fraud Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any taxi driver to induce
or attempt to induce any person to employ him or her by knowingly or wantonly
misinforming or misleading such person as to the time or place of the arrival
or departure of any airplane, bus or other conveyance, or the location of any
hotel, office, public place, or private residence, or to practice any deceit,
fraud or misrepresentation in any manner whatever relative to matters
pertaining to his or her business.
   (5)   Record Of Business: Every person engaged in driving a taxicab shall
keep a true and exact record of every trip he or she shall make. The record
shall show the exact time of departure from the place of employ, the place
where every stop was made and the exact time when the employment terminated,
and the place where the passenger, or if more than one, where each passenger
was discharged, which record shall at all times be open to inspection by any
law enforcement officer upon demand.
   (6)   Refusal To Pay Fare: It shall be unlawful for any person having hired
any taxicab, and having ridden therein, to refuse to pay the fare, not
exceeding the rates prescribed in the schedule or zone maps permitted herein.
(Ord. 2010-13, 2010)
CHAPTER 10
SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
SECTION:
5.10.101: Special Event Permit Required
5.10.102: Application Submittal For Special Event Permit
5.10.103: Application Fee
5.10.104: Fee Waiver
5.10.105: Process And Standards For Permit Approval
5.10.106: Insurance Requirements
5.10.107: Cash Or Security Deposit
5.10.108: Enforcement Of Chapter
5.10.109: Appeals
5.10.101: SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any special event that creates a need for municipal coordination of parking,
traffic flow, fire, police/security service and/or otherwise impacts the public
health, safety, and welfare or general peace and tranquility of the community
beyond that which would be reasonably necessary and ordinarily anticipated
relative to personal and individual use of public or private property, and in
all cases where an admission fee is required, shall be required to apply for
and be granted a special event permit for the specific event and its venue.
Events which occur in a series, such as live performances, may apply for the
entire series of special events under one special event permit. (Ord. 2009-12,
2009)
5.10.102: APPLICATION SUBMITTAL FOR SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT:
Applications for special events shall be made in writing to the special event
coordinator on forms available from the city office. Applications must be
completed and submitted to the special event coordinator not less than thirty
(30) days prior to the scheduled event. The application shall be signed by the
person or group of people who is or are the organizers and with whom the
responsibility for conduct of the event lays. The application shall include:
   (1)   Name and detailed description of the event;
   (2)   Name of the applicant;
   (3)   Geographical location of the event;
   (4)   Proposed time and duration of the event;
   (5)   Anticipated attendance at the event;
   (6)   Anticipated traffic and parking impacts;
   (7)   Anticipated necessity for public personnel, equipment and other public
services at the event;
   (8)   Proposed admission fee;
   (9)   A photocopy of a temporary sales tax license from the state tax
commission for the applicant and each entity offering goods for sale at the
special event. (Ord. 2009-12, 2009)
5.10.103: APPLICATION FEE:
Applications for a special event permit shall be assessed a fee as set forth in
the consolidated fee schedule. Applications shall be considered incomplete
unless and until the application fee is paid in full. (Ord. 2009-12, 2009)
5.10.104: FEE WAIVER:
The city manager may waive all or a portion of the special event permit
application fee upon a finding of eligibility pursuant to the following
criteria:
   (1)   Nonprofit status of the applicant;
   (2)   No fee charged for the event;
   (3)   Demonstration of hardship by the applicant. (Ord. 2009-12, 2009)
5.10.105: PROCESS AND STANDARDS FOR PERMIT APPROVAL:
   (1)   The special event coordinator shall submit the completed special event
permit application to department heads for review. Department heads shall
review and approve the special event permit to determine if the applicant
adequately addresses crowd control, adequate parking, traffic control, and all
other public safety requirements. Department heads shall review and approve the
special event permit to determine if the applicant adequately addresses
sanitation and other public service needs.
   (2)   The applicant shall meet the following standards:
      (a)   The safety, health, sanitation equipment, and services or
facilities are available to ensure that the event will be conducted without
creating unreasonable negative impacts to the area and with due regard for
safety and the environment.
      (b)   Adequate off site parking will minimize substantial adverse impacts
on general parking and traffic circulation in the vicinity of the event.
      (c)   Any other services or facilities necessary are available to ensure
compliance with city noise, sign, and other applicable ordinances.
      (d)   The event shall not create the imminent possibility of violent
disorderly conduct likely to endanger public safety or cause significant
property damage.
      (e)   The applicant demonstrates an ability and willingness to conduct
the event pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
   (3)   After review and approval of the application by department heads, the
special event coordinator shall submit the application to the city manager for
approval. The city manager shall review the application for compliance with
this chapter and shall request any additional information and/or review by
department heads before approving and signing the application.
   (4)   The city manager shall review and approve or deny the application
within fifteen (15) days of the receipt by the special event coordinator of a
complete special event permit application, including all required submittals
and fees. (Ord. 2009-12, 2009)
5.10.106: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Applicants shall provide proof of liability insurance in the amount required by
the city manager, and shall further name the city as additional insured. The
city manager shall determine the amount of insurance required based upon the
size and type of special event. All applicants shall further indemnify the city
from liability occurring at the event. (Ord. 2009-12, 2009)
5.10.107: CASH OR SECURITY DEPOSIT:
The city manager is authorized to require an applicant to post a cash deposit
or other security accepted by the city attorney for all estimated contingent
costs prior to the issuance of the special event permit, as a guarantee against
fees, damages, cleanup, or loss of public property. (Ord. 2009-12, 2009)
5.10.108: ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER:
   (1)   It is unlawful for the authorized special event representative to fail
to take reasonable steps to promptly cure any notice of violation of this
chapter. If the public safety director determines that a failure to cure a
violation of this chapter creates a clear and present danger of immediate
significant harm to life, public safety, or property which cannot be reasonably
mitigated, the applicant shall be promptly notified that the special event
permit is revoked and that the special event must immediately cease and desist.
   (2)   Any person who wilfully violates any provision of this chapter shall
be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Persons conducting special events without
having first obtained a special event permit are subject to arrest and the
event is subject to closure. (Ord. 2009-12, 2009)
5.10.109: APPEALS:
The applicant or any person aggrieved by a final decision, determination, or
requirement of the city manager regarding a special event permit may appeal to
the city council. An appeal must be submitted in writing to the city recorder
within fifteen (15) days of the city manager's final decision on the special
event permit application. (Ord. 2009-12, 2009)
CHAPTER 11
MOBILE CATERING
SECTION:
5.11.101: Purpose
5.11.102: Definitions
5.11.103: Other Licenses Or Permits Required
5.11.104: Registration Of Persons Engaged In Mobile Catering
5.11.105: Exemptions From Registration
5.11.106: Application Form
5.11.107: Written Disclosures
5.11.108: When Registration Begins
5.11.109: Issuance Of Certificates
5.11.110: Form Of Certificate And Identification Badge
5.11.111: Maintenance Of Registry
5.11.112: Nontransferability Of Certificates
5.11.113: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of Certificate
5.11.114: Appeal
5.11.115: Duties Of Registered Caterers
5.11.116: Time Of Day Restrictions
5.11.117: Penalties
5.11.101: PURPOSE:
   (1)   Residents of the city have an inalienable interest in their personal
safety and well being, particularly in the safety and well being of their
children. The city has a substantial interest in protecting the personal safety
and well being of its citizens, particularly on public streets and other public
property. The city also has a substantial interest in protecting citizens from
fraud or otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as criminal
activity.
   (2)   There must be a balance between the substantial interests of the city
and its citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this chapter on the
rights of those who are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of city
officials derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and
property from criminal conduct, and the collective experience of its public
safety officers, the city adopts this chapter to promote the city's substantial
interests in protecting the substantial interests of the city and its citizens.
   (3)   The city finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in
this chapter are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the substantial
interests of the city and its citizens while at the same time balancing the
rights of those regulated. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.11.102: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
APPLICANT: The adult individual applying for a certificate.
APPLICATION FORM: A standardized form provided by the city to an applicant to
be completed and submitted as part of registration.
BCI: An original or copy, dated no older than one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to the date of the application, of either: a) a Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification verified criminal history report
personal to the applicant; or b) verification by the Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification that no criminal history rising to the
level of a disqualifying status exists for the applicant.
BUSINESS: A commercial enterprise licensed by the city as a person or entity
under this title.
CERTIFICATE: A temporary, annual or renewal certificate permitting mobile
catering in the city applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of this
chapter.
COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL: A person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen
(18) years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage
in rational thought, conversation and conduct.
COMPLETED APPLICATION: A fully completed application form, a BCI, proof of
identity, and the tendering of fees.
CRIMINALLY CONVICTED: The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of no
contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not
been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal
conviction is that offense of which the applicant or registered caterer was
convicted, without regard to the reduced status of the charge after completion
of conditions of probation or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in
abeyance or diversion agreement.
DISQUALIFYING STATUS: Anything specifically defined in this chapter as
requiring the denial or suspension of a certificate, and any of the following:
   (1)   The applicant or registered caterer has been criminally convicted of,
or currently has criminal charges pending for:
      (a)   Felony homicide;
      (b)   Physical or sexual abuse or assault of any kind; or
      (c)   The sale or distribution of controlled substances.
   (2)   The applicant or registered caterer has been criminally convicted of a
misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of:
      (a)   Moral turpitude; or
      (b)   Violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property.
   (3)   A final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant or
registered caterer within the last five (5) years indicating that: a) the
applicant or registered caterer had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation.
ENTITY: Includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or
other lawful entity, organization, society or association.
FEES: The cost charged to the applicant or registered caterer for the issuance
of a certificate and identification badge, which shall not exceed the
reasonable costs of processing the application and issuing the certificate and
identification badge.
GOODS: The beverage or food product being offered, provided or sold for human
consumption by a business, person or entity engaged in mobile catering.
LICENSING OFFICER: The city employee or agent responsible for receiving from an
applicant or registered caterer the completed application and either granting,
suspending or denying the applicant's certificate.
MOBILE CATERING: Any business, person or entity engaged in the sale of any
beverage or food product for human consumption from a temporary, portable or
mobile unit. Allowed mobile catering activities shall be restricted to
residential streets within Ivins City.
REGISTERED CATERER: Any person who has been issued a current certificate by the
city.
REGISTRATION: The process used by the city licensing officer to accept a
completed application and determine whether or not a certificate will be
denied, granted or suspended.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON OR ENTITY: That person or entity responsible for the
registered caterer who maintains a state sales tax number and/or special events
sales tax number, computes the sales taxes owing from any sale of goods, pays
the sales taxes, and/or files any required returns or reports.
SUBSTANTIATED REPORT: An oral, written or electronic report:
   (1)   That is submitted to and documented by the city;
   (2)   By any of the following:
      (a)   A competent individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or
other city employees with publicly available identification of their name,
address, and any other reliable means of contact;
      (b)   City law enforcement or licensing officer; or
      (c)   Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level
of government;
   (3)   That provides any of the following information regarding a registered
caterer:
      (a)   Documented verification of a previously undisclosed disqualifying
status of a registered caterer;
      (b)   Probable cause that the registered caterer has committed a
disqualifying status which has not yet been determined to be a disqualifying
status;
      (c)   Documented, eyewitness accounts that the registered caterer has
engaged in repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrate failure by the
registered caterer to adhere to the requirements of this chapter; or
      (d)   Probable cause that continued licensing of the registered caterer
creates exigent circumstances that threaten the health, safety or welfare of
any individuals or entities within the city. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.11.103: OTHER LICENSES OR PERMITS REQUIRED:
In addition to the mobile catering permit required by this chapter, each
responsible person or entity must obtain a business license authorizing it to
do business in the city and, if required, a food handler's permit. No
residential solicitation is allowed under this process. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.11.104: REGISTRATION OF PERSONS ENGAGED IN MOBILE CATERING:
Unless otherwise exempt under this chapter, all persons desiring to engage in
mobile catering within the city, prior to doing so, shall submit a completed
application to the licensing officer and obtain a certificate. (Ord. 2010-09,
2010)
5.11.105: EXEMPTIONS FROM REGISTRATION:
   (1)   A business licensed to provide catering services within the city may
provide such services pursuant to a valid special event permit if authorized to
do so by the special event permit holder without the requirement of
registration under this chapter.
   (2)   The operation of concessions in a city park pursuant to a concession
agreement as authorized by section
11.04.201 of this code.
   (3)   A business licensed to provide catering services within the city may
provide such services on private property where they have been contracted to
provide such services without the requirement of registration under this
chapter. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.11.106: APPLICATION FORM:
The licensing officer shall provide a standard application form for use for the
registration of all persons desiring to engage in mobile catering. Each
application form shall require disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the
following information, documentation and fee:
   (1)   Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant has
received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this chapter;
   (2)   Contact Information:
      (a)   Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former
names or aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
      (b)   Applicant's telephone number, home address and mailing address, if
different;
      (c)   If different from the applicant, the name, address, and telephone
number of the responsible person or entity; and
      (d)   The address by which all notices to the applicant required under
this chapter are to be sent;
   (3)   Proof Of Identity: An in person verification by the licensing officer
of the applicant's true identity by use of any of the following which bear a
photograph of said applicant:
      (a)   A valid driver's license issued by any state;
      (b)   A valid passport issued by the United States;
      (c)   A valid identification card issued by any state; or
      (d)   A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States
military.
Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to
establish proof of identity shall be returned to the applicant;
   (4)   Proof Of Registration With Department Of Commerce: The applicant shall
provide proof that either the applicant, or the responsible person or entity,
has registered with the state department of commerce;
   (5)   Marketing Information:
      (a)   The goods offered for sale by the applicant; and
      (b)   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits,
registrations, or other qualifications required by federal or state law to
promote, provide, or render advice regarding the offered goods;
   (6)   BCI Background Check: The applicant shall provide an original or a
copy of a "BCI" background check, as defined in section
5.11.102 of this chapter;
   (7)   Responses To Questions Regarding "Disqualifying Status": The applicant
shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the
application form:
      (a)   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of, or currently has
criminal charges pending for:
         (i)   Felony homicide;
         (ii)   Physical or sexual abuse or assault of any kind; or
         (iii)   The sale or distribution of controlled substances.
      (b)   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within
the past five (5) years involving a crime of:
         (i)   Moral turpitude; or
         (ii)   Violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property.
      (c)   Has a final civil judgment been entered against the applicant
within the last five (5) years indicating that the applicant had either engaged
in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation;
   (8)   Fee: The applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the
city, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application
and issuing the certificate and/or identification badge; and
   (9)   Execution Of Application: The applicant shall sign the application
form, stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on
the present knowledge and belief of the applicant, the information provided is
complete, truthful and accurate. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.11.107: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the
applicant of the following:
   (1)   The applicant's submission of the application authorizes the city to
verify information submitted with the completed application including:
      (a)   The applicant's address;
      (b)   The applicant's and/or responsible person or entity's state tax
identification and special use tax numbers, if any;
      (c)   The validity of the applicant's proof of identity;
   (2)   The city may consult any publicly available sources for information on
the applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any outstanding
warrants, protective orders or civil judgments;
   (3)   Establishing proof of identity is required before registration is
allowed;
   (4)   Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant
with a completed application;
   (5)   The applicant must submit a BCI background check with a completed
application;
   (6)   To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, the applicant's
BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not
available for public inspection;
   (7)   The city will maintain copies of the applicant's application form,
proof of identity and identification badge. These copies will become public
records available for inspection on demand at the city offices whether or not a
certificate is denied, granted or renewed;
   (8)   The criteria for disqualifying status, denial or suspension of a
certificate under the provisions of this chapter;
   (9)   That a request for a temporary certificate will be granted or denied
the same business day that a completed application is submitted. (Ord. 2010-09,
2010)
5.11.108: WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS:
The licensing officer shall not begin the registration process unless the
applicant has submitted a completed application. The original identification
submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned after the licensing
officer verifies the applicant's identity. A copy of the identification may be
retained by the licensing officer. If an original BCI background check is
submitted by the applicant, the licensing officer shall make a copy of the BCI
and return the original to the applicant. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.11.109: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES:
The licensing officer shall review the completed application submitted by the
applicant and issue a certificate in accordance with the following:
   (1)   Temporary Certificate:
      (a)   A temporary certificate shall issue allowing the applicant to
immediately begin engaging in mobile catering upon the following conditions:
         (i)   Applicant's submission of a completed application;
         (ii)   Applicant's submission of the required fee;
         (iii)   Applicant establishes proof of identity;
         (iv)   The applicant's representations on the application form do not
affirmatively show a disqualifying status;
         (v)   The BCI does not affirmatively show a disqualifying status; and
         (vi)   The applicant has not previously been denied a certificate by
the city, or had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
      (b)   A temporary certificate will automatically expire after twenty five
(25) calendar days from issuance, or upon grant or denial of an annual
certificate, whichever period is shorter.
   (2)   Annual Certificate: Within twenty five (25) calendar days of the
issuance of a temporary certificate, the city shall:
      (a)   Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the
truthfulness and completeness of the information submitted by the applicant,
including, but not limited to, those disclosed with the application form.
      (b)   Issue written notice to the applicant and the responsible person or
entity, if any, that the applicant either:
         (i)   Will be issued an annual certificate, eligible for renewal one
year from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate; or
         (ii)   Will not be issued an annual certificate for reasons cited in
section
5.11.113 of this chapter.
   (3)   Renewal Certificate: An annual certificate shall be valid for one year
from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate and shall expire at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the anniversary date of issuance. Any annual
certificate that is not suspended, revoked or expired may be renewed upon the
request of the registered caterer and the submission of a new completed
application and payment of the fee, unless any of the conditions for the
denial, suspension or revocation of a certificate are present as set forth in
section
5.11.113 of this chapter, or a disqualifying status is present. (Ord. 2010-09,
2010)
5.11.110: FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
   (1)   Certificate Form: Should the licensing officer determine that the
applicant is entitled to a certificate, the licensing officer shall issue a
certificate to the applicant. The certificate shall list the name of the
registered mobile caterer and the responsible person or entity, if any, and the
date on which the certificate expires. The certificate shall be dated and
signed by the license officer. The certificate shall be carried by the
registered mobile caterer at all times while engaged in mobile catering in the
city.
   (2)   Identification Badge: With both the temporary and annual certificates,
the city shall issue each registered caterer an identification badge that shall
be worn prominently on his or her person while engaged in mobile catering in
the city. The identification badge shall bear the name of the city and shall
contain: a) the name of the registered mobile caterer; b) address and phone
number of the registered mobile caterer, or the name, address and phone number
of the responsible person or entity; c) a recent photograph of the registered
mobile caterer; and d) the date on which the certificate expires. (Ord. 2010-
09, 2010)
5.11.111: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The licensing officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a
copy or record of every completed application received and the certificate or
written denial issued by the city. The applicant's BCI background check shall
remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public
inspection. The licensing officer may furnish to the city's public safety
director or designee a listing of all applicants, those denied, and those
issued a certificate. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.11.112: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATES:
Certificates shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and shall list
the responsible party or entity, if any. The certificate shall be
nontransferable. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.11.113: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
   (1)   Denial: Upon review, the licensing officer shall refuse to issue a
certificate to an applicant for any of the following reasons:
      (a)   Denial of temporary certificate:
         (i)   The application form is not complete;
         (ii)   The applicant fails to establish proof of identity, provide a
BCI or pay the fees;
         (iii)   The completed application or BCI indicates that the applicant
has a disqualifying status; or
         (iv)   The applicant has previously been denied a certificate by the
city, or has had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
      (b)   Denial of annual certificate:
         (i)   The information submitted by the applicant at the time of the
granting of the temporary certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         (ii)   Since the submission of the completed application, the
applicant is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying
status;
         (iii)   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         (iv)   Since the submission of the application, the city has received
a substantiated report regarding the past or present conduct of the applicant;
         (v)   Since the submission of the application, the city or other
governmental entity has either criminally convicted or obtained a civil
injunction against the applicant for violating this chapter or similar federal,
state or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying
status; or
         (vi)   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that the applicant had either
engaged in fraud or intentional misrepresentation.
      (c)   Denial of annual certificate renewal:
         (i)   The information submitted by the applicant when seeking renewal
of a certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         (ii)   Since the submission of the renewal application, the applicant
is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
         (iii)   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         (iv)   Since the submission of the application or granting of a
certificate, the city has received a substantiated report regarding the past or
present conduct of the caterer;
         (v)   The city or other governmental entity has either criminally
convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the applicant for violating
this chapter or similar federal, state or municipal laws in a manner rising to
the level of a disqualifying status; or
         (vi)   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that the applicant had either
engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation.
   (2)   Suspension Or Revocation: The city shall either suspend or revoke a
certificate when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a certificate
occurs.
   (3)   Notice Of Denial Or Suspension: Upon determination of the licensing
officer to deny an applicant's completed application or to suspend a registered
caterer's certificate, the city shall cause written notice to be sent to the
applicant or registered caterer by the method indicated in the completed
application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or suspension,
the documentation or information the city relied on to make the decision, the
availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon one business
day's notice to the city, and the date upon which the denial or suspension of
the certificate shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant or
registered caterer shall have ten (10) business days from the receipt of the
notice of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The denial or suspension of
the certificate shall be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from
the date the notice is sent, unless that suspension is because of exigent
circumstances outlined in subsection (3)(d) of the definition of "substantiated
report" in section
5.11.102 of this chapter, in which case, the suspension is effective
immediately. The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless and until
the order is rescinded, overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to be
contrary to equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a certificate
automatically results in its revocation. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.11.114: APPEAL:
An applicant or registered caterer whose certificate has been denied or
suspended may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the city recorder's
office within ten (10) days of the final decision denying or suspending a
certificate. The notice of appeal shall contain the person's or claimant's
name, mailing address, daytime telephone number, the grounds for the appeal and
the relief sought. Any person filing an appeal has the burden of proving that
the final decision denying or suspending a certificate was procedurally or
legally incorrect. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the matter shall be
scheduled for a hearing before the city's administrative law judge as soon as
possible. At the hearing, the administrative law judge shall allow the
applicant or registered caterer, or their legal representative, to present any
relevant evidence. An appeal may be used to waive, modify or amend any
requirement, provision or term of this chapter. As soon as reasonably
practicable following the hearing, the administrative law judge shall issue a
final written decision which shall be effective on the date of the order. (Ord.
2010-09, 2010)
5.11.115: DUTIES OF REGISTERED CATERERS:
While engaged in mobile catering within the city:
   (1)   Registered caterers shall not invite or allow anyone other than
another registered caterer inside a mobile catering vehicle, trailer or other
enclosed space used by the registered caterer, unless such person is a minor
child of the registered caterer and would not be in violation of child labor
laws.
   (2)   Registered caterers shall not intentionally or recklessly make any
physical contact with, or touch, another person without the person's consent.
   (3)   Registered caterers shall not use obscene language or gestures.
   (4)   Registered caterers shall not intentionally make any materially false
or fraudulent statement while engaging in mobile catering.
   (5)   When asked, a registered caterer shall immediately disclose to a
consumer: a) the name of the registered caterer; and b) the name and address of
the entity with whom the registered caterer is associated. This requirement may
be satisfied through the use of the badge.
   (6)   Registered caterers shall not use a fictitious name, an alias, or any
name other than his or her true and correct name.
   (7)   Registered caterers shall not represent directly or by implication
that the granting of a certificate of registration implies any endorsement by
the city of the registered caterer's business or goods. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.11.116: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to engage in
mobile catering before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
5.11.117: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2010-09, 2010)
CHAPTER 12
TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
5.12.101: Applicability; Sale Of Tobacco Products And Tobacco Paraphernalia
Restricted
5.12.102: Definitions
5.12.103: Tobacco Sales Business License Required
5.12.104: Retail Tobacco Specialty Business Not Permitted
5.12.105: Revocation Of A Tobacco Sales Business License
5.12.106: Penalty
5.12.101: APPLICABILITY; SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA
RESTRICTED:
No individual, entity or organization shall:
   (1)   Conduct or operate a retail tobacco specialty business; or
   (2)   Sell, furnish, or otherwise distribute a "tobacco product" as defined
in this chapter and section 10-8-41.6 of the Utah code, unless it satisfies the
requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-05, 2013)
5.12.102: DEFINITIONS:
RETAIL TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS: As used herein, this term/phrase shall have
the same definition as set forth in section 10-8-41.6(1)(b) of the Utah code.
TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA: As used herein, this term/phrase shall have the same
definition as set forth in section 76-10-104.1(1)(b) of the Utah code.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: As used herein, this term/phrase shall have the same
definition as set forth in section 10-8-41.6(1)(c) of the Utah code.
TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS LICENSE: A business license issued by Ivins City which
permits the licensee to sell tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia from
its validly licensed business. (Ord. 2013-05, 2013)
5.12.103: TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (1)   Tobacco Products And Tobacco Paraphernalia: No individual, entity,
organization, or business shall sell tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia
unless it has obtained a tobacco sales business license. A tobacco sales
business license shall only be issued as a secondary license to a business
license for one of the following:
      (a)   A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of food and
beverage products and is located in a building which is ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or larger;
      (b)   A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of gasoline or
diesel fuel and is located in a building which is two thousand (2,000) square
feet or larger;
      (c)   An on premises alcoholic beverage sales license;
      (d)   A business license for a pharmacy under Utah code and is located in
a building which is ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger; or
      (e)   A business license for any business that was lawfully selling
tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia under that license prior to May 3,
2012.
   (2)   Application For License:
      (a)   An application for a license shall be made in writing on the form
provided by the licensing officer. The form must be completed in its entirety.
The application must be accompanied by:
         (i)   The business license required in this chapter;
         (ii)   Documentation showing the square footage of the building;
         (iii)   Proof of the operation of a business specified in subsection
(1)(a) or (1)(b) of this section, if the application is to qualify as such a
business; and
         (iv)   If seeking to qualify under subsection (1)(e) of this section,
proof of the lawful sales of tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia prior
to May 3, 2012, and the percentage of tobacco products and tobacco
paraphernalia sold as compared to the total annual gross receipts for the
business. (Ord. 2013-05, 2013)
5.12.104: RETAIL TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS NOT PERMITTED:
The operation of a retail tobacco specialty business is prohibited. (Ord. 2013-
05, 2013)
5.12.105: REVOCATION OF A TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS LICENSE:
   (1)   The city may suspend, revoke, or terminate the business license of a
business which is operating as a tobacco sales business if:
      (a)   The licensee, owner, or operator:
         (i)   Engages in a pattern of unlawful activity as outlined in Utah
code 76-10-1601 et seq., or its amendment; or
         (ii)   Violates any alcohol or drug related offenses, regulations
restricting the sale and distribution of tobacco products or tobacco
paraphernalia, or any felony offenses under any provision of federal, state, or
local law.
      (b)   While on the business premises, an employee violates:
         (i)   Any laws or regulations related to alcohol or controlled
substances;
         (ii)   Any laws or regulations restricting the sale and distribution
of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia; or
         (iii)   Any provision of federal, state, or local law which would be a
felony level offense.
      (c)   The tobacco sales business does not maintain the right to operate
under the terms of other applicable laws, including zoning ordinances, building
codes, and the business license.
   (2)   In addition to the provisions outlined in subsection (1) of this
section, a business licensed hereunder may have their tobacco sales business
license permanently revoked if:
      (a)   The tobacco sales business license is not renewed continuously
without relapse or revocation;
      (b)   The tobacco sales business is closed for business or otherwise
suspends the sale of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia for more than
sixty (60) consecutive days; or
      (c)   The tobacco sales business substantially changes the business
premises or its business operation. (Ord. 2013-05, 2013)
5.12.106: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter is a class B misdemeanor and punishable by a fine
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), not including any mandatory fees and
surcharges imposed by law or a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2013-05,
2013)
TITLE 6
ANIMALS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL
SECTION:
6.01.101: Policy
6.01.102: Definitions
6.01.103: Division Of Animal Control
6.01.104: Policies And Procedures
6.01.105: Animals At Large
6.01.101: POLICY:
It is the policy of the Ivins City municipal animal shelter and adoption center
that no adoptable animal shall be euthanized if it can be adopted into a
suitable home or transferred to a qualified rescue organization.
The Ivins City municipal animal shelter and adoption center operates as a no
kill facility within the parameters of and lawful constraints imposed by virtue
of its municipal status. As such, the no kill designation does not preclude the
euthanization of any animal when such action is necessary to ensure the public
health, safety and welfare, nor does it prohibit the euthanization of sick or
injured animals when no viable humane alternative remains. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.01.102: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED OR STRAYED: An animal whose owner cannot be immediately identified
through reasonable diligence.
ADEQUATE HOME: Existing facilities to meet the physical and emotional needs of
the adopted animal, including food, water, shelter, medical care, protection
from extreme weather conditions and companionship.
ADOPTABLE: Those animals six (6) weeks of age or older that, at or subsequent
to the time the animal is impounded or otherwise taken into possession, have
manifested no sign of disease, injury, congenital/hereditary defect or
behavioral condition that could pose a health or safety risk or otherwise make
the animal unsuitable for placement as a pet. Animals exhibiting any of the
above mentioned conditions may become adoptable through medical treatment or
rehabilitation.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The director, peace officers and other employees and
volunteers of the public safety department who have been designated by the
director to perform the duties of animal control officers and who have been
authorized to enforce the provisions of this title.
ANIMAL SHELTER: The Ivins City municipal animal shelter and adoption center
(the "animal shelter" or "shelter") is used for the care and custody of seized,
stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or other small
domesticated animals from Ivins City, except as follows:
   (1)   The shelter may assist neighboring jurisdictions, at the approval of
the director during times of disaster and/or exigent circumstances in placing
animals in safe environments, including the shelter if space is available, and
in attempting to find foster homes for such animals.
   (2)   The shelter may take animals from relinquishing owners living in
neighboring jurisdictions if all of the following are met:
      (a)   The owner pays twice the fee charged to Ivins City residents;
      (b)   The animal is spayed or neutered;
      (c)   The animal has complete current vaccinations, including bordatella;
      (d)   The animal is in good health and adoptable; and
      (e)   At the discretion of the shelter manager.
   (3)   The shelter may also engage in cooperative efforts with other shelters
and qualified rescue groups in placing animals for adoption or foster care.
AT LARGE: All wild animals and any livestock or domesticated animals off the
premises of the owner or custodian of the animal and not under immediate
control of the owner or custodian are considered at large. In the case of a
dog, "immediate control" shall mean on a leash, or confined within a vehicle or
pet carrier/cage.
BITE: An actual puncture, tear or abrasion of the skin inflicted by the teeth
of an animal.
CATTERY: An establishment for boarding, breeding, buying, grooming or selling
cats for profit.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL: Any premises or establishment where four (4) or more dogs,
older than four (4) months, are kept for the purpose of boarding, breeding,
raising or training dogs for a fee or on a nonprofit or commercial basis.
DIRECTOR: The Ivins City public safety director.
DISPOSITION: The adoption, transfer, owner return or euthanasia of an animal.
DIVISION: The division of animal control which is within the public safety
department.
DOMESTICATED ANIMALS: Animals accustomed to living in or about the habitation
of man that are not included in the definition of "livestock" or "wild
animals".
FERAL CAT: A cat usually born in the wild with no human contact before four (4)
to six (6) weeks of age, and/or a cat without owner identification of any kind
whose usual and consistent temperament is extreme fear of and resistance to
contact with people.
GROOMING SALON: Any establishment maintained for the purpose of offering
cosmetic services for animals for profit.
LIVESTOCK: Cattle, domesticated elk, bison, sheep, swine, goats, poultry,
llamas, horses, mules, or other equines.
NONREHABILITATABLE: Animals that are neither adoptable nor treatable, vicious
animals, or animals for whom euthanasia would be the most humane alternative
due to disease, injury or suffering that cannot reasonably be alleviated.
PET SHOP: Any establishment containing cages or exhibition pens, not part of a
kennel or cattery, wherein dogs, cats, birds or other pets for sale are kept or
displayed.
PROVOCATION: Any deliberate act by a person toward a dog or other animal done
with the intent to tease, torment, abuse, assault or otherwise cause a reaction
by the dog or other animal; provided, however, that any act by a person done
with the intent to discourage or prevent a dog or other animal from attacking
shall not be considered provocation.
QUALIFIED RESCUE ORGANIZATION: A nonprofit, as defined in section 501(c)(3) of
the internal revenue code. An organization founded to rescue homeless pets. The
organization must have the ability to provide reasonable care, medical care,
rehabilitation, lifetime care, and/or the possibility of future adoption.
QUARANTINE: The isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that the
animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
REHABILITATABLE: Those animals six (6) weeks of age or older that, at or
subsequent to the time the animal is impounded or otherwise taken into
possession, have manifested signs of behavioral or temperamental challenges may
be retrained by a qualified rescue organization/trainer and may be adopted with
signed waiver/disclosure or transferred to a qualified rescue organization.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A person eighteen (18) years of age or older, who is
employed or otherwise capable of providing the physical, medical and emotional
needs of the adopted animal. A person found guilty or who pled no contest to
violating the provisions of this title or any other federal, state or local law
concerning the abuse of or cruelty to animals, within five (5) years of the
animal adoption application, is not a "responsible adult" for the purposes of
this title.
REVIEW PANEL: The review panel shall be made up of the director, animal control
officer/shelter manager, Friends of Ivins Animal Shelter (FIAS) president or
other designated FIAS representative, or any other person(s) requested by the
director who may have specific knowledge/training to assist the panel in making
decisions regarding animals. The director shall make the final determination as
to the disposition in each case.
RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE: An establishment which offers boarding and/or riding
instruction for any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro, or which offers such
animals for hire.
TREATABLE: Any dog or cat that is not adoptable but that could become adoptable
with reasonable efforts.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which has bitten a person or other animal without
provocation, or has a known propensity to attack or bite human beings or other
animals, or approaches any person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public
grounds or place in a threatening and terrorizing manner in an apparent
attitude of attack.
WILD ANIMAL: Any animal that is not livestock or a domesticated animal and
shall specifically include, no matter how domesticated: all alligators and
crocodiles; all bears; all cats other than the commonly accepted domesticated
cats, including, but not limited to, cheetah, leopard, lion, lynx, panther,
cougar, mountain lion, bobcat, and tiger; all dogs other than domesticated
dogs, including, but not limited to, wolf, part wolf, fox, part fox, coyote,
and part coyote; all porcupines; all nonhuman primates; all raccoons; all
skunks; all venomous fish and piranha; all venomous snakes and lizards; and all
weasels other than ferrets. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.01.103: DIVISION OF ANIMAL CONTROL:
There is hereby established a division of animal control (the "division")
within the Ivins City public safety department with power to cite, apprehend,
and/or impound animals found in violation of this title, and to otherwise carry
out and enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.01.104: POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
   (1)   The director, or his designee, shall establish and update, from time
to time, written policies and procedures which implement the provisions of this
title and which govern the administration of the animal shelter.
   (2)   The director, or his designee, shall also establish and update, from
time to time, written guidelines concerning volunteer opportunities available
at or through the animal shelter. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.01.105: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
No animals shall be allowed to run at large or to be herded, tethered or staked
out upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city and all
such animals so found may be impounded and/or the owner of the animal cited.
(Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
CHAPTER 2
DOG LICENSING
SECTION:
6.02.101: License Requirements; Fees
6.02.102: License Tag
6.02.103: Exemptions
6.02.101: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   (1)   License Required: All dogs must be licensed each year, except as
otherwise provided herein, to a responsible adult of the age of eighteen (18)
years or older.
   (2)   Time Limit: Any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog shall
obtain a license for such animal within thirty (30) days after the dog reaches
the age of six (6) months; or in the case of a dog over six (6) months, within
ten (10) days after acquisition of the dog or locating within the Ivins City
limits.
   (3)   Application: License applications must be submitted on a standard form
which requests name, address and telephone number of the applicant; breed, sex,
color and age of the animal; and rabies information, including vaccination date
and expiration. The application shall be accompanied by the prescribed license
fee and by a current rabies vaccination certificate. Rabies vaccinations shall
be given by a licensed veterinarian and comply with the requirements of chapter
3 of this title.
   (4)   Fee For License: The license fees shall be in such amounts as
established by resolution of the city council. No dog will be licensed as
spayed or neutered without proof that such surgery was performed.
   (5)   Term Of License: The license shall be effective from the date of
purchase through the expiration date set forth on the rabies vaccination
certificate presented at the time of initial licensing or renewal. Failure to
renew the license by submitting a new rabies vaccination certificate and
renewal fee prior to the license expiring will result in the automatic
revocation thereof. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.02.102: LICENSE TAG:
   (1)   Required; Attachment: Upon payment of the license fee, the city shall
issue to the owner a certificate and a tag for each dog licensed. The tag shall
have stamped thereon the license number corresponding with the tag number on
the certificate. The owner shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of the
animal and see that the collar and the tag are constantly worn. Failure to
attach the tag as required shall be in violation of this chapter, except that
dogs which are kept primarily for show purposes are exempt from wearing the
tag.
   (2)   Transferability; Lost Tags: Dog tags are not transferable from one dog
to another. No refunds shall be made on any dog license fee for any reason
whatsoever. Replacements for lost or destroyed tags shall be issued upon
payment of a fee to the city in such amount as established by resolution of the
city council.
   (3)   Removal Prohibited: Any person removing or causing to be removed the
collar, harness or tag from any licensed dog without the consent of the owner
or keeper thereof, except a licensed veterinarian or officer who removes such
for medical and other reasons, shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord.
2010-07, 2010)
6.02.103: EXEMPTIONS:
   (1)   The licensing requirements of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (a)   Dogs licensed elsewhere whose owners are nonresidents and are
temporarily (up to 30 days) within the jurisdiction; and
      (b)   Individual dogs within a properly licensed kennel or other such
establishment when such dogs are held for resale.
   (2)   The fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (a)   Seeing eye dogs properly trained to assist blind persons if such
dogs are actually being used by blind persons to assist them in moving from
place to place;
      (b)   Hearing dogs properly trained to assist deaf persons if such dogs
are actually used by deaf persons to aid them in responding to sounds; and
      (c)   Dogs specially trained to assist officials of government agencies
in the performance of their duties and which are owned by such agencies.
   (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to exempt any dog
from having a current rabies vaccination. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
CHAPTER 3
RABIES CONTROL
SECTION:
6.03.101: Duty To Report Bites
6.03.102: Vaccination
6.03.103: Boarding At Commercial Kennels
6.03.104: Quarantine
6.03.101: DUTY TO REPORT BITES:
Any person having knowledge of any individual or animal having been bitten by
an animal of a species subject to rabies shall report the incident immediately
to the division, giving the name and address of the person bitten, or whose
animal was bitten, and of the owner or custodian of the biting animal, if
available. Failure to provide such information or otherwise assist the division
in discovering possible exposure to rabies or in ascertaining the immunization
status of an animal shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.03.102: VACCINATION:
   (1)   Rabies vaccination is required for dogs and cats. The owner or
custodian of a dog or cat shall have said animal vaccinated within thirty (30)
days after it reaches the age of six (6) months. Unvaccinated dogs or cats over
six (6) months of age acquired by the owner or brought into Ivins City must be
vaccinated within thirty (30) days. All adult dogs and cats shall be
revaccinated thereafter every thirty six (36) months. This provision shall not
apply to veterinarian or kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their
premises animals owned by others.
   (2)   Each veterinarian, when vaccinating any animal for rabies, shall
complete a certificate of rabies vaccination (in duplicate) which includes the
following information:
      (a)   Owner's name and address;
      (b)   A description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name);
      (c)   The date of vaccination;
      (d)   The rabies vaccination tag number;
      (e)   The type of rabies vaccine administered; and
      (f)   The manufacturer's serial number of vaccine.
   (3)   A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the owner and
original retained by the issuing veterinarian. Any unvaccinated animal shall be
impounded but may be reclaimed prior to disposition by payment of impound fees
and by obtaining a rabies vaccination within seventy two (72) hours of release.
Any adoptable animal not reclaimed within the minimum impound period shall be
subject to "disposition" as defined and set forth herein. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.03.103: BOARDING AT COMMERCIAL KENNELS:
Commercial kennel operators within Ivins City must be shown proof of current
vaccination before accepting an animal for boarding. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.03.104: QUARANTINE:
   (1)   An animal that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies, and every
animal bitten by another animal afflicted with rabies or that has been exposed
to rabies, shall be reported by the owner, as set forth above, and shall
immediately be confined in a secure place by the owner. The owner shall turn
over the animal to the division upon demand, whereupon the division shall
quarantine the animal for observation for a period of not less than ten (10)
days. The owner of the animal shall bear all costs of quarantining the animal.
Although the animal shelter or a veterinary kennel shall be the normal place
for quarantine, other arrangements, including confinement by the owner, may be
made by the director or his designee if the animal had a current rabies
vaccination at the time the bite was inflicted or if there are other special
circumstances justifying an exception. A person who has custody of an animal
under quarantine shall immediately notify the division if the animal shows any
signs of sickness or abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement.
It shall be unlawful for any person who has custody of a quarantined animal to
fail or refuse to allow a health or animal control officer to make an
inspection or examination during the period of quarantine. If the animal dies
within ten (10) days from the date of the bite, the person having custody shall
immediately notify the division who shall immediately remove and deliver the
head of such animal to the state health laboratory to be examined for rabies.
If, at the end of the ten (10) day period, the director or his designee
examines the animal and finds no sign of rabies, the animal may be released to
the owner, or in the case of a stray, it shall be placed for adoption or
otherwise disposed of as provided in this title.
   (2)   In the case of an unvaccinated animal species subject to rabies which
is known to have been bitten by a known rabid animal, said bitten or exposed
animal should be immediately euthanized. If the owner is unwilling to euthanize
the bitten or exposed animal, the animal shall be immediately isolated and
quarantined for six (6) months under veterinary supervision, the cost of such
confinement to be paid in advance by the owner. The animal shall be euthanized
if the owner does not comply herewith. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
CHAPTER 4
REGULATORY PERMITS AND LICENSES
SECTION:
6.04.101: Required Permits And Licenses
6.04.102: Posting Of Licenses; Transferability; Changes
6.04.103: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
6.04.101: REQUIRED PERMITS AND LICENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a kennel, cattery,
pet shop, grooming salon, riding school or stable, veterinary clinic or
hospital, or any similar establishment, unless such establishment is located in
a zoning district allowing such use as either a permitted or conditional use
and such person first obtains all necessary permits and licenses therefor as
required by city ordinance. This provision shall have no application to the
city animal shelter. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.04.102: POSTING OF LICENSES; TRANSFERABILITY; CHANGES:
All valid licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each
establishment, and a license shall not be transferable to another location. The
permittee shall immediately notify the division of any change in location or
ownership. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.04.103: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   (1)   A license may be suspended or revoked, or a license application
rejected, for falsification of facts in the license application or for
violation of any of the provisions of this title or any other law or regulation
governing the establishment.
   (2)   If the inspection of a licensee discloses a violation, the director or
designee shall notify the licensee of the following:
      (a)   The specific violations found;
      (b)   A specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the
violations found;
      (c)   Notice that failure to correct may result in immediate suspension
of the license; and
      (d)   An opportunity for appeal from the notice and inspection findings
will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the division
within five (5) days of the date of notice.
   (3)   Notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original
of the inspection report form or other notice has been delivered personally to
the licensee or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by certified
mail to the last known address of the licensee. A copy of such notice shall be
filed with the records of the division. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
CHAPTER 5
PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
SECTION:
6.05.101: Harboring Stray Dogs
6.05.102: Animals Running At Large
6.05.103: Tethering
6.05.104: Female Dogs In Heat
6.05.105: Places Prohibited To Animals
6.05.106: Attacking Dogs
6.05.107: Vicious Animals
6.05.108: Animal Waste Disposal
6.05.109: Carcass Disposal
6.05.110: Cruelty To Animals
6.05.111: Dogs And Cats Disturbing Neighborhood
6.05.101: HARBORING STRAY DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except an animal shelter, to harbor or
keep any lost, abandoned or strayed dog. Whenever any dog shall be found which
appears to be lost, abandoned or strayed, it shall be the duty of the finder,
within forty eight (48) hours, to either return the dog to its owner, if known,
or to notify the division so the dog can be impounded as provided in this
title. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.05.102: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to allow such
animal to run at large. The owner or person charged with responsibility for an
animal found running at large shall be strictly liable for a violation of this
section regardless of the precautions taken to prevent the escape of the animal
and regardless of whether or not he knows that the animal is running at large.
(Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.05.103: TETHERING:
   (1)   Tethering may be allowed up to a maximum of ten (10) hours per day
with adequate food, water and shelter from extreme temperatures (cold or hot).
   (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to chain, stake out or tether any
animal in such a manner that may be dangerous to the animal or that would allow
the animal to go beyond the owner's property line. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.05.104: FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT:
It shall be unlawful for the custodian of any female dog in heat to fail to
confine such dog in a secure enclosure so as to prevent it from coming into
contact with other dogs and creating a nuisance, except for planned breeding.
(Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.05.105: PLACES PROHIBITED TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit any animal in or about
any establishment or place of business where food or food products are sold or
displayed, regardless of how the animal may be restrained, except for seeing
eye dogs, hearing dogs and dogs assisting governmental officials. (Ord. 2010-
07, 2010)
6.05.106: ATTACKING DOGS:
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to allow
the dog to attack, bite or chase any person, any domesticated animal or any
domestic fowl. The killing of a dog by any person while the dog is engaged in
any act prohibited by this subsection, if reasonably necessary to stop the
dog's actions, shall not be a violation of any other provision of this title,
provided such killing in no way endangers another's safety or property.
   (2)   When there have been two (2) reported attacks by the same dog, a
review panel will be convened where the dog may be deemed vicious. Regardless
of number of bites, a review panel may be convened on a case by case basis as
determined by the director. The officer may impound the dog pending a final
determination and shall give written notice to the owner that the dog may be
euthanized.
      (a)   The offending dog's actions shall be scrutinized by the review
panel.
      (b)   After review by the review panel the director shall render a final
decision whether or not the dog has been determined to be vicious. The director
shall then cause to be mailed or hand delivered to the owner written notice of
his decision.
   (3)   If a dog is determined to be vicious, the owner may oppose the dog
being euthanized by making a written request for a hearing to the city
recorder's office within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the notice. If
mailed, the notice shall be deemed received five (5) calendar days after the
date of mailing. Upon receiving a written request for a hearing, a hearing
shall be scheduled before the city's administrative law judge as soon as
reasonably possible.
      (a)   At the hearing, the administrative law judge shall allow the animal
control officer and the owner, or the representative of either, to present any
relevant evidence, including reliable hearsay evidence, and shall then, based
on the evidence presented, affirm or overturn the decision to euthanize the
dog.
      (b)   If the administrative law judge affirms the decision, the director
or his designee shall euthanize the dog as soon as possible. (Ord. 2010-07,
2010)
6.05.107: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a vicious animal within
the city.
   (1)   Any person may petition to have an animal classified as vicious by
filing with the division a written "petition to classify an animal as vicious"
on a form provided by the division.
      (a)   Upon receipt of a properly executed petition, the director shall
cause a copy thereof to be mailed or hand delivered to the animal's owner. The
owner shall then have ten (10) calendar days from the date of receipt to submit
a written response to the allegations of the petition. If mailed, the petition
shall be deemed received five (5) calendar days after the date of mailing.
      (b)   Upon receipt of the owner's written response, if any, the review
panel shall review the case to recommend if the animal is in fact vicious.
After review by the review panel, the director shall decide whether the animal
is to be classified as vicious.
      (c)   The director shall then cause to be mailed or hand delivered to the
owner written notice of his decision.
      (d)   If an animal is determined to be vicious, the owner may oppose the
animal being euthanized by making a written request for a hearing to the city
recorder's office within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the notice. If
mailed, the notice shall be deemed received five (5) calendar days after the
date of mailing. Upon receiving a written request for a hearing, a hearing
shall be scheduled before the city's administrative law judge as soon as
reasonably possible.
      (e)   At the hearing, the administrative law judge shall allow the animal
control officer, the petitioner and the owner, or their representatives, and
other witnesses where applicable, to present any relevant evidence, including
reliable hearsay evidence, and shall then, based on the evidence presented,
affirm or overturn the decision of the director.
      (f)   If the administrative law judge overturns the decision, the animal
will be returned to the owner.
      (g)   If the administrative law judge affirms the decision, the director
or his designee shall euthanize the animal as soon as possible. (Ord. 2010-07,
2010)
6.05.108: ANIMAL WASTE DISPOSAL:
It shall be considered an infraction for the owner or custodian of an animal to
permit the animal to defecate upon a public street, sidewalk, park or other
area, or upon the property of another unless the owner or custodian removes and
properly disposes of all animal waste that may result. In the case of farm/
recreational animals such as a horse, the owner should dismount and remove the
waste or return as soon as practical/reasonable to remove the waste. (Ord.
2010-07, 2010)
6.05.109: CARCASS DISPOSAL:
   (1)   General: It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian, or if
ownership cannot be ascertained, for any person causing the death of an animal,
to allow the carcass of a dead animal to remain anywhere in the city, whether
interred or otherwise, and whether on private or public property. Disposal
shall be at the county sanitary landfill by arrangement directly with the
operator thereof who shall effect an appropriate interment at the landfill
site. This subsection shall have no application to animals killed for
consumption purposes, although unused portions of the carcass must be disposed
of in accordance herewith.
   (2)   Domesticated Animals: The foregoing notwithstanding, upon the death of
a domesticated animal, the owner thereof may bury the animal on his/her private
property within one day of the animal's death. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.05.110: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   (1)   Cruelty to animals is prohibited. Cruelty shall consist of those acts
designated in Utah Code Annotated sections 76-9-301 and 76-9-301.1 through 76-
9-301.8, together with injurious hobbling and malicious impounding. The
penalties prescribed by Utah code shall apply.
   (2)   The operator of a motor vehicle that strikes and injures any domestic
animal shall immediately stop and give such aid as can reasonably be rendered.
In the absence of the owner, he shall also immediately notify the division,
furnishing requested facts relative to the incident. Emergency vehicles are
exempted from the requirements of this provision when engaged in emergency or
urgent calls.
   (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to take or kill any birds, or to
rob or destroy any nest, eggs or young of any bird, other than domestic fowl if
allowed within the applicable zoning district. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.05.111: DOGS AND CATS DISTURBING NEIGHBORHOOD:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any dog or cat which by
loud, continued or frequent barking, howling, yelping, meowing, screeching or
by noxious or offensive odors shall annoy, disturb or endanger the health and
welfare of any person or neighborhood. This section shall not apply to the city
animal shelter or veterinary hospitals. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
CHAPTER 6
IMPOUNDING AND ADOPTION
SECTION:
6.06.101: Authority; Applicable Animals
6.06.102: Information Required
6.06.103: Period Of Impound
6.06.104: Impound Fees; Waiver
6.06.105: Redemption
6.06.106: Adoption
6.06.101: AUTHORITY; APPLICABLE ANIMALS:
Animal control officers shall place animals taken into custody in the animal
shelter. The following animals may be taken into custody and impounded:
   (1)   Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
title;
   (2)   Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this title;
   (3)   Any animal which is by this title required to be licensed and is not
licensed or is not wearing a tag, which shall be presumed to be unlicensed for
purposes of this section;
   (4)   Any abandoned or stray animal;
   (5)   Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the
requirements of this title; and
   (6)   Any vicious animal. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.06.102: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
The impounding of any animal shall require the following information to be kept
by the division:
   (1)   A complete description of the animal, including tag numbers if any;
   (2)   The manner and date of impound;
   (3)   The location of the pick up and name of the officer picking up the
animal;
   (4)   The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the
impound facility;
   (5)   The name and address of the redeemer, adopter or qualified rescue
organization the animal is released to, and the date thereof;
   (6)   All applicable violations of this title;
   (7)   All applicable fees and penalties; and
   (8)   All expenses accrued during impoundment. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.06.103: PERIOD OF IMPOUND:
Domesticated animals shall be impounded for a minimum period of five (5)
working days before further disposition, unless voluntarily relinquished by the
owner or custodian in which case there shall be no minimum period of impound.
Notice shall be deemed given when sent to the last known address of the listed
owner. All adoptable dogs and cats, except for those quarantined or confined by
court order, that have not been reclaimed by their owners within the minimum
impound period are then eligible for adoption, placement with a qualified
rescue organization or placement into foster care.
   (1)   After one hundred twenty (120) days an animal, not adopted or placed,
may have its status evaluated by the review panel.
   (2)   Regardless of length of time in the shelter, an animal who begins to
manifest aberrant or aggressive behavior or whose health is deteriorating may
be evaluated by the review panel.
   (3)   If, after the evaluation by the review panel, it is determined that
the animal remains adoptable, transferable or capable of being rehabilitated,
the animal may be placed under the care of FIAS and placement attempts shall
continue per an agreement with FIAS. If determined that an animal is no longer
adoptable, transferable or capable of rehabilitation, the animal may be
euthanized as approved by the director. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.06.104: IMPOUND FEES; WAIVER:
   (1)   Impound fees shall be in such amounts as established by resolution of
the city council.
   (2)   The director or his designee may waive an impound fee under
appropriate circumstances for animals quarantined for possible rabies, but
boarding charges shall be paid in any event. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.06.105: REDEMPTION:
The owner of any impounded animal, who is a responsible adult, may redeem his/
her impounded animal before disposition, upon payment of the following:
   (1)   The impound fees;
   (2)   The daily board charges;
   (3)   Veterinary costs incurred during the impound period, including rabies
vaccination;
   (4)   License fees, if required; and
   (5)   Any penalties imposed for violation of this title. (Ord. 2010-07,
2010)
6.06.106: ADOPTION:
   (1)   The director or his designee shall establish written placement
guidelines for the adoption of impounded animals which are in accordance with
this title.
   (2)   Upon the expiration of the minimum period of impound, adoptable
animals may be given up for adoption to responsible adults, upon a showing that
they can provide an adequate home for the animal. Disposition by adoption shall
relieve the city of further responsibility to any party for the animal. The
city reserves the right to refuse any adoption. No warranty of any type may be
given as to the health, temperament or suitability of the animal so adopted.
   (3)   Records shall be kept of any person to whom an animal is given. No
animal shall be given to a former owner, directly or indirectly, without
payment by the recipient of all impound and other fees applicable to
redemption.
   (4)   Adoption fees shall be in such amounts as established by resolution of
the city council. However, the director may reduce or waive such adoption fees
under appropriate circumstances, such as special animal adoption events or when
the animal shelter is full.
   (5)   Any person denied the right to adopt an animal may appeal the denial
by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within five (5) working
days of the denial. The written notice of appeal shall contain the applicant's
name, mailing address, daytime telephone number, and the relief sought. Upon
receipt of the notice of appeal, a hearing shall be scheduled before the city's
administrative law judge as soon as possible. At the hearing, the
administrative law judge shall allow the officer and the petitioner, or the
representative of either, to present any relevant evidence, including reliable
hearsay evidence, and shall then, based on the evidence presented, affirm or
overturn the decision to deny the adoption. During the appeal process, the
adoptee animal shall be retained by the shelter. If the administrative law
judge affirms the denial, the adoptee animal shall be treated as any other
animal. If the administrative law judge overturns the denial, the adoptee
animal shall be adopted to the petitioner as soon as reasonably practical.
(Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
CHAPTER 7
STERILIZATION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
6.07.101: Definitions
6.07.102: Sterilization Required; Written Agreement
6.07.103: Sterilization Deposit
6.07.104: Failure To Comply With Agreement
6.07.105: Deposit; When Required For Redemption By Claimant
6.07.106: Penalty; Appeal
6.07.101: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AGREEMENT: The animal shelter's written animal sterilization agreement.
ANIMAL: An adoptable cat or dog.
ANIMAL SHELTER: The Ivins City municipal animal shelter and adoption center
(the "animal shelter" or "shelter") is used for the care and custody of seized,
stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or other small
domesticated animals from Ivins City, except as follows:
   (1)   The shelter may assist neighboring jurisdictions, at the approval of
the director during times of disaster and/or exigent circumstances in placing
animals in safe environments, including the shelter if space is available, and
in attempting to find foster homes for such animals.
   (2)   The shelter may take animals from relinquishing owners living in
neighboring jurisdictions if all of the following are met:
      (a)   The owner pays twice the fee charged to Ivins City residents;
      (b)   The animal is spayed or neutered;
      (c)   The animal has complete current vaccinations, including bordatella;
      (d)   The animal is in good health and adoptable; and
      (e)   At the discretion of the shelter manager.
   (3)   The shelter may also engage in cooperative efforts with other shelters
and qualified rescue groups in placing animals for adoption or foster care.
CLAIMANT: An owner claiming an animal upon the animal's second impound within a
twelve (12) month period and upon any subsequent impound of that animal.
PERSON: An individual, an entity or a representative of an entity.
PROOF OF STERILIZATION: A written document signed by a veterinarian licensed
under Utah Code Annotated title 58, chapter 28, the Utah veterinary practice
act, stating:
   (1)   A specified animal has been sterilized;
   (2)   The date on which the sterilization was performed; and
   (3)   The location where the sterilization was performed.
RECIPIENT: The person to whom the animal shelter transfers an animal for
adoption.
STERILIZATION DEPOSIT: The portion of a fee charged by the animal shelter to a
recipient or claimant of an unsterilized animal to ensure the animal is timely
sterilized in accordance with an agreement between the recipient or the
claimant and the animal shelter.
STERILIZED: An animal has been surgically altered, either by the spaying of a
female animal or by the neutering of a male animal, so it is unable to
reproduce.
TRANSFER: The animal shelter sells, gives away, places for adoption or
otherwise transfers an animal to a recipient. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.07.102: STERILIZATION REQUIRED; WRITTEN AGREEMENT:
   (1)   The animal shelter may not transfer an animal that has not been
sterilized, except as provided below.
   (2)   The animal shelter may transfer an animal for adoption that has not
been sterilized only if:
      (a)   Recipient signs the animal shelter's written agreement which states
that the animal is not sterilized and the recipient agrees to be responsible
for ensuring the animal is sterilized:
         (i)   Within thirty (30) days after the agreement is signed, if the
animal is six (6) months of age or older; or
         (ii)   If the animal is younger than six (6) months of age, within
thirty (30) days after the animal becomes six (6) months of age; and
      (b)   The animal shelter receives from the recipient a sterilization
deposit as provided under the terms of the written agreement executed by the
recipient under this section. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.07.103: STERILIZATION DEPOSIT:
   (1)   Sterilization deposits shall reflect the average reduced cost of a
sterilization of an animal, based on the gender and weight of the animal, but
the deposit may not be less than twenty five dollars ($25.00). The amount of
the sterilization deposit shall conform to the city's consolidated fee
schedule.
   (2)   The sterilization deposit shall be refundable to the recipient if
proof of sterilization of the animal within the appropriate time limits is
presented to the animal shelter not more than three (3) months after the date
the animal is sterilized.
   (3)   The deposit shall be forfeited to the animal shelter if proof of
sterilization is not presented to the animal shelter in compliance with this
section.
   (4)   If a female dog or cat and her litter are transferred to one person, a
sterilization deposit is required only for the female dog or cat.
   (5)   All sterilization deposits forfeited or unclaimed under this section
shall be retained by the animal shelter and shall be used by the animal shelter
only for:
      (a)   A program to sterilize animals, which may include a sliding scale
fee program;
      (b)   A public education program to reduce and prevent overpopulation of
animals and the related costs to the city;
      (c)   A follow up program to assure that animals transferred by the
animal shelter are sterilized in accordance with the agreement; and
      (d)   Any additional costs incurred by the animal shelter in the
administration of the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.07.104: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH AGREEMENT:
If a recipient or claimant fails to comply with the agreement:
   (1)   The failure is grounds for seizure and impoundment of the animal by
the animal shelter;
   (2)   The recipient relinquishes all ownership rights regarding the animal
and any claim to expenses incurred in maintenance and care of the animal; and
   (3)   The recipient forfeits the sterilization deposit. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.07.105: DEPOSIT; WHEN REQUIRED FOR REDEMPTION BY CLAIMANT:
   (1)   Upon the second impound within a twelve (12) month period, and upon
any subsequent impound of an animal that is claimed by its owner, the animal
shelter may release the impounded animal to its owner only upon payment of all
impound fees required by the shelter and:
      (a)   Receipt of proof the animal has been sterilized; or
      (b)   A sterilization deposit.
   (2)   The sterilization deposit shall be refunded to the claimant only if
the claimant provides proof of sterilization to the animal shelter within
thirty (30) days of release of the animal to the claimant. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.07.106: PENALTY; APPEAL:
   (1)   Penalty:
      (a)   A person who knowingly commits any of the violations set forth in
this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) on a first violation, and a civil penalty of not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) on any second or subsequent violation.
      (b)   The director or designee shall impose the civil penalties under
this section.
   (2)   Persons Subject: A person is subject to the civil penalties under this
section who:
      (a)   Falsifies any proof of sterilization submitted for the purpose of
compliance with this chapter;
      (b)   Provides to the animal shelter or a licensed veterinarian
inaccurate information regarding ownership of any animal required to be
submitted for sterilization under this chapter;
      (c)   Submits to the animal shelter false information regarding
sterilization fees or fee schedules; or
      (d)   Issues a check for insufficient funds for any sterilization deposit
required of the person or claimant under this chapter.
   (3)   Appeal: Any person or claimant who contests a civil penalty imposed
under this section may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the city
recorder's office within ten (10) days of the imposition of the penalty. The
notice of appeal shall contain the person's or claimant's name, mailing
address, daytime telephone number, and the relief sought. Upon receipt of the
notice of appeal, the matter shall be scheduled for a hearing before the city's
administrative law judge as soon as possible. At the hearing, the
administrative law judge shall allow the animal control officer and the person
or claimant, or a representative of either, to present any relevant evidence,
including reliable hearsay evidence, and shall then, based on the evidence
presented, affirm, modify or overturn the imposition of penalty. (Ord. 2010-07,
2010)
CHAPTER 8
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
6.08.101: Enforcement Authority
6.08.102: Powers And Duties
6.08.103: Right Of Entry For Enforcement
6.08.104: Interfering With Officers Prohibited
6.08.105: Penalties
6.08.101: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The director, his/her authorized designees, and animal control officers are
empowered to apprehend, transport and impound any animal found in violation of
this title, including licensable animals for which no license has been procured
in accordance with this title, or any licensed or unlicensed animals for any
other violation of this title, and are empowered to issue criminal citations
and/or notices of violation for any violations of this title. (Ord. 2010-07,
2010)
6.08.102: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The director shall employ and designate those employees and volunteers within
the public safety department who shall perform the duties of animal control
officers. Animal control officers shall be authorized to enforce the provisions
of this title in all respects, including, but not limited to, the apprehension
and impoundment of animals found in violation of this title and to issue
criminal citations and/or notices of violation for any violations of this
title. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.08.103: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR ENFORCEMENT:
In the enforcement of this title, any peace officer or animal control officer
is hereby authorized to enter into the open yard of any person to secure or
take possession of any animal which is reasonably believed by such officer to
then and there, in the presence and plain view of such officer, be in violation
of this title. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.08.104: INTERFERING WITH OFFICERS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally interfere with the
director or any officer in the lawful discharge of his/her duties as prescribed
in this title. For purposes of this title, the term "interfere" shall include,
without limitation: failing to hand over to, or release to, an officer an
identifiable animal which has been pursued but not captured by such officer;
failing to make payment of agreed upon fees that have been deferred by the
director; failing to meet the agreed upon conditions of a fee waiver, reduction
or deferment; failing to comply with an abatement order lawfully issued by the
director; or failing to meet the conditions imposed by a notice of violation
and stipulation. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
6.08.105: PENALTIES:
   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of this title, either by failing
to do those acts required herein or by doing any act prohibited herein, shall
be subject to the following:
      (a)   A class C misdemeanor, unless expressly stated otherwise herein;
      (b)   Restitution of the cost of all damages incurred by anyone whose
person, property or animal has been injured or destroyed by a dog or other
animal.
   (2)   In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity,
penalties for violations of this title may be pursued under the city's
administrative code enforcement program 1 .
   (3)   Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-07, 2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 2 of this code.
CHAPTER 9
BEEKEEPING
SECTION:
6.09.101: Purpose
6.09.102: Certain Conduct Unlawful
6.09.103: Hives Allowed On Certain Agricultural Lots
6.09.104: Beekeeper Registration
6.09.105: Beekeeping Best Management Practices
6.09.106: Hives
6.09.107: Water
6.09.108: Beekeeping Equipment
6.09.109: Queen Management
6.09.110: Enforcement
6.09.101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize beekeeping subject to certain
requirements intended to avoid problems that may otherwise be associated with
beekeeping in populated areas. (Ord. 2011-03, 2011)
6.09.102: CERTAIN CONDUCT UNLAWFUL:
   (1)   It shall be unlawful to maintain an apiary anywhere within the city
except within the RA-5 zoning district. (Ord. 2011-03, 2011; amd. Ord. 2016-06,
2016)
   (2)   It shall also be unlawful to maintain an apiary in violation of the
requirements of this chapter.
   (3)   Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this
chapter, it shall also be unlawful for any person to maintain an apiary or to
keep any colony on any property in a manner that threatens public health or
safety, or creates a nuisance. (Ord. 2011-03, 2011)
6.09.103: HIVES ALLOWED ON CERTAIN AGRICULTURAL LOTS:
   (1)   An apiary consisting of not more than three (3) hives may be
maintained in a side yard or the rear yard of an agricultural lot in an RA-
5 zoning district. (Ord. 2011-03, 2011; amd. Ord. 2016-06, 2016)
   (2)   A person shall not locate nor allow a hive on property owned or
occupied by another person without first obtaining written permission from the
owner or occupant. (Ord. 2011-03, 2011)
6.09.104: BEEKEEPER REGISTRATION:
Each beekeeper shall be registered with the Utah department of agriculture and
food as provided in the Utah bee inspection act of the Utah code, as amended.
(Ord. 2011-03, 2011)
6.09.105: BEEKEEPING BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
   (1)   Any person engaged in beekeeping within the city shall follow all of
the requirements of this chapter.
   (2)   To the greatest extent reasonably possible, and when not in direct
conflict with any provision of this chapter, any person engaged in beekeeping
within the city shall also abide by the "best management practices" for
beekeeping in Washington County, Utah, as adopted and/or recommended by the
Utah department of agriculture, Washington County, and/or the Southwest Utah
public health department.
   (3)   In the event of a conflict between any regulation set forth in this
chapter and any honeybee management regulations adopted by Washington County or
the Southwest Utah public health department, or the Utah department of
agriculture, the most restrictive regulations shall apply. (Ord. 2011-03, 2011)
6.09.106: HIVES:
   (1)   Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames which
shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
   (2)   Hives shall be placed at least two hundred feet (200') from any
property line and six inches (6") above the ground, as measured from the ground
to the lowest portion of the hive.
   (3)   Hives shall be situated on a lot such that the general flight pattern
of bees is in a direction that will deter and minimize bee contact with humans
and domesticated animals. (Ord. 2011-03, 2011)
6.09.107: WATER:
Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available to
the colony to minimize any nuisance created by bees seeking water on
neighboring property. (Ord. 2011-03, 2011)
6.09.108: BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT:
Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other beekeeping equipment is
left upon the grounds of an apiary site. Upon removal from a hive, all such
equipment shall promptly be disposed of in a sealed container or placed within
a building or other beeproof enclosure. (Ord. 2011-03, 2011)
6.09.109: QUEEN MANAGEMENT:
All queens shall be marked and/or clipped. Each beekeeper shall have a bill of
sale from a European honeybee queen producer for each queen and maintain record
of requeening. This record shall be verified and signed by the Utah department
of agriculture and food designated inspector at each required annual
inspection. (Ord. 2011-03, 2011)
6.09.110: ENFORCEMENT:
   (1)   A first violation of this chapter that does not result in physical
injury or property damage to another shall be an infraction.
   (2)   A second violation of this chapter shall be a class C misdemeanor,
provided neither violation resulted in physical injury or property damage to
another.
   (3)   A third violation of this chapter, or any violation of this chapter
that results in physical injury or property damage to another, shall be a class
B misdemeanor.
   (4)   As an alternative to criminal enforcement, a violation of this chapter
may be enforced as provided in title 4 of this code for code violations.
   (5)   In addition to the foregoing, any person who suffers property damage
or physical injury as a result of a violation of this chapter may seek
injunctive relief. (Ord. 2011-03, 2011)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
HEALTH REGULATIONS GENERALLY
SECTION:
7.01.101: Unwholesome Food
7.01.102: Discharge Of Sewage Pollution
7.01.103: Inadequate Plumbing
7.01.101: UNWHOLESOME FOOD:
It is a class B misdemeanor for any person to sell or offer for sale any
unwholesome food or beverage which has been condemned by any government food
inspector. (Prior Code § 10-223)
7.01.102: DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE POLLUTION:
   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or permit the discharge of
any sewage or filth from any premises into and upon any public highway, stream,
watercourse or public place, or into any drain, cesspool or private wastewater
disposal system which does not conform to standards established by the state
division of health or by this municipality.
   (2)   The health director may order a connection for sewage disposal to be
made with the public sewer system provided by the municipality if such is
available; provided, that the public sewer system is within three hundred feet
(300') of the premises 1 .
   (3)   The health director shall use all due measures to prevent the fouling
of any streams, watercourses, reservoirs or any source furnishing water to any
of the inhabitants of this municipality. (Prior Code § 10-225)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10.03.204 of this code.
7.01.103: INADEQUATE PLUMBING:
The health director shall have power to require the prompt repair of all leaks
or other defects in plumbing throughout the municipality. He shall have power
to condemn and abate all plumbing which is deficient under the plumbing
ordinances. When, in the opinion of the health officer, a change in occupants,
type of business or other cause requires changes in plumbing, he shall have the
power to compel the installation of an increased number of plumbing fixtures
and a change in their type or capacity, and to make such other alterations or
increases as may be necessary for the health and safety of the occupants of the
building and of the public generally. (Prior Code § 10-226)
CHAPTER 2
CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO AND PSYCHOTOXIC CHEMICAL SOLVENTS
SECTION:
7.02.101: State Code Adopted
7.02.101: STATE CODE ADOPTED:
Utah Code Annotated title 76, chapter 10, part 1, as amended, entitled
"cigarettes and tobacco and psychotoxic chemical solvents", is hereby approved
and adopted as the applicable code of the city and, by this reference, is made
a part of this code as fully as if set out at length herein and shall be
controlling within the city limits; provided, however, that any provision of
the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a city
ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2006-33, 2006)
CHAPTER 3
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
SECTION:
7.03.101: Definitions
7.03.102: Use Of Landfill
7.03.103: Collection And Disposal Of Residential Solid Waste
7.03.104: Mandatory Use Of Automated/Semiautomated Containers
7.03.105: Residential Solid Waste Collection Procedures
7.03.106: Residential Solid Waste Collection And Disposal Fees
7.03.107: Residential Fee Established For Availability Of Service
7.03.108: Monthly Billing
7.03.109: Commercial Or Private Haulers
7.03.101: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ALLIED/RED ROCK: Allied Waste Transportation, Inc., DBA Red Rock Waste
Services, Inc.
ALLIED/RED ROCK AGREEMENT: That certain agreement, and any amendments thereto,
between Washington County special service district no. 1 and Allied Waste
Transportation, Inc., DBA Red Rock Waste Services, dated June 4, 1999, a copy
of which is attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit A and
incorporated by this reference.
AUTOMATED PICK UP: A method or system, including all necessary vehicles and
equipment, of collecting solid waste through the use of containers designed for
or compatible with mechanical pick up.
BOARD: The administrative control board of Washington County special district
no. 1.
COLLECTION STATION: Dumpsters, roll off boxes, or other similar containers,
established by the district for disposal of residential waste in isolated or
rural areas where individual curbside collection is unfeasible or impractical.
COMMERCIAL: Any premises or property:
   (1)   Used primarily in connection with the supply of goods or services on a
regular basis or in the regular course of business;
   (2)   Used for apartment complexes with more than eight (8) dwelling units;
   (3)   Condominium or townhome complexes used primarily, when considered as a
whole, for rental purposes;
   (4)   RV parks used primarily for overnight or other rental of less than
thirty (30) consecutive days; or
   (5)   Used for motels, hotels or hometels.
COMMERCIAL HAULER: Any person or entity who is engaged primarily in the
business of collecting and disposing of commercial solid waste generated by any
other person or entity.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE: Any solid waste produced by or resulting from the use
of commercial property or premises.
DISTRICT: The Washington County special service district no. 1.
DUMPSTER: Any container constructed of metal, of two (2) yards' volume or more,
and designed to be compatible with mechanical collection equipment.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes, other than
household waste or special waste, which, because of its quantity, concentration
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly
contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible
or incapacitating reversible illness or may pose a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
PRIVATE HAULER: (1) Any person or entity who, as the owner, tenant or other
occupant of property or premises classified as commercial, collects and
disposes of solid waste generated by the use of such property;
   (2)   Any person or entity who collects and disposes of construction debris.
RESIDENTIAL: (1) Any property or premises containing a building or structure
which is used for human habitation, or which is hooked to culinary water and
power and intended for human habitation, but excluding:
      (a)   Apartment complexes with more than eight (8) dwelling units;
      (b)   Condominium or townhome complexes used primarily, when considered
as a whole, for rental purposes;
      (c)   RV parks used primarily for overnight or other temporary rental of
less than thirty (30) consecutive days;
      (d)   Motels, hotels and hometels.
   (2)   Each unit of a building or structure on property or premises
classified as residential shall be considered as a separate residence for
purpose of billing and collection.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE: Any solid waste produced by or resulting from the use
of any residential property or premises, except for hazardous waste and
construction/demolition waste.
SEMIAUTOMATED CONTAINER: A receptacle specifically designed for or compatible
with automated pick up, having a capacity of sixty (60) or ninety four (94)
gallons, of rotomold design and constructed of Phillips Marlex C1-100 cross
linked high density polyethylene, or equivalent materials approved by the
district, and equipped with a tightfitting permanently attached lid and wheels
for easy movement.
SOLID WASTE: Shall have the same meaning as specified in Utah Code Annotated
section 19-6-502(7). (Ord. 2000-1, 2000)
7.03.102: USE OF LANDFILL:
All solid waste generated within the incorporated areas of the city, except for
hazardous waste, lead acid batteries and used oil, shall be transported and
disposed of at the Washington County landfill. (Ord. 2000-1, 2000)
7.03.103: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE:
Collection and disposal of all residential solid waste within the corporate
limits of the city shall be provided exclusively by the district through its
authorized subcontractor, Allied/Red Rock, except for residential solid waste
hauled to the landfill by the owner or occupant of the residential property.
(Ord. 2000-1, 2000)
7.03.104: MANDATORY USE OF AUTOMATED/SEMIAUTOMATED CONTAINERS:
Each residential unit within the incorporated areas of the city shall be
required to utilize an automated/semiautomated container which has been
approved and delivered to the property by the district, except that collection
of residential waste may be accomplished by use of dumpsters in:
   (1)   Condominium or townhome developments already utilizing dumpsters as a
means of solid waste collection as of October 27, 1999;
   (2)   Condominium or townhome developments utilizing individual automated or
semiautomated containers as a means of collection of solid waste as of October
27, 1999, where use of individual automated or semiautomated containers is
determined to be impractical or unfeasible;
   (3)   Condominium or townhome developments established after October 27,
1999, where use of dumpsters as a means of solid waste collection has been
preapproved by district. (Ord. 2000-1, 2000)
7.03.105: RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION PROCEDURES:
All residential solid waste shall be required to be placed for collection in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the Allied/Red Rock agreement, a
copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit A and by
this reference incorporated in this chapter as if fully set forth. (Ord. 2000-
1, 2000)
7.03.106: RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL FEES:
Unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the monthly fee for
residential solid waste and disposal services for each residential unit within
the incorporated areas of the city shall be as set forth in the city
consolidated fee schedule and shall include a pass through of the charges
imposed by the Washington County special service district no. 1 (solid waste
district), plus a charge to offset the city's cost of billing, collecting and
processing the fees. (Ord. 2006-35, 2006)
7.03.107: RESIDENTIAL FEE ESTABLISHED FOR AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE:
The residential fee established by this chapter is for the availability of
residential solid waste collection and disposal service provided by the
district through its authorized subcontractor, Allied/Red Rock, and such fee
shall be imposed when such service is available, regardless of whether such
service is actually utilized. (Ord. 2000-1, 2000)
7.03.108: MONTHLY BILLING:
Billing for residential solid waste collection and disposal services to
residential units in the incorporated areas of the city shall be done on a
monthly basis, and shall be included in any billing for other services supplied
by the city, including water, power, sewer, etc. All payments for residential
solid waste collection and disposal services not received on or before the
twentieth day of the month following the month for which services were provided
shall be deemed delinquent and shall thereafter bear interest at the rate of
eighteen percent (18%) per annum until paid in full. (Ord. 2000-1, 2000)
7.03.109: COMMERCIAL OR PRIVATE HAULERS:
No private or commercial hauler shall be allowed to collect or dispose of
commercial solid waste generated by commercial establishments or through the
use of other commercial property within the incorporated areas of the city
without first having obtained from the district a license to operate as a
private or commercial hauler. (Ord. 2000-1, 2000)
CHAPTER 4
WEED CONTROL
SECTION:
7.04.101: Real Property To Be Kept Clean
7.04.102: Weeds Defined
7.04.103: Standards Of Weed Control
7.04.104: Violation; Penalty
7.04.101: REAL PROPERTY TO BE KEPT CLEAN:
It shall be an infraction for any person owning or occupying real property to
allow weeds to become a nuisance or not to remove from such property any
cuttings of such weeds or any refuse, unsightly or deleterious objects after
having been given notice from the health director as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code § 10-321; amd. Ord. 94-36, 1994)
7.04.102: WEEDS DEFINED:
"Weeds" mean any vegetation commonly referred to as a weed, or which shall have
been designated a noxious weed by the Utah commissioner of agriculture. (Prior
Code § 10-322)
7.04.103: STANDARDS OF WEED CONTROL:
   (1)   It is hereby declared that the above stated weeds constitute a
nuisance when they create a fire hazard, a source of contamination or pollution
of the water, air or property, a danger to health, a breeding place or
habitation for insects or rodents or other forms of life deleterious to humans
or are unsightly or deleterious to their surroundings.
   (2)   The cut weeds shall be removed from the premises within seventy two
(72) hours after cutting. (Prior Code § 10-323)
7.04.104: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   (1)   Any owner, occupant or person having an interest in the property
subject to this chapter who shall fail to comply with the notice or order given
pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of violation punishable as set out in
title 4 of this code.
   (2)   Compliance by any owner, occupant or person to whom a notice has been
given, as provided in this chapter, shall not be admissible in any criminal
proceeding brought pursuant to this section. (Prior Code § 10-359; amd. 1993
codification)
CHAPTER 5
LITTER AND HANDBILLS
SECTION:
Part 1. General Provisions
7.05.101: Purpose
7.05.102: Definitions
Part 2. Litter Regulations
7.05.201: Public Places
7.05.202: Placement Of Litter In Receptacles
7.05.203: Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited
7.05.204: Merchants To Keep Sidewalks Free Of Litter
7.05.205: Litter Thrown By Persons In Vehicles
7.05.206: Truckloads
7.05.207: Parks
7.05.208: Lakes And Fountains
7.05.209: Vacant Lots
Part 3. Handbills
7.05.301: Commercial Handbills; Permit Required For Distribution
7.05.302: Issuance Of A Commercial Handbill Permit; Duration
7.05.303: Exemptions; Mail And Newspapers
7.05.304: Throwing Or Distributing Handbills In Public Places
7.05.305: Placement Of Handbills On Vehicles
7.05.306: Distribution Of Handbills; Uninhabited Or Vacant Premises
7.05.307: Distribution Prohibited Where Properly Posted
7.05.308: Distribution Of Handbills; Inhabited Private Premises
7.05.309: Posting Of Notice Prohibited
7.05.310: Revocation Or Denial Of Commercial Handbill Permit
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
7.05.101: PURPOSE:
The regulation of commercial handbill distribution is intended to prevent
fraud, prevent crime, protect residents' privacy and reduce litter. (Ord. 2007-
18, 2007)
7.05.102: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE: A public or private litter storage and collection
receptacle.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, business card, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:
   (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing;
   (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest in sales thereof;
   (3)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit, except where an admission
fee is charged or a collection taken up for the purpose of defraying the
expenses incident to any such event; or
   (4)   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
GARBAGE: Waste from the preparation, cooking or consumption of food, condemned
food products and all refuse and waste from the handling, storage, preparation
and sale of produce. Garbage originates primarily in kitchens, stores, markets,
restaurants, hotels and other places where food is handled, stored, sold,
cooked or consumed.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish", as defined in this section, and all
other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to public health, safety, welfare or appearance of the
municipality. "Litter" also includes any commercial handbill distributed to the
public without a valid permit from the city or in violation of the terms and
conditions of an issued permit.
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general or local circulation or any periodical or
current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per
year, and sold to the public. "Newspaper" does not include any paper, magazine,
booklet, circular, leaflet, or other printed or reproduced material or
advertisement that is distributed without cost to the public, unless the
publication consists of news and/or local interest stories rather than
advertisements and members of the public to whom the publication is delivered
have the ability to stop delivery of the publication to their property if
desired.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a "commercial handbill"
or "newspaper".
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other
public area in the municipality, owned or used by the municipality.
REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes)
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively on
stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007; amd. Ord. 2010-01, 2010)
PART 2. LITTER REGULATIONS
7.05.201: PUBLIC PLACES:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or on any street, sidewalk or other
public place except:
   (1)   In authorized receptacles for collection or in official municipal
garbage dumps; or
   (2)   For collection as authorized by the city council. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.202: PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES:
Persons placing litter in authorized receptacles shall do so in such a manner
as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on private property. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.203: SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep
the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.204: MERCHANTS TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER:
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit
in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying places of business shall keep the sidewalk in front of
their business premises free of litter. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.205: LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES:
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter on any street or other public place, or on private property. (Ord. 2007-
18, 2007)
7.05.206: TRUCKLOADS:
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless such vehicle is
so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being
blown or deposited on any street, alley or other public place; nor shall any
person drive or move any vehicle or truck, the wheels or tires of which carry
onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, sticky substances,
litter or foreign matter of any kind. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.207: PARKS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park except in authorized
receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the park or on any street
or other public place. Where authorized receptacles are not provided, all such
litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. (Ord. 2007-18,
2007)
7.05.208: LAKES AND FOUNTAINS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.209: VACANT LOTS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property
whether or not owned by such person. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
PART 3. HANDBILLS
7.05.301: COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS; PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DISTRIBUTION:
   (1)   No person or business shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise
affix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any commercial handbill upon
any portion or part of any public way, public place, public structure or public
building.
   (2)   It is unlawful to distribute indiscriminately to the public by leaving
at houses or residences in the municipality any commercial handbills without
having first secured a permit therefor from the city.
   (3)   Commercial handbills may only be distributed in the city by one of two
(2) methods:
      (a)   By securing the commercial handbill to a door handle at a residence
or business where it is being distributed; or
      (b)   If a current registered solicitor is specifically exempted from
such requirements, by personally handing the commercial handbill to a person at
a residence.
   (4)   Applications for such permit shall include the following:
      (a)   A statement of the nature of the commercial handbill to be
distributed;
      (b)   A sample of the commercial handbill and the manner in which the
commercial handbill will be secured to a door handle, other than by tape or
other adhesive;
      (c)   The requested duration of the commercial handbill permit;
      (d)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (e)   The name of the manufacturer or distributor of any article or
service advertised; and
      (f)   Payment in full of the permit fee as set forth in the city's
consolidated fee schedule.
   (5)   Any person engaging in the distribution of commercial handbills to
residences in the city shall, within forty eight (48) hours of distribution,
return to each residence where a commercial handbill was distributed to make
certain that the commercial handbill has been removed. It shall be unlawful for
any person or entity engaged in distributing or advertising in the commercial
handbill to allow the commercial handbill to remain outside a residence in the
city for a period of more than forty eight (48) hours. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.302: ISSUANCE OF A COMMERCIAL HANDBILL PERMIT; DURATION:
   (1)   Upon receipt by city staff of a complete application and payment of
fees for a commercial handbill permit, staff shall review and either issue or
deny the requested permit within one business day. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
   (2)   The duration of a commercial handbill permit shall be for thirty (30)
days. In the event the applicant desires to engage in ongoing distributions of
handbills throughout the year and there have been no violations of this part
during the initial thirty (30) day permit period, then the applicant may apply
for an annual handbill permit having a duration of one year from the date of
issuance. (Ord. 2009-17, 2009)
7.05.303: EXEMPTIONS; MAIL AND NEWSPAPERS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the distribution of mail by
the United States nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on
private property in such a manner so as to prevent their being carried or
deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place, or on
private property. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.304: THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
on any sidewalk, street or other public place. Unless otherwise authorized by
the city council, it is an infraction for any person to hand out, distribute or
sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it
shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place for any
persons to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.305: PLACEMENT OF HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES:
Unless otherwise authorized by the city council, no person shall throw or
deposit any commercial handbill in or on any vehicle; provided, however, that
it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or
distribute without charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to
any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.306: DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS; UNINHABITED OR VACANT PREMISES:
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial handbill in or on any private
premises, which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (Ord.
2007-18, 2007)
7.05.307: DISTRIBUTION PROHIBITED WHERE PROPERLY POSTED:
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill on any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so,
or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the
entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "no trespassing", "no peddlers or
agents", "no advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner
that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their
right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left on such
premises. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.308: DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS; INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES:
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or on private premises which are inhabited, except by handling or
transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person
then present in or on such private premises. However, in case of inhabited
private premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such
person, unless requested by anyone on such premises not to do so, may place or
deposit any such handbill in or on such inhabited private premises if such
handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from
being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other
public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by
federal postal law or regulations. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.309: POSTING OF NOTICE PROHIBITED:
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree, or on any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
7.05.310: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF COMMERCIAL HANDBILL PERMIT:
   (1)   Any commercial handbill permit issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter may be revoked, and any application denied, by city staff because
of:
      (a)   The failure of the permittee or applicant to comply with the
conditions and requirements of this chapter or any other city ordinance; or
      (b)   The permit was obtained by fraud or deceit. (Ord. 2007-18, 2007)
CHAPTER 6
NUISANCES
SECTION:
Part 1. General Provisions
7.06.101: Definitions
7.06.102: Nuisances Designated
7.06.103: Toilet Or Sewer Facilities
7.06.104: Restrictions On Blocking Water
Part 2. Property Nuisances
7.06.201: Definition Of Nuisance
7.06.202: Private Property; Duty Of Maintenance
7.06.203: Storage Of Personal Property
7.06.204: Abatement Of Nuisance By Owner
Part 3. Nuisance Abatement And Penalty For Violation (Rep. by Ord. 2014-16,
2014)
Part 4. Public Nuisances
7.06.401: Public Nuisance Defined
7.06.402: Maintaining, Committing Or Failing To Remove Public Nuisance;
Classification Of Offense
7.06.403: Carcass Or Offal; Prohibitions Relating To Disposal; Classification
Of Offense
7.06.404: Chapter Provisions Not Exclusive
7.06.405: Abatement Of Public Nuisances; Authority
Part 5. Miscellaneous
7.06.501: Nuisance Defined; Violation; Classification Of Offense
7.06.502: Befouling Waters
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
7.06.101: DEFINITIONS:
AUTHOR OF NUISANCE: Where a nuisance exists upon property and is the outgrowth
of the usual, natural or necessary use of the property, the landlord or his
agent, the tenant or his agent, and all other persons having control of the
property on which such nuisance exists, shall be deemed to be the authors
thereof and shall be equally liable and responsible. Where any such nuisance
shall arise from the unusual or unnecessary use of such property or from the
business thereon conducted, then the occupants and all other persons
contributing to the continuance of such nuisance shall be deemed the authors.
NUISANCES: Whatever is dangerous to human life or health and whatever renders
soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome is declared to be a nuisance and
unlawful. It is unlawful for any person either as an owner, agent, or occupant
to create, or aid in creating or contributing to or maintaining a nuisance.
(Prior code §§ 10-311, 10-312)
7.06.102: NUISANCES DESIGNATED:
   (1)   Every act or condition made, permitted, allowed or continued in
violation of section
7.06.101 of this chapter, is declared to be a nuisance and may be abated and
punished as hereinafter provided.
   (2)   Nuisances include, but are not limited to:
      (a)   Befouling water in any spring, stream, well or water source
supplying water for culinary purposes;
      (b)   Allowing any privy vault or cesspool or other individual wastewater
disposal system to become a menace to health or a source of odors to air or
water;
      (c)   Permitting any garbage container to remain on premises when it has
become unclean and offensive;
      (d)   Allowing vegetable waste, garbage, litter, filth or refuse of any
nature to accumulate within or upon any private alley, yard or area, except
when it is temporarily deposited for immediate removal;
      (e)   Permitting the accumulation of manure in any stable, stall, corral,
feed yard, yard or in any other building or area in which any animals are kept;
      (f)   Permitting any slaughterhouse, market, meat shop, stable, feed yard
or other place or building wherein any animals are slaughtered, kept, fed or
sold to remain unclean or in any state or condition detrimental to health or
creating a nuisance because of odors, or in which flies or rodents breed;
      (g)   Discharging or placing any offensive water, liquid waste or refuse
of any kind into any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash, natural
watercourse, ditch, canal or any vacant lot or which, as the result of
continued discharge, will render the place of discharge offensive or likely to
become so;
      (h)   Keeping or collecting any stale or putrid grease or other offensive
matter;
      (i)   Having or permitting upon any premises any fly or mosquito
producing condition;
      (j)   Keeping any drinking vessel for public use without providing a
method of decontamination between uses;
      (k)   Permitting or performing any ablutions in or near any public
drinking fountain;
      (l)   Failing to furnish any dwelling house, boarding house or factory or
other place of employment with such privy vaults, water closets, sinks or other
facilities as may be required, to maintain the same in sanitary condition;
      (m)   Neglecting or refusing to discontinue use of, clean out, disinfect
and fill up all privy vaults and cesspools or other individual wastewater
disposal systems within twenty (20) days after notice from an enforcement
officer or official of the municipality;
      (n)   Permitting any lot or excavation to become the repository of
stagnant water or any decaying or offensive substances;
      (o)   Obstructing or tending to obstruct or interfere with or render
dangerous for passage any street or sidewalks, lake, stream, drainage, canal or
basin, or any public park without first obtaining the written permission of the
governing body.
   (3)   The types of nuisances above stated shall be deemed in addition to and
in no way a limitation of the nuisances subject to this chapter. (Prior code §§
10-313, 10-314)
7.06.103: TOILET OR SEWER FACILITIES:
All toilet or sewer facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the ordinances of the municipality. All such facilities that do
not comply with such provisions are declared to be a nuisance and are subject
to abatement as herein prescribed. (Prior code § 10-315)
7.06.104: RESTRICTIONS ON BLOCKING WATER:
   (1)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to permit any drainage
system, canal, ditch, conduit or other watercourse of any kind or nature,
natural or artificial, to become so obstructed as to cause the water to back up
and overflow therefrom, or to become unsanitary.
   (2)   Maintenance of any such watercourse in such condition shall constitute
a nuisance and the same shall be subject to abatement. (Prior code § 10-316)
PART 2. PROPERTY NUISANCES
7.06.201: DEFINITION OF NUISANCE:
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "nuisance" means any condition of use
of premises or of building exteriors which are deleterious or injurious,
noxious or unsightly, which includes, but is not limited to, keeping or
depositing on, or scattering over the premises any of the following:
   (1)   Lumber, junk, trash or debris;
   (2)   Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as furniture,
stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers. (Prior Code § 10-331)
7.06.202: PRIVATE PROPERTY; DUTY OF MAINTENANCE:
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall
maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or
maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value
of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located.
(Prior Code § 10-332)
7.06.203: STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY:
   (1)   Definitions:
    INOPERABLE VEHICLE: As used in this section, this term shall mean any
vehicle that cannot either legally or safely be operated on a public street.
   PERSON: Any individual or any type of business entity.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Any property owned by any person who is the owner, tenant
or resident of the real property on which the property is found that is not
attached to the real property in such a manner as to be considered by legal
definition real property.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any property not owned by a governmental entity.
   SCREENED FROM VIEW: Screened by either: a solid six foot (6') high wall/
fence, vegetation (other than any vegetation that is defined by the State of
Utah as a noxious, toxic or invasive plant) that is at least six feet (6') in
height, or stored in an approved enclosed structure, whereby the personal
property is not visible from either a public street/place or from adjoining
private property. All materials used to screen personal property from view must
be in compliance with this Code and design guidelines and approved by the
building official; however, any existing use of the invasive plant Arundo
donax, sometimes referred to as giant cane, Carrizo, arundo, Spanish cane,
Colorado River reed, wild cane, giant reed and/or simply "bamboo" (collectively
referred to as "bamboo") may be allowed to continue to exist so long as it does
not spread (as opposed to naturally filling along an existing boundary), does
not encroach into or onto public rights-of-way, shall not be permitted to be
replaced or to regrow in areas where it has been removed or destroyed by any
means, and shall not be allowed within fifty feet (50') of any structure in
order to provide a defensible space due to its proven flammability. The
foregoing exception for existing bamboo notwithstanding, any property owner who
continues to use existing bamboo shall be responsible for immediate cleanup of
any bamboo debris in the public rights-of-way, or shall pay the costs of the
City cleaning up such debris, and may be liable for damages that may be caused
by such bamboo, whether due to fire, flooding or otherwise.
   STRIPPED AND JUNKED VEHICLE: Any vehicle that is dismantled, wrecked, or
otherwise inoperable.
   UNLICENSED VEHICLE: Any vehicle not licensed for a period exceeding one
hundred twenty (120) days.
   UNSHELTERED STORAGE: Personal property that is not screened from view and is
capable of being viewed from: a public street or other public place; or from
adjoining private property. This term shall also include personal property
which is covered by a tarp, blanket, plastic, or other similar covering.
   VEHICLE: Any vehicle which can be used for towing or transporting people or
materials, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses,
motorcycles, scooters, or recreational vehicles.
   VEHICLE ACCESSORIES: Any part of any vehicle. (Ord. 2014-16, 2014; amd. Ord.
2016-04, 2016; Ord. 2017-18, 2017)
   (2)   Unlawful To Store: It shall be unlawful to store:
      (a)   Stripped and junked vehicles, inoperable vehicles, vehicle
accessories, or personal property of any kind not screened from view.
      (b)   Trash/refuse/recycling containers in the front yard setback except
on the day of trash pick up at the street or the evening immediately prior to
such street pick up.
      (c)   Construction, farm or other large vehicle or equipment that is not
permitted in the zone where it is located.
   (3)   Enforcement: Any violation of this section may be enforced either
criminally or through a civil code enforcement action. The city may be the sole
complainant for unsheltered storage of personal property that is visible from a
public street or place. Any action alleging the unsheltered storage of personal
property that is visible only from adjoining private property shall require a
complaint from the owner, tenant or resident of the adjoining private property
who is willing to testify and provide evidence of the unsheltered storage of
personal property. (Ord. 2014-16, 2014)
7.06.204: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY OWNER:
The owner, owners, tenants, lessees or occupants of any lot within this
municipality on which such "storage", as defined in section
7.06.203 of this chapter, is made, and also the owner, owners or lessees of the
above described personal property involved in such storage shall jointly and
severally abate such nuisance by its prompt removal into completely enclosed
and secured buildings to be used for such purposes, or otherwise to remove such
property from the municipality. (Prior code § 10-334)
PART 3. NUISANCE ABATEMENT AND PENALTY FOR VIOLATION (Rep. by Ord. 2014-16,
2014)
PART 4. PUBLIC NUISANCES
7.06.401: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
   (1)   A public nuisance is a crime against the public order and economy of
this municipality and consists in unlawfully doing any act or omitting to
perform any duty, which act or omission, either:
      (a)   Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety
of three (3) or more persons; or
      (b)   Offends public decency; or
      (c)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake, stream, canal or basin, or any public
park, square, street or highway; or
      (d)   In any way renders three (3) or more persons insecure in life or
the use of property.
   (2)   An act which affects three (3) or more persons in any of the ways
specified in this section is still a nuisance regardless of whether the extent
of annoyance or damage inflicted on individuals is unequal. (Prior code § 13-
1083)
7.06.402: MAINTAINING, COMMITTING OR FAILING TO REMOVE PUBLIC NUISANCE;
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSE:
Every person who maintains or commits any public nuisance, the punishment for
which is not otherwise prescribed, or who wilfully omits to perform any legal
duty relating to the removal of a public nuisance, is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. (Prior code § 13-1084)
7.06.403: CARCASS OR OFFAL; PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO DISPOSAL; CLASSIFICATION
OF OFFENSE:
Every person who puts the carcass of any dead animal, or the offal from any
slaughter pen, corral or butcher shop into any river, creek, pond, street,
alley or public highway or road in common use or who attempts to destroy it by
fire, within one-fourth (1/4) of a mile of this municipality, is guilty of a
class B misdemeanor. (Prior code § 13-1085)
7.06.404: CHAPTER PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall affect any other provisions of city
ordinances, rules or regulations which regulate, prohibit or affect nuisances
or public nuisances. (Prior code § 13-1086)
7.06.405: ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES; AUTHORITY:
The city attorney is empowered to institute an action in the name of this
municipality to abate a public nuisance. (Prior code § 13-1087)
PART 5. MISCELLANEOUS
7.06.501: NUISANCE DEFINED; VIOLATION; CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSE:
   (1)   A "nuisance" is any item, thing, manner or condition whatsoever that
is dangerous to human life or health, or renders soil, air, water or food
impure or unwholesome.
   (2)   Any person, whether as owner, agent or occupant, who creates, aids in
creating or contributes to a nuisance, or who supports, continues or retains a
nuisance, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Prior code § 13-1081)
7.06.502: BEFOULING WATERS:
A person is guilty of a class B misdemeanor if he:
   (1)   Constructs or maintains a corral, sheep pen, goat pen, stable, pigpen,
chicken coop or other offensive yard or outhouse where the waste or drainage
therefrom shall flow directly into the waters of any stream, well or spring of
water used for domestic purposes; or
   (2)   Deposits, piles, unloads or leaves any manure heap, offensive rubbish
or the carcass of any dead animal where the waste or drainage therefrom will
flow directly into the waters of any stream, well or spring of water used for
domestic purposes; or
   (3)   Dips or washes sheep in any stream or constructs, maintains or uses
any pool or dipping vat for dipping or washing sheep in such close proximity to
any stream located within this municipality or over which this municipality may
exercise its jurisdiction and used by the inhabitants of this municipality for
domestic purposes as to make the waters thereof impure or unwholesome; or
   (4)   Constructs or maintains any corral, yard or vat to be used for the
purpose of shearing or dipping sheep within twelve (12) miles of the
municipality, where the refuse or filth from the corral or yard would naturally
find its way into any stream of water used by the inhabitants of this
municipality for domestic purposes; or
   (5)   Establishes and maintains any corral, camp or bedding place for the
purpose of herding, holding or keeping any cattle, horses, sheep, goats or
hogs, within seven (7) miles of this municipality, where the refuse or filth
from the corral, camp or bedding place will naturally find its way into any
stream of water used by the inhabitants of this municipality for domestic
purposes. (Prior code § 13-1082)
CHAPTER 7
EXPLOSIVES
SECTION:
7.07.101: State Code Adopted
7.07.102: Handling Of Explosives; Permit Required
7.07.101: STATE CODE ADOPTED:
Utah Code Annotated title 76, chapter 10, part 3, as amended, entitled
"explosives" is hereby approved and adopted as the applicable code of the city
and, by this reference, is made a part of this code as fully as if set out at
length herein and shall be controlling within the city limits; provided,
however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be
imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2006-33, 2006)
7.07.102: HANDLING OF EXPLOSIVES; PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (1)   Every person who makes or keeps nitroglycerin or other high explosive
substances of five (5) or more pounds of gunpowder within this municipality, or
who carries it through the streets hereof, without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the city recorder, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
   (2)   The city may impose as a condition of receiving and keeping a permit
under this section, that the person comply with reasonable safety standards as
the public safety director may require. (Prior Code § 13-1031)
CHAPTER 8
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
7.08.101: Sale Or Use Of Fireworks
7.08.101: SALE OR USE OF FIREWORKS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to offer for
sale, expose for sale, sell or use, or explode any device commonly used and
sold as "fireworks" in violation of the Utah fireworks act, or any other
explosives, substance or combination of substances, or articles prepared for
the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, other than emergency road flares and
except as specifically and expressly authorized by permit issued by the public
safety director or by the Utah fireworks act. In the event of extreme fire
conditions, however, it shall also be unlawful to sell or use fireworks at
times otherwise allowed by the Utah fireworks act if the public safety director
has issued an order prohibiting the sale and use of fireworks and notice of
such prohibition is posted on the city website and at various locations
throughout the city. (Ord. 2011-08, 2011)
CHAPTER 9
WATERS
SECTION:
7.09.101: State Code Adopted
7.09.101: STATE CODE ADOPTED:
Utah Code Annotated title 76, chapter 10, part 2, as amended, entitled "waters"
is hereby approved and adopted as the applicable code of the city and, by this
reference, is made a part of this code as fully as if set out at length herein,
and shall be controlling within the city limits; provided, however, that any
provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for
violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2006-33, 2006)
CHAPTER 10
SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CITY PARKS, RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, CEMETERIES AND NEAR
MASS GATHERINGS
SECTION:
7.10.101: Definitions
7.10.102: Prohibitions
7.10.103: Exceptions
7.10.104: Posting Of Signs
7.10.101: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
CITY PARK: Means and includes city owned parks and trails, public squares, ball
diamonds, golf courses, soccer fields, other recreational areas, and city owned
cemeteries.
MASS GATHERING: An outdoor assembly of one hundred (100) or more people on city
owned property that reasonably can be expected to continue for two (2) or more
hours.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Means and includes: possession, carrying, or holding a
lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking
equipment, or the lighting or emitting or exhaling of smoke of a pipe, cigar,
or cigarette of any kind, or of any other lighted smoking equipment. (Ord.
2007-19, 2007)
7.10.102: PROHIBITIONS:
Smoking is hereby prohibited in city parks, within twenty five feet (25') of
any bus stop, and within fifty feet (50') of any mass gathering. A violation of
this chapter is an infraction. Police officers shall have the discretion to
issue a "warning" if they deem it is in the best interests of the city for the
first offense. (Ord. 2007-19, 2007)
7.10.103: EXCEPTIONS:
   (1)   American Indian/Alaska Native Ceremonies:
      (a)   A person is exempt from the restrictions of this chapter if the
person:
         (i)   Is a member of an American Indian/Alaska Native tribe whose
members are recognized as eligible for the special programs and services
provided by the United States to American Indians/Alaska Natives who are
members of those tribes;
         (ii)   Is an American Indian/Alaska Native who actively practices an
American Indian/Alaska Native religion, the origin and interpretation of which
is from a traditional American Indian/Alaska Native culture;
         (iii)   Is smoking tobacco using the traditional pipe of an American
Indian/Alaska Native tribal religious ceremony, of which tribe the person is a
member, and is smoking the pipe as part of that ceremony; and
         (iv)   The ceremony is conducted by a pipe carrier, American Indian/
Alaska Native spiritual person, or medicine person recognized by the tribe of
which the person is a member and by the American Indian/Alaska Native
community. (Ord. 2007-19, 2007)
7.10.104: POSTING OF SIGNS:
"No smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a
pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every city
park. (Ord. 2007-19, 2007)
CHAPTER 11
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
Part 1. General Provisions
7.11.101: Purpose
7.11.102: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
7.11.103: Definitions
7.11.104: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
7.11.105: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
7.11.106: Establishment Of Development Permit
7.11.107: Compliance
7.11.108: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
7.11.109: Interpretation
7.11.110: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
Part 2. Administration
7.11.201: Designation Of Floodplain Administrator
7.11.202: Duties And Responsibilities Of Floodplain Administrator
7.11.203: Permit Procedures
7.11.204: Variance Procedures
Part 3. Standards
7.11.301: General Standards
7.11.302: Specific Standards
7.11.303: Standards For Subdivision Proposals
7.11.304: Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
7.11.305: Floodways
Part 4. Penalties For Noncompliance
7.11.401: Penalties
Part 5. Certification
7.11.501: Certification By City
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
7.11.101: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (1)   Protect human life and health;
   (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.102: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
   (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.103: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used herein shall be
interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
chapter its most reasonable application.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30,
VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building: 1) built, in the case of a building
in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers),
or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water, and 2) adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of
up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-
30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting
the definition of "elevated building", even though the lower area is enclosed
by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of
section 60.3(e)(5) of the national flood insurance program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance), and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of interior; or
   (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
      (b)   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without
approved programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   (1)   Built on a single chassis;
   (2)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions, or
   (2)   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter
when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this chapter. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.104: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of Ivins City. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.105: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in recent scientific and engineering flood insurance studies
resulting in issuance of flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) for Washington
County, Utah, and incorporated areas with the effective date of April 2, 2009,
and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.106: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.107: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.108: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2008-22,
2009)
7.11.109: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
   (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.110: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 2008-22,
2009)
PART 2. ADMINISTRATION
7.11.201: DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The Ivins City engineer is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate
sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.202: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
   (1)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter.
   (2)   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site,
including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
   (3)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
   (4)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
   (5)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
   (6)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is the Utah division of water rights, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the federal emergency management agency.
   (7)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
   (8)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with section
 7.11.105 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of part 3 of this chapter.
   (9)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
   (10)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided
that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision). (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.203: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   (1)   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      (a)   Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (b)   Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
      (c)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of section
7.11.302 of this chapter;
      (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      (e)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
section
7.11.202 of this chapter.
   (2)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (a)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (b)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (c)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (d)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (e)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (f)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (g)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (h)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (i)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (j)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.204: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   (1)   Requests For Variances: The city's land use appeal authority shall
hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.
   (2)   Appeal Decision Of Floodplain Administrator: The appeal authority
shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain
administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   (3)   Appeal To Courts: Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of
the appeal authority may appeal such decision in the courts of competent
jurisdiction.
   (4)   Record Of Actions; Report Variances: The floodplain administrator
shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request.
   (5)   Historic Structures: Variances may be issued for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   (6)   Lot Size: Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section
7.11.203 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
   (7)   Conditions Of Variance: Upon consideration of the factors noted above
and the intent of this chapter, the appeal authority may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this chapter.
   (8)   Increase In Flood Levels: Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
   (9)   Preservation Of Historic Character And Design: Variances may be issued
for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
   (10)   Prerequisites For Granting Variances:
      (a)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (b)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (i)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         (ii)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (iii)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (c)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   (11)   Functionally Dependent Uses: Variances may be issued by a community
for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development
necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
      (a)   The criteria outlined in this section are met, and
      (b)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
PART 3. STANDARDS
7.11.301: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
   (1)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   (2)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (3)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   (4)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   (7)   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.302: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been
provided, including sections
7.11.105 and
7.11.303 of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
   (1)   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in
section
7.11.203 of this chapter, is satisfied.
   (2)   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
   (3)   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
      (a)   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
      (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (4)   Manufactured Homes:
      (a)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a
community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      (b)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 1)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or 4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      (c)   Require that manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on
sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30,
AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
this subsection (4) be elevated so that either:
         (i)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation, or
         (ii)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
   (5)   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
      (a)   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days,
      (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
      (c)   Meet the permit requirements of section
7.11.203 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.303: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   (1)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with this chapter.
   (2)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development
permit requirements of sections
7.11.106 and
7.11.203 of this chapter; and the provisions of this part.
   (3)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which are greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5)
acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to sections
7.11.105 and
7.11.202 of this chapter.
   (4)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   (5)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.304: STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES):
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section
7.11.105 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three
feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
   (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
   (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
      (a)   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified), or
      (b)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
   (3)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in section
7.11.103 of this chapter are satisfied.
   (4)   Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
7.11.305: FLOODWAYS:
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section
7.11.105 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
shall apply:
   (1)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (2)   If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this part.
   (3)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
PART 4. PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE
7.11.401: PENALTIES:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a class B misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than
six (6) months, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all
costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
Ivins City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
PART 5. CERTIFICATION
7.11.501: CERTIFICATION BY CITY:
It is hereby found and declared by Ivins City that severe flooding has occurred
in the past within its jurisdiction and will certainly occur within the future;
that flooding is likely to result in infliction of serious personal injury or
death, and is likely to result in substantial injury or destruction of property
within its jurisdiction; that in order to effectively comply with minimum
standards for coverage under the national flood insurance program; and in order
to effectively remedy the situation described herein, it is necessary that this
chapter become effective immediately. (Ord. 2008-22, 2009)
CHAPTER 12
DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS; TRAPPING; FEEDING PREDATORY ANIMALS
SECTION:
7.12.101: Definitions
7.12.102: Discharge Of Firearms Prohibited; Exceptions
7.12.103: Trapping Prohibited; Exceptions
7.12.104: Feeding Predatory Animals Prohibited
7.12.105: Animals At Large Prohibited
7.12.106: Penalty
7.12.101: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
FIREARM: Any gun, revolver, pistol, rifle or firearm of any kind or nature that
ignites a propellant to shoot a projectile.
PREDATORY ANIMAL: Coyotes, foxes, mountain lions, bobcats and any other animal
defined as a predator by law.
TRAPPING: The use of any "body gripping" device which entraps, snares or snaps
closed on any animal, excluding the trapping of rodents, the use of live box or
cage traps, and any trapping deemed necessary and performed by either the Utah
division of wildlife resources or the Ivins City public safety department.
(Ord. 2014-10, 2014)
7.12.102: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in Ivins City, except
under the following circumstances:
   (1)   In self-defense;
   (2)   In any case of any law enforcement officer in the discharge of his/her
duty; or
   (3)   When used for the slaughter of domestic livestock.
   (4)   When used in a below-ground, indoor shooting range that meets the
following minimum requirements:
      (a)   Designated as a shooting range on the building plans submitted to
Ivins City;
      (b)   The walls, floor and ceiling are all made of concrete that is thick
enough to withstand a .50 caliber round as certified (stamped) by a structural
engineer on the plans;
      (c)   A rubber trap behind the targets that is at least four feet thick;
      (d)   A ventilation system plan that has been certified (stamped) by a
mechanical engineer on the plans;
      (e)   A noise mitigation plan certified (stamped) by an acoustical
engineer that would make it so that no shooting in the range can be heard at
the boundaries of the property;
      (f)   The design specifications for the shooting range shall be reviewed
and approved by a qualified shooting consultant approved by the City;
      (g)    The storage of ammunition must meet all applicable fire and
building codes;
      (h)   The range cannot be used as a home-based business; and (Ord. 2014-
10, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-05, 2023)
7.12.103: TRAPPING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to trap, set a trap, or engage in trapping in
Ivins City, except for the following:
   (1)   Any trapping deemed necessary and performed by either the Utah
division of wildlife resources or the Ivins City public safety department;
   (2)   Live box or cage traps;
   (3)   When performed by a licensed trapper following the guidelines of the
most recent "Furbearer Guidebook", provided no lethal conibear type traps are
used and no traps are set within fifty feet (50') of a road or trail with a
sign posted at the head of any trail across open desert areas warning the
public to beware of the possibility of traps beyond fifty feet (50') of the
trail; and
   (4)   When performed on private property by a person having legal ownership
of or right to use the property. (Ord. 2014-10, 2014)
7.12.104: FEEDING PREDATORY ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to feed a predatory animal (excluding bait used
by a licensed trapper) in Ivins City, including the failure to properly dispose
of carcasses as set forth in section
6.05.109 of this code. (Ord. 2014-10, 2014)
7.12.105: ANIMALS AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
See sections
6.01.102 and
6.01.105 of this code. (Ord. 2014-10, 2014)
7.12.106: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter may be enforced either criminally as a class C
misdemeanor or civilly by imposing a monetary penalty under title 4,
"Administrative Code Enforcement", of this code. (Ord. 2014-10, 2014)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL
SECTION:
8.01.101: Jurisdiction Of Offenses
8.01.102: Continuing Violation
8.01.101: JURISDICTION OF OFFENSES:
   (1)   A person is subject to prosecution in this city for an offense which
he commits while either within or outside the city by his own conduct or that
of another for which he is legally accountable if:
      (a)   The offense is committed either wholly or partly within this city;
      (b)   The conduct outside this city constitutes an attempt within this
city;
      (c)   The conduct outside this city constitutes a conspiracy to commit an
offense within this city and an act in furtherance of the conspiracy occurs in
this city; or
      (d)   The conduct within this city constitutes an attempt, solicitation
or conspiracy to commit in another jurisdiction an offense under this code and
such other jurisdiction.
   (2)   An offense is committed partly within this city if either the conduct
which is an element of the offense, or the result which is such an element,
occurs within this city.
   (3)   An offense which is based on an omission to perform a duty imposed by
this code is committed within this city regardless of the location of the
offender at the time of the omission. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
8.01.102: CONTINUING VIOLATION:
In all instances where the violation of these ordinances or any ordinance
hereinafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or
continues to occur. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
CHAPTER 2
CRIMINAL CODE
SECTION:
8.02.101: Utah Criminal Code Adopted
8.02.101: UTAH CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED:
The Utah criminal code, as contained in Utah Code Annotated title 76, as
amended, is hereby approved and adopted as the criminal code of the city. By
this reference, the Utah criminal code is made a part of this code as fully as
if set out at length herein and shall be controlling within the city limits;
provided, however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which
cannot be imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2005-
29, 2005)
CHAPTER 3
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
SECTION:
8.03.101: Utah Controlled Substances Act Adopted
8.03.102: Unlawful Intoxicating Chemical Compounds
8.03.101: UTAH CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ACT ADOPTED:
The Utah controlled substances act, as contained in Utah Code Annotated title
58, chapter 37, as amended, is hereby approved and adopted as the controlled
substances code of the city. By this reference, the Utah controlled substances
act is made a part of this code as fully as if set out at length herein and
shall be controlling within the city limits; provided, however, that any
provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for
violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
8.03.102: UNLAWFUL INTOXICATING CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS:
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including a corporation or other
entity, to manufacture, distribute, use, possess, purchase, attempt to
purchase, sell, publicly display for sale, attempt to sell, give, trade or
barter any one or more of the following chemical compounds and/or substances or
their salts, isomers, homologues, and salts of their isomers and homologues:
      (a)   Salvia divinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently
classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds
thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound,
manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds
or extracts.
      (b)   (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6dimethyl-3(2- methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1- ol, some trade or other name: HU-
210.
      (c)   Naphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone (also known as 1
Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole, some trade or other name:   JWH-018.
      (d)   Naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone (also known as 1-
Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole, some trade or other name:   JWH-073.
      (e)   2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2- yl)phenol, some
trade or other name: CP 47,497 and its C6, C7, C8, and C9 homologues.
      (f)   1-(3-[triflouromethylphenyl]) piperazine, some trade or other name:
   TFMPP.
      (g)   (R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4- morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo
[1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1- napthalenylmethanone, some trade or other
name:   WIN 55,2-212.
      (h)   2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]-5- (2-
methyloctan-2-yl)phenol, some trade or other name: CP 55,940.
      (i)   6,6,9-trimethyl-3-(3-methyloctan-2-yl)-7,8,9,10- tetrahydrobenzo
[c]chromen-1-ol, some trade or other name: Dimethylheptylpyran 1, 2-
dimethylheptyl-3THC, or DMHP, or A- 40824, or EA-1476.
      (j)   [(6S,6aR,9R,10aR)- 9-hydroxy- 6-methyl- 3-[(2R)-5- phenylpentan- 2-
yl]oxy- 5,6,6a,7,8,9,10,10a- octahydrophenanthridin- 1-yl] acetate, some trade
or other name: Levonantradol, or CP 50,556-1.
      (k)   1-(4-methylphenyl)-2-methylaminopropan-1-one, some trade or other
name: Mephedrone, 4-methylmethcathinone, 4-MMC or 4- methylephedrone.
      (l)   Or any similar structural analogs.
   (2)   It is not an offense under this section if the person was acting at
the direction of an authorized agent of Ivins City to enforce or ensure
compliance with this law prohibiting the sale of the aforementioned
intoxicating chemical compound.
   (3)   If any of the aforementioned intoxicating chemical compounds are found
in the possession of any person, they may be confiscated and destroyed by law
enforcement officials.
   (4)   This section does not apply to any person who commits any act
described in this section pursuant to the lawful direction or prescription of a
licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act. This
section likewise does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for a medical
purpose or dental purpose.
   (5)   Any person found to be in violation of this section will be guilty of
a class B misdemeanor subject to a term of imprisonment not to exceed six (6)
months and/or a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or both.
Each day during which violation of subsection (1) of this section occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (6)   Ivins City shall have the authority to seek an injunction to compel
compliance of any business which fails or refuses to comply with this section.
(Ord. 2010-18, 2010)
CHAPTER 4
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
8.04.101: Utah Drug Paraphernalia Act Adopted
8.04.101: UTAH DRUG PARAPHERNALIA ACT ADOPTED:
The Utah drug paraphernalia act, as contained in Utah Code Annotated title 58,
chapter 37a, as amended, is hereby approved and adopted as the drug
paraphernalia code of the city. By this reference, the Utah drug paraphernalia
act is made a part of this code as fully as if set out at length herein and
shall be controlling within the city limits; provided, however, that any
provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for
violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
CHAPTER 5
IMITATION CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
SECTION:
8.05.101: Imitation Controlled Substances Act Adopted
8.05.101: IMITATION CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ACT ADOPTED:
The imitation controlled substances act, as contained in Utah Code Annotated
title 58, chapter 37b, as amended, is hereby approved and adopted as the
imitation controlled substances code of the city. By this reference, the
imitation controlled substances act is made a part of this code as fully as if
set out at length herein and shall be controlling within the city limits;
provided, however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which
cannot be imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2005-
29, 2005)
CHAPTER 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL; CRIMINAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
8.06.101: Alcoholic Beverage Control Act; Criminal Offenses Adopted
8.06.101: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT; CRIMINAL OFFENSES ADOPTED:
That portion of the alcoholic beverage control act contained in Utah Code
Annotated title 32A, chapter 12, together with section 32A-1-105, as amended,
is hereby approved and adopted as part of the alcoholic beverage control code
of the city. By this reference, the referenced portions of the alcoholic
beverage control act are made a part of this code as fully as if set out at
length herein and shall be controlling within the city limits; provided,
however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be
imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
CHAPTER 7
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
SECTION:
Part 1. Definitions
8.07.101: Definitions
Part 2. Curfew
8.07.201: Curfew
8.07.202: Liability Of Parents And Businesses
8.07.203: Aiding Minor To Violate Curfew
8.07.204: Exceptions
8.07.205: Enforcement
Part 3. Offenses Where Beer Sold
8.07.301: Minors Prohibited Where Beer Sold
Part 4. Penalties
8.07.401: Penalty
PART 1. DEFINITIONS
8.07.101: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CARE AND CUSTODY: The legal authority of a parent or guardian to supervise or
otherwise be responsible for a minor, or the express authority given from such
parent or legal guardian of a minor to supervise or otherwise be responsible
for the activities and care of the minor.
EMERGENCY ERRAND: Any errand or travel undertaken to directly and immediately
seek to prevent or reduce the consequences of an illness or injury, criminal or
potential criminal activity, or fire or other accident, and shall include the
seeking of aid and assistance from medical or emergency response personnel or
the purchase of medications.
MINOR: An unmarried, unemancipated person who is not a member of the armed
forces of the United States and who is under the age of eighteen (18) years of
age.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place open to the public, whether privately or publicly
owned, including, but not limited to, parking lots and the interiors and
exteriors of commercial establishments such as restaurants, stores or places of
entertainment. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
PART 2. CURFEW
8.07.201: CURFEW:
   (1)   Under Sixteen: It is unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen
(16) years to be or remain upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public place in
the city between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00)
A.M. of the day immediately following.
   (2)   Under Eighteen: It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen
(18) years to be or remain upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public place in
the city between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. of the day immediately following. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
8.07.202: LIABILITY OF PARENTS AND BUSINESSES:
   (1)   Parents: It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person
having care and custody of any minor to allow or permit, whether knowingly or
by exercise of insufficient parental control, any minor to remain or loiter in
any public place or in any other restricted place in violation of the curfew
provisions set forth in section
8.07.201 of this chapter.
   (2)   Businesses: It shall be unlawful for any person operating a business
to knowingly permit any minor to remain on the premises of such business in
violation of the curfew set forth in section
 8.07.201 of this chapter. This subsection, however, shall not apply to any
minor who is lawfully employed on the premises. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
8.07.203: AIDING MINOR TO VIOLATE CURFEW:
It is unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to
violate the provisions of this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to use
any influence or otherwise to entice or persuade any minor from his or her
parents, guardians or other persons having care and custody of such minor
without the consent of such parents, guardians or custodians. (Ord. 2005-29,
2005)
8.07.204: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any circumstance in which the
minor is:
   (1)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other responsible adult having
care and custody of such minor;
   (2)   Engaged in a legitimate trade, employment or occupation that requires
the minor's presence in or on the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places
while working at or traveling to or from such employment;
   (3)   Engaged on an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent,
guardian or other responsible person having care and custody of such minor;
   (4)   In a motor vehicle engaged in normal interstate travel beginning in,
traveling through, or ending in the city;
   (5)   Attending or engaged in traveling between the minor's home or place of
residence and a place where any religious, municipal, social, entertainment,
sporting, political, library or school function is occurring;
   (6)   Within the boundaries of the minor's place of residence; or
   (7)   Engaged in the exercise of first amendment rights, such as freedom of
speech, freedom of assembly or freedom of religion. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
8.07.205: ENFORCEMENT:
   (1)   Any minor who is in violation of the provisions of this chapter is
subject to arrest and citation.
   (2)   Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent,
guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of the minor.
   (3)   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person charged
with the care and custody of a minor, who is in violation of this chapter, to
knowingly refuse to appear and take custody of said minor after being ordered
to do so by a public safety officer. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
PART 3. OFFENSES WHERE BEER SOLD
8.07.301: MINORS PROHIBITED WHERE BEER SOLD:
   (1)   It is unlawful for the owner, keeper, manager, licensee or employee in
any establishment or place where beer is sold or offered for sale for
consumption on the premises, to permit or allow any person under the age of
twenty one (21) years to visit or frequent or remain in such establishment
where beer is sold or offered for sale for consumption on the premises.
   (2)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
to visit or frequent or remain in such establishment where beer is sold or
offered for sale for consumption on the premises.
   (3)   Establishments which qualify and maintain a current state restaurant
liquor permit, along with the required city business license, are exempt from
this section. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
PART 4. PENALTIES
8.07.401: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
CHAPTER 8
DECEPTIVE BUSINESS PRACTICES
SECTION:
8.08.101: Deceptive Business Practices
8.08.102: Affirmative Defense
8.08.103: Penalty
8.08.101: DECEPTIVE BUSINESS PRACTICES:
In addition to the offenses contained in Utah Code Annotated title 76, as
amended, and as adopted herein, the following shall also be unlawful as
deceptive business practices:
   (1)   Any person making a false or misleading statement in any advertisement
addressed to the public or to a substantial segment thereof for the purpose of
promoting the purchase or sale of property or services;
   (2)   Any person who offers, by advertising or other means of communication,
to the public or a substantial number of persons, property or services as part
of a scheme or plan, with intent not to sell or provide the advertised property
or services:
      (a)   At the price which he offered them;
      (b)   In a quantity sufficient to meet the reasonably expected public
demand, unless the quantity is specifically stated in the advertisement; or
      (c)   At all. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
8.08.102: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this chapter that the
defendant's conduct was not knowing or reckless. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
8.08.103: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
CHAPTER 9
OFFENSES AGAINST FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
8.09.101: Interference With Firefighters In Discharge Of Duties
8.09.102: Unlawful Interference With Officers, Apparatus And Water
8.09.103: Tampering With Fire Alarm
8.09.104: Penalty
8.09.101: INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTERS IN DISCHARGE OF DUTIES:
It is unlawful for any person at the scene of any fire to disobey the lawful
orders of any public officer or firefighter, or offer any resistance to or
interfere with the efforts of any firefighter or company of firefighters to
extinguish a fire, or to engage in any disorderly conduct calculated to prevent
the fire from being extinguished, or to forbid, prevent or dissuade others from
assisting to extinguish the fire. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
8.09.102: UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS, APPARATUS AND WATER:
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully hinder any officer or firefighter in
the discharge of his duty at a fire, or in any manner to injure, deface or
destroy any engine, hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the city, or to
interfere with any fire company or firefighter, or to wilfully break or injure
any water pipe, or interfere with the water or its source of supply. (Ord.
2005-29, 2005)
8.09.103: TAMPERING WITH FIRE ALARM:
It is unlawful for any person to make a false fire alarm or to tamper with or
remove any part of a fire alarm system. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
8.09.104: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2005-29, 2005)
CHAPTER 10
NOISE
SECTION:
8.10.101: Generally
8.10.102: Construction Hours And Activities
8.10.103: Emergencies
8.10.104: Cease And Desist Orders
8.10.105: Penalties
8.10.101: GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace or quiet of any
neighborhood by making, continuing, or causing to be made or continued, any
loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others
within the limits of the city. (Ord. 2005-52, 2005)
8.10.102: CONSTRUCTION HOURS AND ACTIVITIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the excavation, construction,
demolition, alteration or repair of any building, street, walk, sewer or
utility line, or to engage in any other construction activities related or
incidental thereto, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the day immediately following. However, pouring concrete
during the months of April through October may begin at three o'clock (3:00)
A.M. rather than six o'clock (6:00) A.M. It shall also be unlawful to make,
continue or cause any construction noise associated with construction
activities during prohibited hours, including, without limitation: noise
attributed to workers arriving on the job (i.e., loud talking, laughing or
singing); vehicular noise; the playing of radios or other music; assembling,
moving or stacking of construction materials; deliveries; or other site related
construction noise. If unusual circumstances exist that would cause extreme
hardship, the city manager may issue a temporary written exception to the
construction hours set forth herein, provided there has been a written request
submitted therefor; and reasonable conditions can be imposed to minimize any
adverse effects to neighboring or nearby property owners. (Ord. 2005-52, 2005)
8.10.103: EMERGENCIES:
The foregoing shall not apply to city departments and employees attempting to
preserve the public health, safety and welfare, including, without limitation,
the preservation of life, public or private property and/or infrastructure in
cases of flooding, earthquake, fire or other emergency. (Ord. 2005-52, 2005)
8.10.104: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
Law enforcement officers are hereby authorized and directed to order any person
determined to be in violation of this chapter to immediately cease and desist
from any and all activities which violate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2005-52, 2005)
8.10.105: PENALTIES:
   (1)   Any person who commits, permits, assists in or attempts any violation
of this chapter, whether by act or omission, is hereby deemed to be a
"responsible person" as used in the city administrative code enforcement
ordinance and shall be liable for all civil penalties set forth therein.
   (2)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and any person who knowingly violates or authorizes
the violation of a cease and desist order from law enforcement concerning a
violation of this chapter shall be subject to immediate arrest by law
enforcement officers. (Ord. 2005-52, 2005)
TITLE 9
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
MOTOR VEHICLE CODE
SECTION:
9.01.101: Motor Vehicle Act Adopted
9.01.101: MOTOR VEHICLE ACT ADOPTED:
The motor vehicle act, as contained in Utah Code Annotated title 41, chapter
1a, as amended, is hereby approved and adopted as the motor vehicle code of the
city. By this reference, the motor vehicle act is made a part of this code as
fully as if set out at length herein and shall be controlling within the city
limits; provided, however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty
which cannot be imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (Ord.
2005-31, 2005)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9.02.101: Utah Traffic Rules And Regulations Act Adopted
9.02.102: Engine Brake Illegal; Penalty
9.02.101: UTAH TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS ACT ADOPTED:
The Utah traffic rules and regulations, as contained in Utah Code Annotated
title 41, chapter 6a, as amended, is hereby approved and adopted as the traffic
rules and regulations code of the city. By this reference, the Utah traffic
rules and regulations are made a part of this code as fully as if set out at
length herein and shall be controlling within the city limits; provided,
however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be
imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2005-31, 2005)
9.02.102: ENGINE BRAKE ILLEGAL; PENALTY:
   (1)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle
with a dynamic braking device engaged within the boundaries of the city, except
to avert imminent collision or other similar uncommon dangers. The emitting of
any compression noise shall be prima facie evidence of the use of engine
compression.
   (2)   “Dynamic brake device”, “Engine Compression Brake”, “Jacobs Brake” or
as commonly referred to as “Jake Brake”, means a device used primarily on
trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to
an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
   (3)   Any person violating the dynamic braking device provisions shall be
guilty of a class C misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2023-17, 2023)
CHAPTER 3
DRIVING BY MINORS
SECTION:
9.03.101: Utah Driving By Minors Laws Adopted
9.03.101: UTAH DRIVING BY MINORS LAWS ADOPTED:
The Utah driving by minors laws, as contained in Utah Code Annotated title 41,
chapter 8, as amended, is hereby approved and adopted as the driving by minors
code of the city. By this reference, the Utah driving by minors laws are made a
part of this code as fully as if set out at length herein and shall be
controlling within the city limits; provided, however, that any provision of
the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a city
ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2005-31, 2005)
CHAPTER 4
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY OF MOTOR VEHICLE OWNERS AND OPERATORS
SECTION:
9.04.101: Financial Responsibility Of Motor Vehicle Owners And Operators Act
Adopted
9.04.101: FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY OF MOTOR VEHICLE OWNERS AND OPERATORS ACT
ADOPTED:
The financial responsibility of motor vehicle owners and operators act, as
contained in Utah Code Annotated title 41, chapter 12a, as amended, is hereby
approved and adopted as the financial responsibility of motor vehicle owners
and operators code of the city. By this reference, the financial responsibility
of motor vehicle owners and operators act is made a part of this code as fully
as if set out at length herein and shall be controlling within the city limits;
provided, however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which
cannot be imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2005-
31, 2005)
CHAPTER 5
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES
SECTION:
9.05.101: Utah Off Highway Vehicles Act Adopted
9.05.101: UTAH OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES ACT ADOPTED:
The Utah off highway vehicles act, as contained in Utah Code Annotated title
41, chapter 22, as amended, is hereby approved and adopted as the off highway
vehicles code of the city. By this reference, the Utah off highway vehicles act
is made a part of this code as fully as if set out at length herein and shall
be controlling within the city limits; provided, however, that any provision of
the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a city
ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2005-31, 2005)
CHAPTER 6
MOTOR VEHICLE INSURANCE LAWS
SECTION:
9.06.101: Utah Motor Vehicle Insurance Laws Adopted
9.06.101: UTAH MOTOR VEHICLE INSURANCE LAWS ADOPTED:
The Utah motor vehicle insurance laws, as contained in Utah Code Annotated
title 31A, chapter 22, part 3, as amended, is hereby approved and adopted as
the motor vehicle insurance code of the city. By this reference, the Utah motor
vehicle insurance laws are made a part of this code as fully as if set out at
length herein and shall be controlling within the city limits; provided,
however, that any provision of the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be
imposed for violation of a city ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2005-31, 2005)
CHAPTER 7
UNIFORM DRIVER'S LICENSE ACT
SECTION:
9.07.101: Uniform Driver's License Act Adopted
9.07.101: UNIFORM DRIVER'S LICENSE ACT ADOPTED:
The uniform driver's license act, as contained in Utah Code Annotated title 53,
chapter 3, as amended, is hereby approved and adopted as the driver's license
code of the city. By this reference, the uniform driver's license act is made a
part of this code as fully as if set out at length herein and shall be
controlling within the city limits; provided, however, that any provision of
the foregoing having a penalty which cannot be imposed for violation of a city
ordinance is not adopted. (Ord. 2005-31, 2005)
CHAPTER 8
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
SECTION:
9.08.101: Definitions
9.08.102: Parking Or Blocking Streets Or Highways
9.08.103: Unlawful Parking
9.08.104: Authorization For Removal Of Vehicle
9.08.105: Signs
9.08.101: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
COMMERCIAL VAN: Any enclosed vehicle with a motor used commercially to
transport people or property, to include the size that would make parking along
city streets inappropriate.
SEMITRUCK/TRAILER: Any vehicle or combination truck/trailer that has at least
three (3) axles used for cargo and is of the type commonly used for commercial
transport purposes. (Ord. 2005-31, 2005)
9.08.102: PARKING OR BLOCKING STREETS OR HIGHWAYS:
In addition to the parking provisions contained in the Utah traffic code, as
adopted by this city, it shall be a class B misdemeanor for any person to:
   (1)   Remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in such a
manner as to obstruct the free passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
thereon;
   (2)   Wilfully remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in
such manner for more than one minute after being requested to move by any
police officer;
   (3)   Wilfully remain on such street or highway in such manner as to
obstruct the free passage of any person or vehicle into or out of any property
abutting upon the street or highway or any property having access to such
street or highway. (Ord. 2005-31, 2005)
9.08.103: UNLAWFUL PARKING:
   (1)   Parking At Curb: No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of the
vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets. It is unlawful to stand or
park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two
(2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly
established curb line, except on those streets which have been marked for angle
parking; then vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by
such marks.
   (2)   Vehicles For Sale: It is unlawful to park any vehicle on any street
for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle from which
merchandise is peddled on any business street.
   (3)   Loading Zone: When so posted, it is unlawful for the driver of a
passenger vehicle to stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer
than is permitted by the posted sign for the loading or unloading of
passengers, or for the driver to stand or park any freight carrying vehicle for
a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials
in any place designated as a loading zone and marked as such.
   (4)   Parking Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person, except physicians
on emergency calls or designated emergency vehicles when properly posted, to
park any motor vehicle on any street in violation of the posted restrictions.
   (5)   Alleys: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such manner
or under such conditions as to leave less than ten feet (10') of the width of
the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
   (6)   Cab Stands And Bus Stands: No motor vehicle other than a licensed
taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a taxicab stand
and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a
bus loading zone. (Ord. 2005-31, 2005)
   (7)   Parking Prohibited:
      (a)   Semitruck/Trailers And Commercial Vehicles: It is unlawful for any
person to park or leave standing on any public road right of way, street, alley
or municipal property a semitruck/trailer combination, semitruck tractor,
semitruck trailer, commercial trailer or any two (2) ton or greater capacity
commercial truck/van or greater than eight feet (8') in overall height, except
for the commercial delivery or loading of cargo, and for such purpose the
parking or standing shall be limited to the period of time of actual loading or
unloading. (Ord. 2008-18, 2008)
      (b)   Boats, Trailers, Tractors And Recreation Vehicles: It is unlawful
for any person to park or leave standing on any public road right of way,
street, alley or municipal property any boat, trailer, tractor or recreation
vehicle.
      (c)   Motor Homes And Travel Trailers: It is unlawful for any person to
park or leave standing on any public road right of way, street, alley, or
municipal property a motor home or travel trailer with a tow vehicle attached,
without first obtaining a permit allowing the temporary parking of such a
vehicle. The permit will be issued to city residents only upon application at
the city office. The permit will allow the parking of a motor home, or travel
trailer with a tow vehicle attached, only on a public road right of way,
street, or alley that is contiguous to, and in front of, the property owned by
the city resident making the application for the permit. The permit will be
limited to a total of thirty (30) days per year to use at the discretion of the
applicant, not to exceed ten (10) days in duration per permit. The permit must
be displayed in the front window of the motor home or tow vehicle of the travel
trailer while such vehicle is parked. It is unlawful for any person to park or
leave standing on any public road right of way, street, alley or municipal
property a travel trailer without a tow vehicle attached.
      (d)   Parking Limited To Seventy Two Hours: It is unlawful for any person
to stop, park or leave standing upon any public road right of way within the
city for more than seventy two (72) hours, any vehicle not covered in items
above.
      (e)   Obstruction Prohibited: An unobstructed width not less than
eighteen feet (18') of the roadway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left
for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such stopped
vehicles shall be available from a distance of two hundred feet (200') in each
direction upon such roadway.
      (f)   Exceptions: The city manager or designee may approve exceptions to
the parking prohibitions of this section for road construction or maintenance,
public safety emergencies and special events.
   (8)   Penalty: Any person who violates the provisions of this section is
guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 2005-31, 2005)
9.08.104: AUTHORIZATION FOR REMOVAL OF VEHICLE:
Whenever any public safety officer finds a vehicle in violation of this
chapter, such officer is hereby authorized to move the vehicle or cause the
vehicle to be removed, to the nearest garage or other place of safety, any
vehicle at the vehicle owner's expense. (Ord. 2005-31, 2005)
9.08.105: SIGNS:
The governing body may authorize or direct any person employed by the
municipality to erect or install any sign or traffic control device required to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-31, 2005)
TITLE 10
PUBLIC SERVICES
CHAPTER 1
WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
10.01.101: Water Department And System Created
10.01.102: Superintendent
10.01.103: Superintendent Duties
10.01.104: Application For Water Connection
10.01.105: Application For Water Connection By Subdivider
10.01.106: Application For Water Service
10.01.107: Rates And Connection Fees
10.01.108: Water Deposit Fee
10.01.109: When Cash Payment Required
10.01.110: Special Rates And Conditions
10.01.111: Board Of Equalization, Rates And Rebates
10.01.112: Use Without Payment Prohibited
10.01.113: Discontinuance Of Service For Delinquent Payments
10.01.114: Turning On Water After Being Turned Off Prohibited
10.01.115: Separate Connections
10.01.116: Unauthorized Users
10.01.117: Period For Visitors
10.01.118: Pipes To Be Kept In Good Repair
10.01.119: Quality Of Service Pipe
10.01.120: Faulty Equipment
10.01.121: Sprinkling Vehicles
10.01.122: Department To Have Free Access
10.01.123: Nonliability For Damages
10.01.124: Water Not Supplied For Motors Or Siphons
10.01.125: Sprinklers
10.01.126: Conservation Stages
10.01.127: Emergency Restriction
10.01.128: Water Meters
10.01.129: Permits For Installation
10.01.130: Applications For Installation Permit
10.01.131: Moving Or Replacement Of Water Lines
10.01.132: Permits Not To Be Issued; When
10.01.133: Discontinuance Of Service
10.01.134: Fire Hydrants
10.01.135: Extension Of Water Mains Within City
10.01.136: Cost Of Extensions Determined
10.01.137: Amount Of Cost To Be Deposited With City Recorder
10.01.138: Return Of Money; Forfeiture
10.01.139: Ownership Of Extension
10.01.140: Supply Of Water Services To Person Outside Municipal Limits
10.01.141: Petition For Service
10.01.142: Extensions May Be Master Metered
10.01.143: Cost Of Extensions To Be Determined By Water Superintendent
10.01.101: WATER DEPARTMENT AND SYSTEM CREATED:
The water department of the city is created. It shall administer the operation
and maintenance of the water system of the city. (Prior Code § 14-110)
10.01.102: SUPERINTENDENT:
Unless delegated to someone else in the future, the public works director shall
act as the superintendent of the water department. (Prior Code § 14-111)
10.01.103: SUPERINTENDENT DUTIES:
The superintendent of the water department shall manage and supervise the
municipal water system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and pursuant
to resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the city council from time to
time prescribing his powers and duties and directing the manner and frequency
with which he shall make reports to the mayor relating to the water system. All
of the functions and activities of the superintendent shall be carried on under
the direction of the mayor. (Prior Code § 14-112)
10.01.104: APPLICATION FOR WATER CONNECTION:
Any person, other than a subdivider or developer seeking multiple connections,
who desires or is required to secure a new connection to the municipal water
system, shall file with the water department for each such connection a written
and signed connection application in substantially the following form:
   APPLICATION FOR WATER CONNECTION
I hereby apply to Ivins City for permission to connect my premises at
                         with the city of Ivins water system and hereby agree
as follows:
(1) The city shall make the requested connection from its water main to and
including the water meter and up to my property line or to the meter if the
meter is installed within my property. I agree to pay the city the connection
charges and fees as may be fixed by the city council by resolution or
ordinance, including a reservoir charge if so provided.
(2) Additionally, I agree to pay $            for inspection and overhead
charges and other miscellaneous costs of the city as may be fixed by the city
council by resolution or ordinance.
(a) The work of extending the water connection from the point to which the city
installs it to the place at which the water is to be used shall be my
responsibility and shall be performed at my sole cost.
(b) The connection so made by the city, including the meter, shall remain the
property of the city at all times, and the city shall have access thereto at
all times.
(3) The location of the meter, whether on my premises or at some point near my
premises, may be decided solely by the city.
(4) Before making connection with the water system, I shall cause the plumbing
upon my premises to be inspected by the city, and if the plumbing is not
approved, I will cause the plumbing to be rectified at my own expense to meet
the requirements of the city or of any other governmental agency having
jurisdiction to regulate the water system within the city.
(5) I will be bound by the rules, regulations, resolutions or ordinances
enacted now or hereafter by the city applicable to the city water system.
(6) The purpose for which the water connection will be used is
                              .
(7) The city shall have free access to the lines and meters installed under
this agreement and, at reasonable times, through my property if necessary.
Dated this                  day of        , 20   .
(Applicant)
(Prior Code § 14-113)
10.01.105: APPLICATION FOR WATER CONNECTION BY SUBDIVIDER:
Whenever a subdivider or developer desires or is required to install water
connections and extensions for a subdivision or development, the subdivider or
developer shall enter into a written extension agreement, which shall
constitute an application for permission to make the extensions and connections
and an agreement specifying the terms and conditions under which the water
extensions and connections shall be made and the payments that shall be
required. (Prior Code § 14-114)
10.01.106: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE:
Any property owner of record desiring a supply of water from the city system to
their property, where water service and adequate water supply is available,
shall apply therefor to the city and file an agreement with the city. The
agreement and application shall be in substantially the following form:
   APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE
The undersigned property owner of record hereby applies for water service from
Ivins City, Utah, for the premises located at                       , and
hereby agrees:
(1) To pay all charges for such water service as are fixed from time to time by
the Ivins City council. Any charges for water service not paid by the twentieth
day of the month charges are due shall be assessed a five percent (5%) penalty
on the unpaid balance.
(2) To be bound by the rules, regulations, resolutions or ordinances enacted or
adopted by the city applicable to the city water system.
(3) To deposit with the city, at the time of filing this application, the
amount specified in the Ivins City consolidated fee schedule as security for
the payment for services. It is agreed and understood that the city may, but is
not required to, apply the deposit to bills due for prior service. The city
shall have the right to discontinue service as provided even though the deposit
has not been applied to the payment of past due bills for service. Upon final
settlement of the applicant's account, any unused balance of the deposit shall
be refunded to the applicant.
(4) The deposit shall not be considered an advance payment for any service.
Charges and unpaid accounts shall be considered delinquent notwithstanding the
existence of the deposit, and the applicant or user of the water service shall
not have the right to compel the city to apply the deposit to any account to
avoid delinquency.
(5) The deposit shall be credited to applicant's account after one year of
timely payments or refunded upon applicant's request and proof of transfer of
ownership of the property resulting in applicant's termination of water
service.
(6) In the event two (2) of applicant's checks are returned to the city for
nonsufficient funds (NSF) within a twelve (12) month period, then the applicant
shall be required to pay for services in cash for the next twelve (12) months.
(7) If the applicant or user of the water service fails to pay the water
charges within thirty (30) days of the date due, or if the occupant of the
premises fails to conform to the ordinances and regulations established by the
city regulating the use of the water system, the city shall have the right to
discontinue the water service after written notice to discontinue service. To
avoid discontinuance of service, payment in full of all delinquent charges and
reconnection fees, if applicable, or elimination of the failure to conform with
the ordinances and regulations established by the city regulating the use of
the water system, must be made by close of five (5) business days from the date
of the notice to discontinue service. Such notice shall be mailed to the
address on the application for water service and notice shall be deemed
effective upon the date affixed to the notice.
(8) In the event water service is discontinued, the city shall have the right
to charge a water reconnection fee in the amount specified in the Ivins City
consolidated fee schedule, and may, in addition, require a delinquent water
customer to file a new application with a deposit in the amount specified in
the Ivins City consolidated fee schedule to be held until the service is
disconnected and all related charges are fully paid. In the case of water
remaining off for a period of more than forty eight (48) hours due to
nonpayment, the building shall be considered uninhabitable and will be subject
to having the certificate of occupancy revoked.
(9) The owner of any property or premises containing a building or structure
which is used for human occupancy or which is connected to culinary water,
whether the water is turned on or off, shall be responsible for the then
current base water fee in addition to all other services provided by the city,
which include garbage, sewer (if applicable) and storm drain fees. These fees
are applicable whether or not the services are being used (i.e., seasonal
residents).
Dated this               day of              , 20       .
             
(Applicant) - Print - Sign
(Ord. 2007-06, 2007)
10.01.107: RATES AND CONNECTION FEES:
The rates, penalty fee for delinquency in payment, connection fee, reservoir
fee, inspection fee and other charges incidental to connection and services
from the municipal water system shall be fixed from time to time by resolution
enacted by the city council. The city council may from time to time promulgate
rules for levying, billing, guaranteeing and collecting charges for water
services and all other rules necessary for the management and control of the
water system. Rates for services furnished shall be uniform with respect to
each class or classes of service established or that may hereafter be
established. (Prior code § 14-117)
10.01.108: WATER DEPOSIT FEE:
   (1)   All new applications for water service shall be accompanied by a
deposit in the amount specified in the Ivins City consolidated fee schedule as
security for the payment for services. The city may waive this requirement if a
customer has at least a one year history of on time payments and a deposit has
previously been credited to their account. The city may, but is not required
to, apply the deposit to bills due for prior service. The city shall have the
right to discontinue service as provided even though the deposit has not been
applied to the payment of past due bills for service. Upon final settlement of
the applicant's account, any unused balance of the deposit shall be refunded to
the applicant.
   (2)   The deposit shall not be considered an advance payment for any
service. Charges and unpaid accounts shall be considered delinquent
notwithstanding the existence of the deposit, and the applicant or user of the
water service shall not have the right to compel the city to apply the deposit
to any account to avoid delinquency.
   (3)   The deposit shall be credited to applicant's account after one year of
timely payments or refunded upon applicant's request and proof of transfer of
ownership of the property resulting in applicant's termination of water
service. (Ord. 2012-09, 2012)
10.01.109: WHEN CASH PAYMENT REQUIRED:
In the event two (2) checks are returned to the city for nonsufficient funds
(NSF) within a twelve (12) month period, then the applicant or user shall be
required to pay for services in cash for the next twelve (12) months. (Ord.
2006-11, 2006)
10.01.110: SPECIAL RATES AND CONDITIONS:
The city council may, from time to time, fix by agreement or resolution special
rates and conditions for users using exceptionally large amounts of water
service or making use of the water system under exceptional circumstances, upon
such terms and conditions as they may deem proper. (Prior Code § 14-118)
10.01.111: BOARD OF EQUALIZATION, RATES AND REBATES:
The city council shall act as the board of equalization of water rates to hear
complaints and make corrections of any assessments deemed to be illegal,
unequal or unjust. They may, if they see fit, rebate all or any part of the
water bill of any indigent person. (Prior Code § 14-119)
10.01.112: USE WITHOUT PAYMENT PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person by himself, family, servants or agents to utilize
the municipal water or sewer system without paying therefor, as herein provided
or, without authority, to open any fire hydrant, stopcock, valve or other
fixtures attached to the system of water supply unless it is done pursuant to
proper application, agreement or resolution. It is unlawful to injure, deface
or impair any part or appurtenance of the water or sewer system, or to cast
anything into any reservoir or tank belonging to the water system. (Prior Code
§ 14-120)
10.01.113: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
   (1)   The city shall furnish to each user, or mail to, or leave at the place
of residence or usual place of business, a written or printed statement stating
the amount of water service charges assessed against the user once each month.
The statement shall specify the amount of the bill for the water service and
the place of payment and date due.
   (2)   Any charges for water service not paid by the twentieth day of the
month charges are due shall be assessed a five percent (5%) penalty on the
unpaid balance.
   (3)   If any person fails to pay the water charges within thirty (30) days
of the date due, the city shall give the customer notice, in writing, of intent
to discontinue the service (notice to discontinue service) unless the customer
pays the bill in full by close of business, five (5) business days from the
date of notice. The notice to discontinue service shall specify the amount due
for the water service and the date due. Such notice to discontinue service
shall be mailed to the address on the application for water service agreement,
and notice shall be deemed effective upon the date affixed to the notice to
discontinue service.
   (4)   If the water service is thereafter discontinued for failure to make
payment, all delinquent water charges owed by the customer and a water
reconnection charge in the amount specified in the city consolidated fee
schedule shall be paid by cash, money order, debit card or credit card before
the water service to the premises shall again be provided.
   (5)   If water service is discontinued for failure to make payment, a
delinquent customer may also be required to file a new application with a
deposit in the amount specified in the city consolidated fee schedule if the
previous deposit has been applied to the payment of the delinquent bills. This
deposit shall be held by the city as security for the payment of future water
bills, and this deposit shall be returned only when service is disconnected and
all related charges are fully paid.
   (6)   The city treasurer is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the
payment of all delinquent water charges. The city treasurer shall have the
right to apply any unpaid balance to the deposit and require the delinquent
water user to restore the deposit immediately or suffer a discontinuance of
service under the procedures provided in this section.
   (7)   Any person given notice of the city's intent to discontinue water
service as a result of delinquent payments may dispute the notice to
discontinue service by filing a written protest with the city recorder before
the close of business, five (5) business days from the date of the notice to
discontinue service and prior to the disconnection of the water service. The
written protest shall include the reasons for the dispute of the notice to
discontinue service. The city recorder shall submit all written protests to the
city hearing officer, who shall set a hearing within five (5) business days to
hear the written protest. The city hearing officer shall have the authority to
review the reasons for dispute and make a determination on the merits of the
protest, but shall not have authority to consider questions of hardship or
inability to pay. Payment of all delinquent charges or adjusted delinquent
charges determined by the city hearing officer shall be paid in cash, money
order, debit card or credit card before the close of business, three (3)
business days from the date of the protest hearing before the city hearing
officer.
   (8)   The city hearing officer shall be the city manager. The city recorder
shall serve as the city hearing officer as alternate to the city manager. (Ord.
2007-06, 2-1-2007)
10.01.114: TURNING ON WATER AFTER BEING TURNED OFF PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, after the water has been turned off from the
premises for nonpayment of water charges or other violation of the ordinances,
rules, regulations or resolutions pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or
allow the water to be turned on or used without authority from the
superintendent or city recorder. (Prior Code § 14-122)
10.01.115: SEPARATE CONNECTIONS:
It is unlawful for two (2) or more families or service users to be supplied
from the same service pipe, connection or water meter unless special permission
for such combination usage has been granted by the city council and the
premises served are owned by the same owner. In all such cases, a failure on
the part of any one of the users to comply with this section shall warrant a
withholding of a supply of water through the service connections until
compliance or payment has been made, and in any event, the property owner shall
be primarily liable to the city for all water services utilized on all such
premises. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the power of the city to
require separate pipes, connections or meters at a subsequent time. (Prior Code
§ 14-123)
10.01.116: UNAUTHORIZED USERS:
It is unlawful for any water service user to permit any person from other
premises or any unauthorized person to use or obtain water services regularly
from his premises or water facilities, either outside or inside his premises.
(Prior Code § 14-124)
10.01.117: PERIOD FOR VISITORS:
Individuals visiting the premises of an authorized user in a recreational
vehicle, not including a mobile home, and continuing to live therein during the
period of visitation may receive water service from the service pipes or
facilities of the host during the visitation period which shall not exceed one
month. Continued use thereafter shall be deemed unauthorized and violative of
the provisions of this chapter relating to separate connections and
unauthorized use. (Prior Code § 14-125)
10.01.118: PIPES TO BE KEPT IN GOOD REPAIR:
All users of water services shall keep their service pipes and connections and
other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at their own expense.
No person, except under the direction of the water superintendent, shall be
allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of laying, removing or repairing
any service pipe. (Prior Code § 14-126)
10.01.119: QUALITY OF SERVICE PIPE:
   (1)   All service and other pipe used in conjunction with the water services
of the city shall be of such material, quality and specifications as the city
council may from time to time by resolution provide, and shall be installed at
such distances belowground as may be specified by regulations relating to the
water department. All work, alterations or extensions affecting water pipes
shall be subject to the acceptance of the water superintendent, and no
connections with any water mains shall be made without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the city recorder.
   (2)   No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water pipes across lots or
buildings to adjoining premises without permission from the water
superintendent and subject to such requirements relating to controls as may be
imposed by him. (Prior Code § 14-127)
10.01.120: FAULTY EQUIPMENT:
It is unlawful for any water user to:
   (1)   Waste water;
   (2)   Allow it to be wasted by stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes,
or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow;
   (3)   Wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets or stops, or through
basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus; or
   (4)   Use the water for purposes other than for those which he has applied,
or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations for controlling the
water supply. (Prior Code § 14-128)
10.01.121: SPRINKLING VEHICLES:
Vehicles for sprinkling shall be regulated and controlled by the water
department through the superintendent of the water department. (Prior Code §
14-129)
10.01.122: DEPARTMENT TO HAVE FREE ACCESS:
The water superintendent and his agents shall at all ordinary hours have free
access to any place supplied with water services from the municipal system for
the purpose of examining the apparatus and ascertaining the amount of water
service being used and the manner of its use. In particular, it shall be
unlawful to obstruct access to the water meter and/or water shutoff at any
time. In the event a vehicle is on top of or otherwise obstructing access to
the water meter and/or water shut off, the vehicle may be impounded at the
owner's expense. Furthermore, a violation of this section shall be a class C
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2006-11, 2006)
10.01.123: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The city shall not be liable for any damage to a water service user by reason
of stoppage or interruption of his or her water supply service caused by fires,
scarcity of water, accidents to the water system or its mains, or which occurs
as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any other
unavoidable cause. This section shall not be construed to extend the liability
of the city beyond that provided in the governmental immunity act. (Prior Code
§ 14-101)
10.01.124: WATER NOT SUPPLIED FOR MOTORS OR SIPHONS:
No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the municipal water system for the
purpose of driving motor, siphon, turbine or other wheels, or any hydraulic
engines or elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind
whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such purpose
except by special permission of the city council. (Prior Code § 14-102)
10.01.125: SPRINKLERS:
   (1)   Sprinkler irrigation of all lawns and landscapes using potable
(treated) water is prohibited between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
      (a)   Secondary (untreated or reclaimed wastewater) water systems have
limited capacity and are therefore exempt from this restriction. Facilities
irrigated with secondary water systems include public amenities (parks, golf
courses, schools, cemeteries) and some residential neighborhoods. Using
secondary water for irrigation extends our water resources and saves residents
millions of dollars in annual treatment costs.
      (b)   The provisions of this restriction shall apply to all landscapes
watered with potable water within the city. This section does not apply in the
following situations:
         (i)   New lawn that requires frequent irrigation for establishment
purposes within ninety (90) days of planting.
         (ii)   Short cycles required for testing, inspecting, and maintaining
irrigation systems.
         (iii)   Other situations as permitted by the city. (Prior Code § 14-
103; Ord. 2021-06, 2021)
10.01.126: CONSERVATION STAGES:
   (1)   Stage 1: Reduction In Water Use: All of the conservation measures set
forth in section
10.01.125 comprise Stage 1 and shall always be in effect. Voluntary
conservation in other areas of water usage is also encouraged.
   (2)   Stage 2: Mandatory Water Restriction: In addition to all of the
conservation measures of Stage 1, all parks and cemetery will only be allowed
to water every other day during permitted hours. Residential and commercial
water users will be allowed to water outside during permitted hours on an odd/
even schedule as determined by street address (i.e. even addresses water on
even days, etc.). Vehicles may be washed only at commercial car washes. Use of
water for street and/or driveway washing will not be permitted.
   (3)   Stage 3: Additional Mandatory Restrictions: All restrictions included
in Stages 1 and 2 shall be in force. In addition, no use of fire hydrants for
purposes other than fire protection shall be allowed. No use of water for
ornamental use including, but not limited to, fountains, artificial waterfalls,
and reflection pools shall be allowed. No use of water to fill or top off
swimming pools shall be allowed.
   (4)   Stage 4: Water Rationing Plan: All restrictions included in Stages 1,
2, and 3 shall be in force. In addition, no watering of lawns, gardens,
landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, and other outdoor plants shall be allowed,
unless by means of a bucket, pail, or handheld hose equipped with an automatic
shut-off nozzle during the permitted hours. (Ord. 2021-06, 2021)
10.01.127: EMERGENCY RESTRICTION:
In times of extreme scarcity of water, whenever in the judgment of the mayor
and the city council be necessary, the mayor may by proclamation limit the use
of water to such extent as may be necessary. It is unlawful for any person, his
family, servants or agents, to violate a proclamation made by the mayor in
pursuance of this chapter. (Ord. 2021-06, 2021)
10.01.128: WATER METERS:
   (1)   Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, all
structures, dwelling units, establishments and persons using water from the
municipal water system must have such number of water meters connected to their
water system as are necessary in the judgment of the superintendent to
adequately measure use and determine water charges to the respective users.
   (2)   Meters will be furnished by the city upon application for a
connection, and upon payment of such connection fees and other costs as may be
established by the city council from time to time by resolution.
   (3)   Meters shall be deemed to be and remain the property of the city.
Whenever a dispute between superintendent and the property owner arises as to
the appropriate number of meters to be installed on any premises, the matter
shall be heard and determined by the city council after due notice in writing
to the parties involved.
   (4)   The superintendent shall cause meter readings to be taken regularly
and shall advise the city recorder thereof for the purpose of recording the
necessary billings for water service.
   (5)   Meters may be checked, inspected or adjusted at the discretion of the
city, and they shall not be adjusted or tampered with by the customer. Meter
boxes shall not be opened for the purpose of turning on or off the water except
by an authorized representative of the city, unless special permission is given
by the city through its representatives to the customer to do so.
   (6)   If a customer submits a written request to the superintendent to test
his water meter, the city may, if under the circumstances it deems it advisable
and in its discretion, order a test of the meter measuring the water delivered
to such customer. If such request is made within twelve (12) months after the
date of the last previous test, the customer may be required to pay the cost of
such test. If the meter is found in such test to record from ninety seven
percent (97%) to one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy under methods of
testing satisfactory to the city council, the meter shall be deemed to
accurately measure the use of water.
   (7)   If the city's meters fail to register at any time, the water delivered
during the period of failure shall be estimated on the basis of previous
consumption during a period which is not questioned. In the event a meter is
found to be recording less than ninety seven percent (97%) or more than one
hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy, the city shall make such adjustments
in the customer's previous bills as are just and fair under the circumstances.
   (8)   All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other materials of the
city on or near the customer's premises caused by any act or neglect of the
customer shall in the discretion of the city be repaired by and at the expense
of the customer, and the customer shall pay all costs and expenses, including a
reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or accrue to the city through its
efforts to repair the damage to the lines, meters or to other equipment of the
department or collect such costs from the customer. (Prior Code § 14-106)
10.01.129: PERMITS FOR INSTALLATION:
It is unlawful for any person to lay, repair, alter or connect any water line
to the city culinary water system without first having received a construction
permit from the office of the city recorder or from the water superintendent.
(Prior Code § 14-107)
10.01.130: APPLICATIONS FOR INSTALLATION PERMIT:
   (1)   Applications for permits to make water connections or other alteration
or for laying or repairing lines connected directly or indirectly to the
municipal water system must be made in writing by a licensed plumber, his
authorized agent, or by the owner of the premises who shall describe the nature
of the work to be done for which the application is made. The application shall
be granted if the superintendent determines that:
      (a)   The connection, repair, alteration or installation will cause no
damage to the street in which the water main is laid, or that it will not be
prejudicial to the interests of persons whose property has been or may
thereafter be connected to the water main; and
      (b)   The connection conforms to the ordinances, regulations,
specifications and standards of materials required by the city.
   (2)   All connections, alterations or installations shall be to the line and
grade designated by the water superintendent.
   (3)   Fees for permits or for inspection services shall be of such amounts
as the city council shall from time to time determine by resolution. (Prior
Code § 14-108)
10.01.131: MOVING OR REPLACEMENT OF WATER LINES:
In the event that the city in its sole direction determines that any water line
of the city must be moved or replaced, the city shall bear that portion of the
cost of such move or replacement which applies to main lines up to the property
line of the customer. The cost of reconnecting such new line or lines from the
house of the customer to his property line shall be borne by the customer.
(Prior Code § 14-109)
10.01.132: PERMITS NOT TO BE ISSUED; WHEN:
Permission to connect with the municipal water system shall not be given unless
the plumbing in the house or building to be connected meets the provisions of
the building and plumbing codes of the city. (Prior Code § 14-140)
10.01.133: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Any customer desiring to discontinue service shall notify the city in writing
of such fact at least ten (10) days before the date when such service shall be
discontinued. On giving such written notice, the customer shall not be
responsible for water bills incurred after the date specified in the notice.
Any credit balance in favor of the customer as a result of an advance payment
of bills or a deposit made will be refundable upon discontinuance of service.
(Prior Code § 14-141)
10.01.134: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Water for fire hydrants will be furnished free of charge by the city.
Installation and repairs on such hydrants shall be at the expense of the city
and shall be made under the direction of the city. All customers shall grant
the city, upon demand, a right of way or easement to install and maintain such
hydrants on their premises if the city concludes that hydrants shall be so
installed for the protection of the residents of the city. (Prior Code § 14-
142)
10.01.135: EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS WITHIN CITY:
Any person or persons, including any subdivider, who desires to have the water
mains extended within the city, and is willing to advance the whole expense of
such extension and receive the return of an agreed portion thereof, as
hereinafter provided, may make application to the city council by petition. The
petition shall contain a description of such proposed extension accompanied by
a map showing the location of the proposed extension, together with an offer to
advance the whole expense thereof, which cost shall be verified by the water
superintendent. The city council may grant or deny the petition as in its
discretion deems best for the welfare of existing water users in the city.
(Prior Code § 14-143)
10.01.136: COST OF EXTENSIONS DETERMINED:
Upon the receipt of such petition and map and before the petition is granted,
the city council shall obtain from the water superintendent a certified
statement showing the whole cost of expense of making such extension. (Prior
Code § 14-144)
10.01.137: AMOUNT OF COST TO BE DEPOSITED WITH CITY RECORDER:
If the city council grants the petition, the amount of the cost of making the
extension, as certified by the superintendent, shall be deposited with the city
recorder before any work shall be done on such extension. The deposit shall be
made within thirty (30) days, or such other time as the city council shall
indicate, after the granting thereof. (Prior Code § 14-145)
10.01.138: RETURN OF MONEY; FORFEITURE:
   (1)   At the time the city council decides whether or not to grant petition
for an extension, it shall also decide whether or not any portion of the costs
is to be refunded and the manner and circumstances under which such refund
shall be made or credited to the applicant, his successors or representatives.
Such determination shall be duly recorded in writing and a copy thereof
furnished to the applicant.
   (2)   In the event any deposit remains unclaimed for a period of five (5)
years after the depositor has discontinued water service, the deposit may be
forfeited and then transferred to the water utility fund. (Prior Code § 14-146)
10.01.139: OWNERSHIP OF EXTENSION:
Any such extension shall be deemed the property of the city. (Prior Code § 14-
147)
10.01.140: SUPPLY OF WATER SERVICES TO PERSON OUTSIDE MUNICIPAL LIMITS:
The city may furnish water service from its water system to persons outside the
city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior Code § 14-151)
10.01.141: PETITION FOR SERVICE:
Any person located outside the municipal limits who desires to be supplied with
water services from the municipal water system and is willing to pay in advance
the whole expense of extending the water system to his property, including the
cost of extending any water main beyond its present location, may make
application to the city council by petition containing:
   (1)   A description of the proposed extension;
   (2)   A map showing the location thereof;
   (3)   An offer to pay the whole expense incurred by the city in providing
such extension and to advance such expense as shall be verified by the water
superintendent. The city council and the person or persons seeking such
extension may enter into an agreement providing in detail the terms under which
the extension may be utilized by others in the future and the terms under which
all or any portion of the cost of installing such extension may be refunded;
   (4)   An acknowledgment that the city, in granting the petition, need supply
only such water to the petitioner which from time to time the city council
deems beyond the requirements of water users within the municipal limits, and
that such extension shall be the property of and subject to the control of the
city. (Prior Code § 14-152)
10.01.142: EXTENSIONS MAY BE MASTER METERED:
When an extension supplying more than one house or user outside the municipal
limits is connected to municipal water mains, the water superintendent may
require a master meter to be installed near the point where the connection is
to be made to the municipal main. This installation will be at the expense of
the persons served by such extension according to the regular rates for meter
installation. Responsible parties must agree to pay all bills for water served
through the meter at the applicable water rates. (Prior Code § 14-153)
10.01.143: COST OF EXTENSIONS TO BE DETERMINED BY WATER SUPERINTENDENT:
Upon receipt of such petition and map and before the petition is granted, the
city council shall determine what portion, if any, of the extension of the
municipal water mains to the municipal limits the city shall construct, and
shall obtain from the water superintendent a verified statement showing the
whole cost and expense of making such extension. Such costs and expenses shall
include administrative and supervisory expenditures of the municipal water
department, which shall in no event be deemed to be less than ten percent (10%)
of the cost of materials and labor. (Prior Code § 14-154)
CHAPTER 2
RESERVED
(Ord. 2013-13, 2013)
CHAPTER 3
SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
Part 1. Definitions
10.03.101: Definitions
Part 2. Use Of Public Sewers Required
10.03.201: Deposit Of Waste In Unsanitary Manner Unlawful
10.03.202: Discharge Of Waste Into Natural Outlet Unlawful
10.03.203: Construction Of Privy Or Cesspool Prohibited
10.03.204: Connection To Public Sewer Required
10.03.205: Sewer Connection Fees
10.03.206: Sewer Connection; Installation And Inspection Fee
10.03.207: Failure To Connect To Public Sewer System
Part 3. Private On Site Wastewater
   Treatment Systems
10.03.301: Private Septic Systems; When Permitted
10.03.302: Private Advanced On Site Wastewater Treatment Systems; When
Permitted
10.03.303: Construction Of Private Disposal System; Permit Required
10.03.304: Use Of Private System; Inspection And Permit
10.03.305: Permit Issuance; Requirements
10.03.306: Private Systems To Be Properly Abandoned
10.03.307: Operation And Maintenance Of Private Septic Or Advanced On Site
Wastewater Treatment System
10.03.308: Provisions Not Exclusive
Part 4. Sanitary Sewers, Building Sewers And Connections
10.03.401: Permits Required When
10.03.402: Permits; Classification; Application Fees
10.03.403: Service User Charge System
10.03.404: Rates
10.03.405: Liability For Costs And Damages; Owner Responsible
10.03.406: Maintenance And Repair; Owner Responsible
10.03.407: Extension Of Sewer From Front Building To Rear Building; Allowed
When
10.03.408: Old Building Sewers Allowed When
10.03.409: Construction Materials And Methods To Conform To City Regulations
10.03.410: Elevation Of Sewer
10.03.411: Disposal Of Polluted Surface Drainage
10.03.412: Conformance To Building And Plumbing Codes Required
10.03.413: Excavations For Installation; Barricades And Lights
10.03.414: Charges, Fees, Assessments And Other Charges; Owner Responsible
10.03.415: Interest Charge On Delinquent Or Past Due Connection Fees
Part 5. Annual Review Of Operation Costs
10.03.501: Review And Revision Of User Charge System
10.03.502: User Notification Of Review
10.03.503: Calculation Of Rates
Part 6. Use Of Public Sewer
10.03.601: Discharge Of Unpolluted Water To Sewer
10.03.602: Stormwater Discharge
10.03.603: Discharge Of Certain Wastes To Public Sewers Prohibited
10.03.604: Discharge Of Certain Wastes To Public Sewers Limited
10.03.605: Prohibited Waste Found In Sewer; City Response
10.03.606: Analysis Of Waters And Wastes
10.03.607: Provisions Not Exclusive
Part 7. Damage To System
10.03.701: Unlawful
Part 8. Powers And Authority Of Inspections
10.03.801: Inspection Of Building And Structures
10.03.802: Information Of Industrial Processes
10.03.803: Interceptors Required When
10.03.804: Maintenance Of Pretreatment Or Flow Equalization Facilities
10.03.805: Observation, Sampling And Measurement Of Wastes; Structure To Be
Installed By Owner
10.03.806: Information Required To Determine Compliance
10.03.807: Injury To Employee Or Damage To Property; City Held Harmless
10.03.808: City Employees Allowed On Private Property When
Part 9. Hearing Board
10.03.901: Established
Part 10. Violation; Penalty
10.03.1001: Notice To Offender
10.03.1002: Penalty
10.03.1003: Offender Liable For Expense, Loss Or Damage
PART 1. DEFINITIONS
10.03.101: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
ADDENDUM: The document amended hereto entitled service user charge system. The
addendum is incorporated in this chapter the same as though fully set forth
herein. The service user charge system includes sections A through H of the
addendum.
ADVANCED ON SITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM: A state approved on site system
for treatment and disposal of domestic wastewater or wastes which consists of a
building sewer, a septic tank or other sewage treatment or storage unit, and
treating the effluent through an advanced treatment media such that the
effluent total nitrogen concentration is no more than twenty milligrams per
liter (20 mg/l) as nitrogen.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING DEPARTMENT: The Ivins City building department. Said department is
responsible for administering, interpreting and enforcing all state adopted
building codes. The building department processes permit applications, performs
plan checks and conducts inspections for all commercial, industrial and
residential structures in the city.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also called house connection.
CESSPOOL: A reservoir for liquid waste (as household sewage).
CITY: Ivins City, Washington County, state of Utah.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or
surface water.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in physical state such that it will separate
by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility.
Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly
pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from processes, trade or
business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
HEARING BOARD: The board appointed according to provisions of section
10.03.901 of this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business
as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
MAY: Is permissive (see also definition of Shall).
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogenous concentration. The
concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution.
Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion
concentration of 107.
PRIVY: A small building having a bench with holes through which the user may
defecate or urinate.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility.
RESIDENTIAL FLOWS: The flow strengths and flow volume set out in the addendum
hereto.
RESIDENTIAL, HEAVY AND LIGHT COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USERS: Any industrial or
commercial user who discharges waste into the system requiring higher than
normal biochemical oxygen demand, or greater than normal total suspended
solids.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted
intentionally.
SEPTIC SYSTEM: An on site underground wastewater treatment system consisting of
a septic tank wherein solid wastes settle and a drainfield or leach field that
allows liquid wastewater to percolate into the native soils.
SEWAGE: The spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater".
SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL: Is mandatory (see also definition of May).
SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer
than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24)
hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect
the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
STORM DRAIN (Sometimes Termed STORM SEWER): A drain or sewer for conveying
water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of wastewater facilities, and/or of
wastewater treatment works, and/or of water pollution control of the city, or
his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of,
or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by
laboratory filtering as prescribed in standard methods for the examination of
water and wastewater and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
SYSTEM: The sewer, wastewater or combined wastewater and storm or surface water
facilities of the city.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it
may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of
the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water
pollution control plant".
WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
WINTERTIME FLOW RATES: The average monthly flows contributed to the sewer
system based upon the average monthly culinary water usage meter readings for
the months of January, February and March. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005; amd. Ord. 2009-
08, 2009)
PART 2. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
10.03.201: DEPOSIT OF WASTE IN UNSANITARY MANNER UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner in or upon public or private property within the city or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.202: DISCHARGE OF WASTE INTO NATURAL OUTLET UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the city, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters,
except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.203: CONSTRUCTION OF PRIVY OR CESSPOOL PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater, with the
limited exception of a private septic system which may be allowed for the
limited circumstances expressly authorized herein. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.204: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED 1 :
   (1)   The owner of real property on which will be constructed a house or
other building to be used for human occupancy, situated within the city, shall
be required to connect to the public sewer system prior to occupancy, provided
a public sewer system is within three hundred feet (300') of the owner's
property line.
   (2)   The owner of real property located within the city on which is already
constructed a house or other building used for human occupancy that is
presently connected to a private septic system, shall be required to connect to
the public sewer system, at the owner's expense, within two (2) years of the
city giving notice to do so, provided that a public sewer system is within
three hundred feet (300') of the owner's sewer connection point of the building
unless the sewer main is not adjacent to the owner's property.
      (a)   Unless mandated by state or federal law, an exception to the
requirement for existing homes to connect to the public sewer shall be allowed
for single-family residential real property if all of the following conditions
are found to exist:
         (i)   The public sewer was not installed low enough to allow the
existing home to gravity feed;
         (ii)   The existing septic system is currently operating and has no
history of problems;
         (iii)   The septic drainfield soil is a type that would allow for the
continued effective use of the existing septic system;
         (iv)   The existing septic system poses a low risk to groundwater and/
or surface water resources;
         (v)   There are geological or other exigent circumstances that make
the cost of connecting to the public sewer unreasonably high when compared to
average connection costs; and
         (vi)   The existing home is not part of a special assessment area for
public sewer.
      (b)   An additional exception to the requirement for buildings used for
human occupancy that have an existing and functioning septic system to connect
to the public sewer if it is within three hundred feet (300') of the property
line shall be for single-family residential real property that meets all of the
following conditions:
         (i)   Connection has not been mandated by state or federal law;
         (ii)   The local public health department has not determined the
existing septic system to be unsafe or otherwise not functioning properly;
         (iii)   The public sewer system that is within three hundred feet
(300') of the single-family residential real property was installed or
otherwise completely paid for by a developer and dedicated to the city as a
public sewer system at no cost to the city.
   (3)   Connection to the public sewer system must be in a manner consistent
with the city's sewer master plan.
   (4)   In the event the owner of real property claims inability to connect to
the sewer system within the required time due to severe economic hardship, the
owner may file a petition for relief with the city's land use appeal authority
based upon one or more of the following grounds:
      (a)   The owner or spouse is currently on active military duty status out
of the area;
      (b)   The owner is currently receiving federal or state public
assistance, such as temporary assistance for needy families (TANF),
supplemental security income (SSI), food stamps, or state general public
assistance;
      (c)   The property owner's current monthly income is less than one
hundred fifty percent (150%) of the United States poverty level as defined by
the most recently revised poverty income guidelines published by the United
States department of health and human services; or
      (d)   Other exigent circumstances, such as extraordinary medical expenses
or loss of employment.
   (5)   In the event the appeal authority makes a finding that the property
owner is unable to connect to the sewer system due to severe economic hardship
as defined in this section, then the appeal authority shall grant a onetime
extension of time of an additional two (2) years for the property owner to
connect to the sewer system as required by this section. (Ord. 2016-01, 2016)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  7.01.102(2) of this code.
10.03.205: SEWER CONNECTION FEES:
A sewer connection fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00), together with any
other applicable fees, including impact fees, permit fees, and inspection fees,
shall be collected by the building department before commencement of
construction of a building used for human occupancy. (Ord. 2009-04, 2009)
10.03.206: SEWER CONNECTION; INSTALLATION AND INSPECTION FEE:
With respect to actual connection of each owner's house or building to the
public sewer system (private service line), the actual connection may be
performed through services provided by a special improvement district if one is
created by the city. (Ord. 2009-04, 2009)
10.03.207: FAILURE TO CONNECT TO PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM:
Failure to connect to the public sewer system as required herein shall be
unlawful and shall constitute a class C misdemeanor. In addition to any other
legal or equitable remedies that may be available to the city, the city may:
   (1)   Impose penalties for violations of this chapter under the city
administrative code enforcement program; and/or
   (2)   Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-38, cause the water to be
shut off from the premises until the owner has hooked up to the sewer at the
owner's own expense. (Ord. 2009-04, 2009)
PART 3. PRIVATE ON SITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS
10.03.301: PRIVATE SEPTIC SYSTEMS; WHEN PERMITTED:
   (1)   Where a public sewer system is not available to a currently platted
lot under the provisions of section
10.03.204 of this chapter, the building sewer may be connected to a private
septic system complying with the provisions of this chapter until such time a
public sewer system is installed as provided in section
10.03.204 of this chapter.
   (2)   Private septic systems are not permitted in any new subdivisions.
(Ord. 2009-08, 2009)
10.03.302: PRIVATE ADVANCED ON SITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS; WHEN
PERMITTED:
   (1)   Wherever a private septic system is allowed, a private advanced on
site wastewater treatment system shall also be allowed as an alternative to the
private septic system.
   (2)   Private advanced on site wastewater treatment systems are permitted as
an approved sewer system on new subdivision lots within the Kayenta Wash
natural drainage area provided:
      (a)   The effluent from the treatment systems contain total nitrogen
concentrations to twenty milligrams per liter (20 mg/l) or less as nitrogen;
      (b)   The subdivision densities are at least one acre per equivalent
residential unit, unless the systems are equipped to reuse water for subsurface
or drip irrigation, in which case the subdivision densities must be at least
one-half (1/2) acre per equivalent residential unit;
      (c)   The treatment systems serve no more than one property;
      (d)   The treatment systems are continuously monitored by electronic
telecommunication technologies and maintained by a certified technician who
visually inspects the unit at least once per year;
      (e)   The treatment systems are approved by the city engineer, state of
Utah and Southwest Utah public health department;
      (f)   The treatment systems' discharges are subsurface through a
drainfield or irrigation system that must be a subsurface or drip system as
approved by the state of Utah; and
      (g)   The treatment systems are installed by a manufacturer certified
installer. (Ord. 2009-08, 2009)
10.03.303: CONSTRUCTION OF PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before commencement of construction of a private septic or advanced on site
wastewater treatment system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit
issued by the city's building department. The application for such permit shall
be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement
by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary. A
permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application
is filed. (Ord. 2009-08, 2009)
10.03.304: USE OF PRIVATE SYSTEM; INSPECTION AND PERMIT:
Permission to use a private septic or advanced on site wastewater treatment
system shall not become authorized until the installation is completed in
compliance with the approved plans in conformity with all state and local codes
and this chapter. Authorized city employees shall be allowed to inspect the
work at any stage of construction. The applicant for the permit shall notify
the building department when the work is ready for final inspection, and before
any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within a
reasonable time after the receipt of notice by the building department. (Ord.
2009-08, 2009)
10.03.305: PERMIT ISSUANCE; REQUIREMENTS:
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private septic or advanced on
site wastewater treatment system shall comply with all requirements of the
Southwest Utah public health department. No permit shall be issued for any
private septic or advanced on site wastewater treatment system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge into any natural outlet. (Ord. 2009-08, 2009)
10.03.306: PRIVATE SYSTEMS TO BE PROPERLY ABANDONED:
At such time as a property connects to a public sewer or for any other reason
abandons a private system with a septic tank, the septic tank shall be
completely removed or filled with earthen materials such that the tank will not
become a public safety hazard in the future. (Ord. 2009-08, 2009)
10.03.307: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE SEPTIC OR ADVANCED ON SITE
WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM:
When a public sewer is not available, the owner(s) shall operate and maintain a
private septic or advanced on site wastewater treatment system in a sanitary
manner at all times, and at no expense to the city. (Ord. 2009-08, 2009)
10.03.308: PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
No statement contained in this part shall be construed to conflict with,
modify, or change any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Utah
state department of health now or at any time in the future enacted. (Ord.
2009-08, 2009)
PART 4. SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
10.03.401: PERMITS REQUIRED WHEN:
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the city. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.402: PERMITS; CLASSIFICATION; APPLICATION FEES:
There shall be two (2) classes of sewer connection permits: a) class I for
residential and light commercial services; and b) class II for services to
heavy commercial establishments producing industrial wastes. "Class I for
residential and light commercial services" is defined to include users of less
than twelve thousand (12,000) gallons of culinary water per month based on
wintertime flow rates; and "class II for heavy commercial establishments" is
defined to include users with over twelve thousand (12,000) gallons of culinary
water use per month based on wintertime flow rates. In either case, the owner
or its agent shall make application on a form obtained from the city. The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city water and sewer
superintendent. A permit and inspection connection fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for a residential or light commercial sewer permit and one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for industrial or heavy commercial sewer permit with
culinary water usage greater than five hundred (500) gallons per day, shall be
paid to the city at the time the application is filed. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.403: SERVICE USER CHARGE SYSTEM:
The city has previously adopted a service user charge system. The rates for
connecting to and use on monthly or any other basis may be fixed and amended by
resolution or amending ordinance. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.404: RATES:
Until otherwise provided by resolution or an amending ordinance, the rates
shall be as follows:
   (1)   Residential and light commercial: Twenty three dollars ($23.00) per
month.
   (2)   Heavy commercial users of greater than twelve thousand (12,000)
gallons of water per month: As determined with exhibit A attached to the
ordinance codified herein. Commercial user fees shall be established yearly,
based upon measured wastewater flows and strengths. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.405: LIABILITY FOR COSTS AND DAMAGES; OWNER RESPONSIBLE:
All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer from the home or other building to the main sewer line, shall be
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.406: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR; OWNER RESPONSIBLE:
All repair and/or maintenance of a sewer line from a home or other building to
the main sewer line shall be paid for by the owner and not the city. (Ord.
2005-14, 2005)
10.03.407: EXTENSION OF SEWER FROM FRONT BUILDING TO REAR BUILDING; ALLOWED
WHEN:
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building;
except, where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and
no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from
the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole system
will be considered as one building sewer. The city does not and will not assume
any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any
such single connection aforementioned. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.408: OLD BUILDING SEWERS ALLOWED WHEN:
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are examined and tested by the city sewer and water superintendent and found to
meet all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.409: CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND METHODS TO CONFORM TO CITY REGULATIONS:
The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of all sanitary sewers,
including building sewers, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of
the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to
the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules
and regulations of the city and the state. In the absence of any of these code
provisions, or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the American society for testing and materials
(ASTM) and water pollution control federation (WPCF) manual of practice no. 9
shall apply. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.410: ELEVATION OF SEWER:
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought from the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer. Where such means are necessary, the owner
shall be responsible for all purchases, installations, maintenance and
operating costs for such means and their operation. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.411: DISPOSAL OF POLLUTED SURFACE DRAINAGE:
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway
drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer
or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer, unless such connection is approved by the city and the state
department of health for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
(Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.412: CONFORMANCE TO BUILDING AND PLUMBING CODES REQUIRED:
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city and the state, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF manual of practice no. 9.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the building
official before installation. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.413: EXCAVATIONS FOR INSTALLATION; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS:
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the building official. The
city shall have no liability for damage to property or injury to persons from
any defective or insufficient guards, signing or lighting, and any person
responsible for or placing guards, signing or barricades unequivocally
indemnifies the city from any liability, costs and expenses, and any defense
costs, including attorney fees, arising from defective or inappropriate warning
measures, whether negligent or not. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.414: CHARGES, FEES, ASSESSMENTS AND OTHER CHARGES; OWNER RESPONSIBLE:
   (1)   Irrespective of whether or not the occupant, user, tenant, cotenant,
permissive user or any other person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity
is in possession of the premises to which a connection is supplied or service
made available, the owner of the premises according to the records of the
Washington County recorder shall be legally responsible for the payment of all
charges, fees, assessments and any other obligation or liability of a user. If
any delinquent sewer connection, sewer user charge, repairs, maintenance or any
other obligation is imposed against any premises, property, buildings or
structures, the obligation shall be deemed by the city as a lien upon all of
the real property on which any use is made from a sewer connection. Water
service to delinquent property shall be turned off by the city for failure to
pay such fee, assessment, charge or liability and will not be turned on again
to those premises where a delinquency occurs unless and until all liabilities
to the city for sewer service are paid in full.
   (2)   All payments for utilities, whether water or sewer (and, if added,
electrical power) shall be credited first to sewer assessments, fees and
charges. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.415: INTEREST CHARGE ON DELINQUENT OR PAST DUE CONNECTION FEES:
The mayor and city council may, at their discretion and in circumstances that
are equitable, impose interest at the highest legal rate (but not to exceed 11/
2 percent per month) on all past due accounts either for connection fees, user
charges, maintenance, repair or any other charge which is provided for, imposed
or authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
PART 5. ANNUAL REVIEW OF OPERATION COSTS
10.03.501: REVIEW AND REVISION OF USER CHARGE SYSTEM:
The city should periodically review the total annual cost of operation and
maintenance, long term debt service relating to the wastewater treatment works,
as well as each user's wastewater contribution percentage, and revise the user
charge system as necessary, to assure equity of the system established herein
and to assure that sufficient funds are obtained from the city's user system
established herein and to assure that sufficient funds are obtained from the
city's user charge system to: a) adequately operate and maintain the wastewater
treatment works; and b) cover said debt service. The city will apply excess
revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of operation and
maintenance attributable to that class for the next year, and adjust this rate
accordingly. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.502: USER NOTIFICATION OF REVIEW:
Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular
bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable
to wastewater treatment services. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.503: CALCULATION OF RATES:
The city service user charge system shall be used as a formula for calculating
rates, fees and charges for connection, use and access to the system. (Ord.
2005-14, 2005)
PART 6. USE OF PUBLIC SEWER
10.03.601: DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WATER TO SEWER:
No person shall discharge or cause the discharge of any unpolluted waters such
as storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage
or cooling water to any sewer, except storm water runoff from limited areas,
which storm water may be polluted at times and may not be discharged to the
sanitary sewer except by permission of the city and state department of health.
(Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.602: STORM WATER DISCHARGE:
Storm water, other than that exempted under section
10.03.601 of this chapter, and all other unpolluted drainage, shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or
storm sewers, or to natural outlets approved by the city and the state
department of health. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters
shall also be discharged to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
(Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.603: DISCHARGE OF CERTAIN WASTES TO PUBLIC SEWERS PROHIBITED:
   (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described water or wastes to any public sewers: a) any gasoline,
benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas; b) any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or other
wastes, to contaminate or interrupt any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from
the works; c) any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the wastewater works; and d) solid or viscous
substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the
flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the
wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
   (2)   Each user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an
increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the city
treatment works shall pay for such increased costs. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.604: DISCHARGE OF CERTAIN WASTES TO PUBLIC SEWERS LIMITED:
The following described substances, materials, waters or wastes shall be
limited in discharges to the system to concentrations or quantities which will
not harm either the sewers, the sludge of any municipal system, the wastewater
treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, public property or
constitute a nuisance. The city may set limitations more severe than the
limitations established in the regulations below if such more severe
limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In setting these
requirements, the city will give consideration to such factors as the quantity
of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials
of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed,
capacity of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of
the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The limitations or
restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged
to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city
are as follows:
   (1)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) (65° Celsius);
   (2)   Wastewater containing more than twenty five milligrams per liter (25
mg/l) of petroleum, oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or products of mineral
oil origin;
   (3)   Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or
grease;
   (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may
be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants,
hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates
from the preparation of food in commercial kitchens or the purpose of
consumption on the premises;
   (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the state for such materials;
   (6)   Any waters or wastes containing odor producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the state;
   (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life of concentration
as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations;
   (8)   Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a
"slug", as defined in section
10.03.101 of this chapter;
   (9)   Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters;
   (10)   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes
in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids
which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious
to structures and treatment processes. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.605: PROHIBITED WASTE FOUND IN SEWER; CITY RESPONSE:
If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in section
10.03.604 of this chapter, and which are determined by the city to have a
deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the city may:
   (1)   Reject the wastes;
   (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
   (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge and/or
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
section
10.03.607 of this chapter. If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization
of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall
be subject to the review and approval of the city and the state department of
health;
   (4)   A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location;
   (5)   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities;
   (6)   Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.606: ANALYSIS OF WATERS AND WASTES:
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association.
Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be
determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the city. (Ord. 2005-
14, 2005)
10.03.607: PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
No statement contained herein shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city
for treatment. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
PART 7. DAMAGE TO SYSTEM
10.03.701: UNLAWFUL:
No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the wastewater facilities (the system). Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
PART 8. POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTIONS
10.03.801: INSPECTION OF BUILDING AND STRUCTURES:
Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all properties and buildings or
structures for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing pertinent to discharge into the system in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.802: INFORMATION OF INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES:
Duly authorized city employees are authorized to obtain information concerning
industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the system. Industrial users may withhold information when they
have established that the revelation of said information to the public might
result in an advantage to competitors. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.803: INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED WHEN:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when liquid wastes
containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in subsection
 10.03.604(3) of this chapter, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients are introduced into public sewers; except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the state plumbing
code, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owners shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the
captivated material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of
disposal which are subject to review by the city. Any removal and means of
disposal are subject to review by the city. Any removal and hauling of the
collected materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by
currently licensed waste disposal firms. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.804: MAINTENANCE OF PRETREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZATION FACILITIES:
Where pretreatment or flow equalization facilities are provided or required for
any water or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at its expense. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.805: OBSERVATION, SAMPLING AND MEASUREMENT OF WASTES; STRUCTURE TO BE
INSTALLED BY OWNER:
When determined necessary by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
structures, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The structure shall
be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as
to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.806: INFORMATION REQUIRED TO DETERMINE COMPLIANCE:
The city may require any user of sewer services to provide information needed
to determine compliance with this chapter. These requirements may include:
   (1)   Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified item
period;
   (2)   Chemical analysis of wastewaters;
   (3)   Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality;
   (4)   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or
other materials important to sewer control. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.807: INJURY TO EMPLOYEE OR DAMAGE TO PROPERTY; CITY HELD HARMLESS:
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
section
10.03.801 of this chapter, duly authorized employees of the city shall observe
all safety rules applicable to the premises established by any occupant or
owner, and the city shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city
employees, and the occupant shall indemnify the city against loss or damage to
its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner growing out of
the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence
or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions as required by section
10.03.805 of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.808: CITY EMPLOYEES ALLOWED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WHEN:
Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited
to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of
any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
PART 9. HEARING BOARD
10.03.901: ESTABLISHED:
A hearing board shall be appointed as needed for arbitration of differences
between the city and sewer users on matters concerning interpretation and
execution of the provisions of this chapter by the city. The board shall meet
once every three (3) months unless their services are determined to be
necessary more often by the city engineer. One member shall be a representative
of a local commercial enterprise. One member shall be a residential user
selected at large for their interest in accomplishing the objectives of this
chapter. As the board deems necessary and upon concurrence by the city, a
qualified attorney may be consulted by the board to a specific case. (Ord.
2005-14, 2005)
PART 10. VIOLATION; PENALTY
10.03.1001: NOTICE TO OFFENDER:
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except for
section
10.03.204 of this chapter, and part 6 of this chapter, shall be served by the
city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.1002: PENALTY:
Any person who fails to correct a noticed violation within the time limit
provided for in the notice shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount of two hundred ninety nine
dollars ($299.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
10.03.1003: OFFENDER LIABLE FOR EXPENSE, LOSS OR DAMAGE:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable
to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of
such violation. (Ord. 2005-14, 2005)
CHAPTER 4
BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
10.04.101: Definitions
10.04.102: Protection Of Water Supply
10.04.103: Backflow Prevention Devices Or Assemblies; When Required
10.04.104: Testing And Inspection
10.04.105: New Construction
10.04.106: Installation Of Prevention Device Required
10.04.107: Existing Equipment
10.04.108: Repair And Maintenance Of Equipment
10.04.109: Access For Inspection
10.04.110: Certified Backflow Technician
10.04.111: Notification Of Public
10.04.112: Records Maintained
10.04.113: Violations
10.04.114: Emergency Discontinuance Of Service
10.04.115: Penalty
10.04.101: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
BACK PRESSURE: A pressure, higher than the supply pressure, caused by a pump,
elevated tank, boiler, or any other means that may cause backflow.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other
than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable
water supply system.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water in a potable water
distribution system as a result of cross connection.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE OR ASSEMBLY: A device, assembly or means designed to
prevent backflow, which complies with the specifications of section 608 of the
international plumbing code.
CHEMICAL: Any solid, gas, liquid or other substance of whatever nature which is
possible to introduce into the public drinking water system other than the
intended potable water, including, but not limited to, nonpotable water,
pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, soaps, detergents, and other similar
substances.
CHEMICAL EQUIPMENT: Any equipment, device or other contraption of whatever
nature which is used or designed for the handling, storage, transportation or
application of chemicals, including, but not limited to, herbicide, pesticide,
fertilizer, mobile wash, and other similar equipment.
CHEMICAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle of whatever nature used or designed for the
handling, storage, transportation or application of chemicals, including, but
not limited to, herbicide, pesticide, fertilizer, mobile wash and other similar
vehicles.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any actual or potential connection between a potable water
system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce
into the public drinking water system any used water, industrial fluid, gas or
substance other than the intended potable water. (Ord. 2006-37, 2006)
10.04.102: PROTECTION OF WATER SUPPLY:
No person, business or entity shall cause, create or allow to exist, any actual
or potential cross connection that affects or possibly may affect the city
water supply system. No water service connection to any premises shall be
installed or maintained by the city, or any other water utility, unless the
water supplying the premises is protected as required by state and city laws
and regulations. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the occupied
premises to effect installation and inspections as required herein, and to give
notice to the supplier or water utility of any deficiencies of his water system
in that regard. (Ord. 2006-37, 2006)
10.04.103: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES OR ASSEMBLIES; WHEN REQUIRED:
   (1)   Property Owner: It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
property where water is consumed to purchase, install, and maintain backflow
prevention devices or assemblies wherever it will be possible for used,
unclean, polluted or contaminated water, mixtures or substances to enter any
portion of his potable water system, and to otherwise control cross
connections.
   (2)   Chemical Equipment And Vehicles:
      (a)   Backflow Device Required: No person shall add water to any chemical
equipment via a hose, pump or other equipment unless such hose, pump or other
equipment is fitted with an effective and approved permanently affixed backflow
prevention device or assembly to prevent backflow of chemicals or liquids
containing chemicals into the city's water supply system, streams, lakes, other
sources of water or other areas.
      (b)   Exception: Notwithstanding the foregoing, a backflow prevention
device or assembly is not required when:
         (i)   It is impossible to permanently affix a backflow prevention
device to the hose, pump, or other equipment;
         (ii)   The hose, pump or other equipment is not allowed to contact or
fall below the flood rim of the handling, storage or application equipment to
which water is being added; and
         (iii)   No other possible means of establishing a back siphon or
backflow exists.
      (c)   Chemical Vehicles: Every chemical vehicle to which water is or
potentially may be added from the city's water supply system, or from the
regional water system, shall be equipped with a permanently affixed and
operational air gap backflow device. All water added to such vehicles from the
city's water supply system shall pass through the backflow device. (Ord. 2011-
16, 2011)
10.04.104: TESTING AND INSPECTION:
   (1)   Annual Testing Of Backflow Devices Or Assemblies: Each property owner
or owner of chemical equipment or vehicles on which a backflow prevention
device or assembly is required under this chapter shall have certified
inspections and operational tests made at least once a year at the owner's own
expense. Where the city deems the hazard to be great, the city may require such
inspections and tests at a more frequent interval as prescribed by the city.
All such tests shall be made according to the standards set forth by the Utah
state department of health, bureau of drinking water and sanitation and the
international plumbing code. The city shall issue and place the approved
sticker onto the chemical equipment or vehicle in a visible location. The city
may require at any time proof of compliance with this section which shall be
fulfilled by presenting the chemical equipment or vehicle with the sticker
issued and placed by the issuing authority. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner of any such chemical equipment or vehicle to arrange for the
inspections required by this section.
   (2)   Inspection Of Chemical Vehicles: Every chemical vehicle on which a
backflow prevention device or assembly is required under this chapter shall be
submitted for inspection to the city before it is put into service and at least
once every six (6) months thereafter. The city shall verify that each such
vehicle is equipped with an approved backflow device. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of any such vehicle to arrange for the inspections
required by this section.
   (3)   Condition For Issuance Of Business License: The issuance or renewal of
a business license for any business employing chemical equipment or vehicles
subject to the provisions of this chapter may be conditioned upon compliance
with this section, and any failure to comply with this section shall be grounds
for the suspension of a business license issued to any such business. (Ord.
2011-16, 2011)
10.04.105: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
The building official will review all plans for new construction to ensure that
unprotected cross connections are not an integral part of the owner's water
system. If a cross connection cannot be eliminated, protection will be required
by installation of an air gap or other approved backflow prevention device or
assembly, in accordance with the plumbing code. Water vacating the drinking
water supply must do so by means of an approved air gap or mechanical backflow
prevention device or assembly as required by said code. The owner shall provide
the building official with verification of a certified test of the backflow
prevention device or assembly before a certificate of occupancy is issued.
(Ord. 2006-11, 2006)
10.04.106: INSTALLATION OF PREVENTION DEVICE REQUIRED:
Whenever the city deems that a service connection's water usage contributes a
sufficient hazard to the water supply and a property owner has not made
appropriate installation, the installation of an approved backflow prevention
device or assembly shall be required on the lateral service line of the owner's
water system, at or near the property line, or immediately inside the building
being served, but before the first branch line leading off the lateral service
line, in any event. The type of protective device or assembly required shall
comply with local and state requirements. The water services department shall
be provided by the owner with a certified test of such backflow prevention
devices or assemblies within ten (10) working days after their initial
installation in order to determine their adequacy. (Ord. 2006-11, 2006)
10.04.107: EXISTING EQUIPMENT:
All backflow prevention devices or assemblies existing as of November 1989,
which do not meet the requirements hereof, shall nonetheless be required to
comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless they are deemed by the
building official or the water services department to be nonetheless adequate
for the purposes intended, in which event compliance with any particular
provision hereof may be waived in writing by the city. Such previously existing
devices or assemblies shall be subject, in any event, to the periodic
inspection and testing required by this chapter. Whenever an existing device or
assembly is moved to another location, or requires more than minimum
maintenance, or where it is determined to constitute a hazard to health, the
unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention device or assembly
meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-37, 2006)
10.04.108: REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT:
The maintenance, including necessary repairs, of all backflow prevention
devices or assemblies and cross connection control devices required by this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the owner of property, equipment or
vehicle where an assembly or device is installed, and failure to adequately
maintain any required device or assembly shall be a violation hereof. All
installations and repairs of such devices or assemblies shall be effected by a
certified journeyman plumber or other agent of the owner, provided he is a
certified backflow technician as provided in this chapter, in either case.
(Ord. 2006-37, 2006)
10.04.109: ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
All water systems, and all equipment and vehicles on which a backflow
prevention device or assembly is required shall be open for inspection at all
reasonable times by authorized representatives of the water services department
in order to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary
hazards, including violations of this chapter, exist. In order to make such
determination, the inspection shall include access to above ceiling areas,
pits, paneled interior areas, or other locations where cross connections might
exist. The owner and any occupant shall be responsible to provide a route of
access across the property for inspection purposes that is free from litter,
overgrowth, the threat of a vicious animal, or other hindrance that may be
detrimental to the safety of the inspector or obstructive to his ease of
access. (Ord. 2006-37, 2006)
10.04.110: CERTIFIED BACKFLOW TECHNICIAN:
All tests of backflow prevention devices or assemblies shall be conducted by a
certified backflow technician who will be responsible for the competence and
accuracy of all tests and reports. Such technician shall be responsible for the
following:
   (1)   Assure that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for
the testing, repairing or overhauling of backflow prevention devices or
assemblies.
   (2)   Make report of such testing and/or repair within required times to the
owner, the water services department and the backflow technician on a form
approved for such use by said bureau.
   (3)   Include in all reports a list of any materials or replacement parts
used.
   (4)   Assure that replacement parts are equal in quality to original parts
and that any testing, repair or replacement does not change the design or
operational characteristics of the assembly.
   (5)   Maintain his license in current condition and his testing equipment in
proper operating condition.
   (6)   Be equipped with, and competent to use, all necessary tools, gauges
and other equipment necessary to properly test and maintain backflow prevention
devices or assemblies.
   (7)   Tag each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure
backflow assembly, high hazard air gap, or other backflow prevention device or
assembly showing the serial number, date tested, and by whom, together with the
technician's certification number. (Ord. 2006-37, 2006)
10.04.111: NOTIFICATION OF PUBLIC:
Although failure of a consumer to be aware of this chapter shall be no defense
to violation hereof, the water services department may use reasonable means to
notify its customers of the hazards of cross connections and the need for
annual inspection of backflow prevention devices or assemblies. (Ord. 2006-11,
2006)
10.04.112: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
The city shall keep records of cross connection hazards and the condition of
backflow prevention devices or assemblies, including those records required by
state and federal agencies. It shall provide the tags required by this chapter,
upon request by certified backflow technicians. (Ord. 2006-37, 2006)
10.04.113: VIOLATIONS:
   (1)   Specified: A violation of this chapter exists if:
      (a)   Failure To Install: A backflow prevention assembly required by this
chapter for control of cross connections is not installed, tested or
maintained, as required herein.
      (b)   Removal Or Bypass Of Assembly: It is found that a backflow
prevention assembly has been removed or bypassed.
      (c)   Unprotected Cross Connection: An unprotected cross connection
exists on the premises or equipment.
      (d)   Failure To Inspect: The periodic system inspection required herein
has not been conducted.
      (e)   False Report Or Information: A false report or false information is
provided to the city by or on behalf of the owner or consumer, with regard to
the cross connection or backflow prevention assembly.
   (2)   Notice Of Violation: The city shall provide written notification of
any violation of this chapter to both the owner of the property or equipment on
which the violation exists and the consumer, if different, and shall demand
that corrective action be taken within twenty four (24) hours of the delivery
of such notification. The city, at the request of the owner or consumer, may
authorize an extension of time for completion or any modification of the
required corrective action upon good cause shown.
   (3)   Discontinuance Of Water Service; Suspension Of Business License: If
the owner or consumer fails to take the required corrective action within
twenty four (24) hours of the delivery of a notice of violation of this
chapter, the city, in its own discretion, may discontinue water service to the
affected property and may suspend any business license issued to the owner and/
or consumer.
   (4)   Restoration Of Water Service; Reinstatement Of Business License: Water
service to the affected property will not be restored and no business license
suspended under this section shall be reinstated until all outstanding fines
and fees are paid, and all violations or defects are corrected and the city has
inspected and approved the corrections.
   (5)   Restitution: If contamination of the city water system occurs by means
of a violation of this chapter, the owner of the property or equipment in
violation, and/or the party responsible for such contamination, must bear the
cost of cleanup of the city water system. (Ord. 2006-37, 2006)
10.04.114: EMERGENCY DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city may immediately
discontinue water service to any property or number of properties without
notice to the affected owners or consumers if the water services department
determines that any violation of this chapter or other circumstances exist
which may pose a significant health hazard. Such cessation of service shall
continue until compliance is attained or the significant health hazard is
removed. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from seeking any remedy
provided for under this chapter or other applicable law. (Ord. 2006-37, 2006)
10.04.115: PENALTY:
In addition to any penalty provided herein, any violation of this chapter shall
be a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided
in this code. Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense, and each day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 2006-37, 2006)
CHAPTER 5
STORMWATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
Part 1. General Provisions
10.05.101: Purpose
10.05.102: Definitions
Part 2. Stormwater Utility
10.05.201: Enterprise Fund
10.05.202: Facilities And Assets
10.05.203: Administration
Part 3. Stormwater Utility Charge
10.05.301: Imposed
10.05.302: Billing And Collection
10.05.303: Policies
10.05.304: Appeals
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.05.101: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the city and its inhabitants by efficiently operating the stormwater system,
managing and controlling stormwater runoff, protecting property, preventing
polluted waters from entering the water supply and other receiving waters, and
establishing a viable and equitable method of financing the stormwater system
long term improvement, operation, and maintenance. (Ord. 2010-05, 2010)
10.05.102: DEFINITIONS:
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES: Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes
reduced quality of runoff water or causes water to run off in greater
quantities or at greater rates of flow than the natural surface.
STORMWATER: Water produced by storm, surface drainage, snow and ice melt, and
other water handled by the stormwater system.
STORMWATER FACILITY: Any facility, improvement, development, or property made
for controlling stormwater quantity and quality.
STORMWATER SYSTEM: All manmade stormwater facilities and conveyances and
natural storm drain systems, including, but not limited to, designated open
spaces owned and maintained by the city that stores, controls, treats, and/or
conveys stormwater.
STORMWATER UTILITY: The utility which operates, maintains, regulates, and
improves storm drain facilities and programs within the city. (Ord. 2010-05,
2010)
PART 2. STORMWATER UTILITY
10.05.201: ENTERPRISE FUND:
The city has established a stormwater utility enterprise fund to handle all
income, expenses, and other financial transactions related to the stormwater
utility. All charges collected with respect to the stormwater utility shall be
deposited in the stormwater utility enterprise fund. Money in the stormwater
utility enterprise fund shall not be commingled with other city funds but may
be transferred to other city funds as allowed by the uniform fiscal procedures
act for Utah cities. (Ord. 2010-05, 2010)
10.05.202: FACILITIES AND ASSETS:
The city shall determine which storm drain facility assets will be transferred
to the storm drain utility. Until such transfer, the utility shall operate,
maintain, and improve all existing public storm drain facilities. (Ord. 2010-
05, 2010)
10.05.203: ADMINISTRATION:
The stormwater utility shall be administered by the public works director or
designee. (Ord. 2010-05, 2010)
PART 3. STORMWATER UTILITY CHARGE
10.05.301: IMPOSED:
All owners of impervious surfaces within the city which contribute runoff water
to the stormwater system or who otherwise use or benefit from the stormwater
system or the utility will be responsible for paying the stormwater utility
charge as set forth in this chapter. The calculation of charges shall be based
on the current user rate analysis. (Ord. 2010-05, 2010)
10.05.302: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
The city shall bill, or cause to be billed, property owners of impervious
surfaces for the stormwater utility service charge. Charges and fees shall be
considered delinquent if not paid as determined by rules and procedures
established by the city and will be considered to be a debt of the city, which
shall be subject to recovery by civil action or otherwise. (Ord. 2010-05, 2010)
10.05.303: POLICIES:
The city may adopt rules and policies to assist in applying, administering, and
interpreting the provisions related to the stormwater utility. (Ord. 2010-05,
2010)
10.05.304: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision on an application filed in
accordance with this chapter may appeal that decision to the city's appeal
authority in accordance with the same procedures set forth in title 16, chapter
30 of this code governing appeals from land use authority decisions which are
incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 2010-05, 2010)
CHAPTER 6
SEWER PRETREATMENT
SECTION:
Part 1. General Provisions
10.06.101: Purpose And Policy
10.06.102: Administration
10.06.103: Abbreviations
10.06.104: Definitions
Part 2. General Sewer Use Requirements
10.06.201: Prohibited Discharge Standards
10.06.202: National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
10.06.203: State Pretreatment Standards
10.06.204: Local Limits
10.06.205: City’s Right Of Revision
10.06.206: Dilution Prohibition
10.06.207: Wastewater System
Part 3. Pretreatment Of Wastewater
10.06.301: Pretreatment Facilities
10.06.302: Additional Pretreatment Measures
10.06.303: Accidental Discharge/Slug Discharge Control Plans
10.06.304: Hauled Wastewater
Part 4. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits
10.06.401: Wastewater Analysis
10.06.402: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
10.06.403: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Existing Connections
10.06.404: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections
10.06.405: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
10.06.406: Application Signatories And Certifications
10.06.407: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
Part 5. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
10.06.501: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
10.06.502: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
10.06.503: Permit Appeals
10.06.504: Permit Modification
10.06.505: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
10.06.506: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
10.06.507: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
10.06.508: Regulation Of Waste Received From Other Jurisdictions
Part 6. Reporting Requirements
10.06.601: Baseline Monitoring Reports
10.06.602: Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
10.06.603: Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline
10.06.604: Periodic Compliance Reports
10.06.605: Reports Of Changed Conditions
10.06.606: Reports Of Potential Problems
10.06.607: Reports From Unpermitted Users
10.06.608: Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting
10.06.609: Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous Waste
10.06.610: Analytical Requirements
10.06.611: Sample Collection
10.06.612: Date Of Receipt Of Reports
10.06.613: Recordkeeping
10.06.614: Certification Statements
Part 7. Compliance Monitoring
10.06.701: Right Of Entry: Inspection And Sampling
10.06.702: Search Warrants
Part 8. Confidential Information
10.06.801: Confidential Information
Part 9. Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
10.06.901: Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
Part 10. Administrative Enforcement Remedies
10.06.1001: Notification Of Violation
10.06.1002: Consent Orders
10.06.1003: Show Cause Hearing
10.06.1004: Compliance Orders
10.06.1005: Cease And Desist Orders
10.06.1006: Administrative Fines
10.06.1007: Emergency Suspensions
10.06.1008: Termination Of Discharge
Part 11. Judicial Enforcement Remedies
10.06.1101: Injunctive Relief
10.06.1102: Civil Penalties
10.06.1103: Criminal Prosecution
10.06.1104: Remedies Nonexclusive
Part 12. Supplemental Enforcement Action
10.06.1201: Performance Bonds
10.06.1202: Liability Insurance
10.06.1203: Water Supply Severance
10.06.1204: Public Nuisances
Part 13. Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations
10.06.1301: Upset
10.06.1302: Bypass
Part 14. Fats, Oils, Grease, And Soil (FOGS) Control
10.06.1401: General
10.06.1402: Definitions
10.06.1403: Interceptor And Trap Installation Specifications
10.06.1404: General FOGS Waste Discharge Limits And Requirements
10.06.1405: Kitchen Best Management Practices (BMP) Requirements
10.06.1406: Interceptor Operation And Maintenance Requirements
10.06.1407: Grease Trap Operation And Maintenance Requirements
10.06.1408: Notification Requirements
10.06.1409: Recordkeeping Requirements
10.06.1410: Inspections And Sampling
Part 15. Miscellaneous Provisions
10.06.1501: Pretreatment Charges And Fees
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.06.101: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned
treatment works for the St. George Regional Water Reclamation Facility (SGRWRF)
and enables the Ivins City to comply with all applicable State and Federal
laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and the General
Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403), and the Utah Administrative Code
R317-8-8. This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment
works. This chapter authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater discharge
permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and
provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein. The objectives of this chapter
are:
   (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation or contaminate the
resulting sludge;
   (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, the atmosphere, or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;
   (3)   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is
maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations found in 40 CFR Part 503;
   (4)   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment, and the
general public;
   (5)   To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and sludge from the
publicly owned treatment works;
   (6)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works;
and
   (7)   To enable SGRWRF to comply with its Utah Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and
any other Federal or State laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is
subject. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.102: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Ivins City Public Works Director
(hereinafter "Manager") shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Manager may
be delegated by the Manager to a duly authorized Ivins City Public Works or St.
George Regional Water Reclamation Facility employee. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.103: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
BMP     Best Management Practice
BMR     Baseline Monitoring Report
BOD     Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CFR     Code of Federal Regulations
COD     Chemical Oxygen Demand
DWQ     State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Water
        Quality
EPA     U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
FOG     Fats, Oils and Grease
FOGS    Fats, Oils, Grease and Soil
gpd     gallons per day
IU      Industrial User
mg/L    milligrams per liter
POTW    Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA    Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIU     Significant Industrial User
SGRWR F St. George Regional Water Reclamation Facility
TSS     Total Suspended Solids
UPDES   Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
USC     United States Code
 
(Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.104: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACT or "THE    The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
ACT":          amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. and any subsequent amendments thereto.
APPROVAL       The State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, Division Water Quality (DWQ),
AUTHORITY:     or its successor agency.
               (a)   If the user is a corporation:
                  (i)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation
               in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar
               policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
                  (ii)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating
               facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that
               govern the operation of the regulated facility, and is authorized to sign documents on
               behalf of the corporation in accordance with corporate procedures, and where the
               manager has the duty to:
                     (A)   Make major capital investment recommendations;
AUTHORIZED or        (B)   Initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long term
DULY           environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; or
AUTHORIZED           (C)   Ensure that necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
REPRESENTATIVE complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
OF THE USER:   requirements;
               (b)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
               proprietor, respectively.
               (c)   If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or
               highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
               the activities of the government facility, or its designee.
               (d)   The individuals described in subsections (a) through (c), above, may designate a
               duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization
               specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the
               facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
               environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
               the manager.
               The schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and
BEST           other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in subsections
MANAGEMENT     10.06.201(1) and (2). BMPs include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements,
PRACTICES or   operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage, leaks,
BMP:           sludge, waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs may be developed
               by the pretreatment program as a local limit to control discharges from SIU as needed.
BIOCHEMICAL    The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
OXYGEN DEMAND  standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C),
or BOD:        usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L).
BYPASS:        The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment
               facility.
CATEGORICAL
PRETREATMENT   Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA, in accordance
STANDARD or    with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317), that apply to a specific
CATEGORICAL    category of users, and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
STANDARD:
CATEGORICAL    An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical
INDUSTRIAL     standard.
USER or CIU:
CITY:          Ivins City, State of Utah.
               The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to
COLOR:         distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is equivalent to zero (0.0)
               optical density.
CHEMICAL       A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic,
OXYGEN DEMAND  in water.
or COD:
               The samples resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at
COMPOSITE      selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time, to minimize the
SAMPLE:        effect or the variability of the individual samples. This sampling should be in
               accordance with 40 CFR Part 403 Appendix E Sub-part I-Composite Method.
DAILY MAXIMUM: The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a
               calendar day.
               The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where
DAILY MAXIMUM  daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total
LIMIT:         mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed
               in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement
               of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
ENVIRONMENTAL  The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water
PROTECTION     management division director, the regional administrator, or other duly authorized
AGENCY or EPA: official of said agency.
EXISTING       Any source of discharge that is not a new source.
SOURCE:
GRAB SAMPLE:   A sample that is taken from a wastestream, without regard to the flow in the
               wastestream, and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
HAZARDOUS      Waste as defined in 40 CFR 261.3, incorporated herein and made a part hereof.
WASTE:
INDIRECT       The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source which is
DISCHARGE or   regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act (including septage waste
DISCHARGE:     discharged into the POTW).
               The maximum or minimum concentration (or load) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged
INSTANTANEOUS  at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete, grab or composited sample
LIMIT:         collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling
               event.
               A discharge that alone, or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
               sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its
               sludge processes, use or disposal; therefore, it is a violation of SGRWRF's UPDES
               permit, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any
               of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any
INTERFERENCE:  more stringent State or local regulations, including, but not limited to: 1) section
               405 of the Act; 2) the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred
               to as the RCRA; 3) any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan
               prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; 4) the Clean Air Act;
               5) the Toxic Substances Control Act; and 6) the Marine Protection, Research, and
               Sanctuaries Act.
               Specific discharge limits developed to protect the POTW in accordance with 40 CFR
               403.5 and enforced by SGRWRF upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the
LOCAL LIMIT:   general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in subsections 8-4-2.1.A and B. The
               technically based local limits and development documents are kept on file at the
               SGRWRF office and can be reviewed if requested.
               The person designated by the City to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is
MANAGER:       charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter. Manager also means a
               duly authorized representative of the manager.
               Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological
MEDICAL WASTE: wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
               contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY        The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the
AVERAGE:       number of "daily discharges" measured during that month.
MONTHLY        The highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated
AVERAGE LIMIT: as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month, divided by the
               number of "daily discharges" measured during that month.
               (a)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may
               be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
               publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act that
               will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
               accordance with that section, provided that:
                  (i)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site
               at which no other source is located; or
                  (ii)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
               process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing
               source; or
                  (iii)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
               structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing
               source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent,
               factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
               plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
               activity as the existing source, should be considered.
NEW SOURCE:    (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a
               modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new
               building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (a)
               (ii) or (iii) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or
               production equipment.
               (c)   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if
               the owner or operator has:
                  (i)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction
               program:
                     (A)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
                     (B)   Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or
               removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
               placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
                     (C)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
               facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
               reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified
               without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design
               studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
NON-CONTACT    Water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
COOLING WATER: intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
               A discharge which exits the POTW into Waters of the State in quantities or
PASS THROUGH:  concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from
               other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of SGRWRF's UPDES permit,
               including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
               Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, limited
PERSON:        liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
               entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
               This definition includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities.
pH:            A measure of the acidity or basicity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
               Any pollutant, including, but not limited to: dredged spoils; solid waste; incinerator
               residue; filter backwash; sewage; garbage; sewage sludge; munitions; medical wastes;
POLLUTANT:     chemical wastes; biological materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or
               discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; municipal, agricultural and industrial
               wastes; and, certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
               turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
               The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
               alteration of the nature of pollutant properties, in wastewater, prior to, or in lieu
PRETREATMENT:  of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be
               obtained by: 1) physical, chemical, or biological processes; 2) process changes; or 3)
               other means. Pretreatment cannot be obtained by diluting the concentration of the
               pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
               The person designated by SGRWRF to coordinate the SGRWRF Pretreatment Program, charged
PRETREATMENT   with certain duties and responsibilities under the ordinance as directed and delegated
COORDINATOR:   by the manager. A technically skilled position, the pretreatment coordinator, or his
               or her designee, performs surveillance, administrative duties, and related work in
               monitoring compliance, and is a liaison with IUs of the SGRWRF.
PRETREATMENT   Pretreatment standards shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
STANDARDS OR   promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, which
STANDARDS:     applies to IUs, which includes, but is not limited to, prohibited discharge standards,
               categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED
DISCHARGE      Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
STANDARDS or   appear in section
PROHIBITED     10.06.201 of this chapter.
DISCHARGES:
               A treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned
               by the SGRWRF. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
PUBLICLY OWNED storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
TREATMENT      liquid nature, and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. It
WORKS or POTW: also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to a POTW.
               The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which
               has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to, and the discharges from, such a
               treatment works.
SEPTIC TANK    Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers,
WASTE:         and septic tanks.
SEWAGE:        Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
               Except as provided in subsection (c), a significant industrial user is:
               (a)   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
               (b)   An industrial user that:
                  (i)   Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process
               wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown
               wastewater);
                  (ii)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%) or more
SIGNIFICANT    of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant;
INDUSTRIAL     or
USER (SIU):       (iii)   Is designated as such by SGRWRF on the basis that it has a reasonable
               potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, or for violating any
               pretreatment standard or requirement.
               (c)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (b) has no
               reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, or for violating
               any pretreatment standard or requirement, SGRWRF may at any time, on its own
               initiative, or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in
               accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not
               be considered a significant industrial user.
               Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the
               prohibited discharge standards in section
SLUG LOAD or   10.06.201 of this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non routine,
SLUG           episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non customary
DISCHARGE:     batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
               through, or in any other way violates the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit
               conditions.
STORM WATER:   Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and
               resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
TOTAL
SUSPENDED
SOLIDS, or     The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
TSS, or        wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
SUSPENDED
SOLIDS:
               Any exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance
               with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
UPSET:         control of the user. Upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
               operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
               facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER, or
INDUSTRIAL     A source of indirect discharge.
USER, or IU:
               Liquid and water carried industrial waste and sewage from residential dwellings,
WASTEWATER:    commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions,
               whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER
TREATMENT      The portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
PLANT or       industrial waste.
TREATMENT
PLANT:
               All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water-courses, waterways, wells, springs,
               irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
               surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
WATERS OF THE  within, flow through, or border upon this state or any portion thereof. Waters of the
STATE:         State does not include bodies of water confined to, and retained within, the limits of
               private property, and which do not develop into or constitute a nuisance, or a public
               health hazard, or a menace to fish and wildlife (see section 19-5-102 of the Utah
               Code). (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
 
PART 2. GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
10.06.201: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
   (1)   General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other National, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (2)   Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (a)   Pollutants which will create a fire or explosive hazard in the
POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint
of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F (60°C)) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      (b)   Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW, including, but not limited to, discharges with a pH lower than 5.0,
unless the works is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges;
      (c)   Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW, including, but not limited to, discharges with a pH greater than 12.0;
      (d)   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference;
      (e)   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which
will cause interference with the POTW;
      (f)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred forty
degrees Fahrenheit (140°F (60°C)), or which will inhibit biological activity in
the SGRWRF resulting in interference, but in no case in such quantities that
cause the temperature at the SGRWRF headworks to exceed one hundred four
degrees Fahrenheit (104°F (40°C));
      (g)   Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (h)   Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, exceeding one hundred (100) mg/L;
      (i)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety
problems;
      (j)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW, see section
10.06.304 of this chapter;
      (k)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or prevent entry into
the sewers for maintenance or repair;
      (l)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating SGRWRF's UPDES permit;
      (m)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except
in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;
      (n)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the manager;
      (o)   Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      (p)   Any discharge of medical waste that causes or contributes to pass
through or interference:
      (q)   Any wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test; or
      (r)   Any waste containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
   (3)   Discharge: Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.202: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
   (1)   National categorical pretreatment standards, specifying quantities or
concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to
a POTW by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial
subcategories, have been established by EPA in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N,
Parts 405-471 and are hereby incorporated.
   (2)   Users must comply with categorical pretreatment standards found at 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   (3)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the manager shall
impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e). (Ord. 2018-19,
2018)
10.06.203: STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
State of Utah pretreatment standards, established by the Utah Administrative
Code R317-8-8, are hereby incorporated. Any user subject to a state
pretreatment standard is required to comply with the applicable standard. (Ord.
2018-19, 2018)
10.06.204: LOCAL LIMITS:
   (1)   The manager is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
   (2)   Local limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to
the POTW. All limits set for metallic substances are for total metal unless
indicated otherwise. The manager may impose mass limitations in addition to the
concentration based limitations. The development documents for local limits are
kept at SGRWRF offices and may be reviewed upon request.
   (3)   The manager may develop best management practices (BMPs), by
ordinance, or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local
limits and the requirements of section
10.06.201.
   (4)   No user shall discharge pollutants in excess of the local limits
established by the manager. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.205: CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION:
The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter. In
addition, the manager is authorized to temporarily or permanently revoke or
suspend issuance of any type of permit at any time, in order to protect the
POTW from pass through or Interference, or in order to maintain compliance with
any UPDES permit requirement or pretreatment program requirement. The manager
shall also have the right to deny new or increased contributions, or to set
additional conditions on such contributions, to protect the POTW, including
limits that may be more stringent than the approved local limits. (Ord. 2018-
19, 2018)
10.06.206: DILUTION PROHIBITION:
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment,
to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized
by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The manager may impose
mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in any other case when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.207: WASTEWATER SYSTEM:
   (1)   Application For Wastewater Service: Any person desiring to secure, or
required to secure, wastewater service, when such service is available from the
city, shall apply to the water services director, or to such other person
designated by the water services director, and shall pay the required fees
before any wastewater connection is approved. By applying for a wastewater
connection, such person agrees to be bound by this chapter and all applicable
policies and regulations pertaining to the city POTW.
   (2)   Mandatory Use Of Wastewater System:
      (a)   Residential:
         (i)   Residential Subdivisions: Residential subdivision developments
are subject to city policy regarding use of, and connection to, the POTW, as
well as this chapter.
         (ii)   Residential Dwelling Unit: It is mandatory that any residential
dwelling unit shall be connected to the wastewater system at the expense of the
owner or occupant thereof.
            (A)   The sole exception shall be for single residential lot not
within a platted subdivision where said lot is one acre or greater in size. In
such case, a private wastewater disposal system may be utilized if a delay
improvement agreement is approved and executed with the city, and easements are
provided where required. Before commencement of construction of any private
wastewater disposal system, the property owner or person seeking to install a
private wastewater system shall submit plans, specifications, and other
information deemed necessary to the Utah Department of Health, and obtain a
written permit from it for installation thereof. The type, capacity, location,
and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all
requirements of the Utah Department of Health. The owner of a private
wastewater disposal system shall at all times operate and maintain the same in
a sanitary manner and at no expense to the city.
            (B)   When, in the discretion of the wastewater manager, a private
wastewater disposal system ceases to operate effectively or creates a
sanitation hazard, direct connection to the public wastewater system may be
required by the manager, in which case the private wastewater disposal system
shall be closed, and its facilities disconnected and properly decommissioned.
      (b)   Commercial, Industrial, And Other Buildings: It is mandatory that
all commercial, industrial, and other buildings with wastewater service be
connected to the public wastewater system. Private wastewater disposal systems
shall not be allowed.
      (c)   In addition to other available enforcement actions, the city may
enforce the wastewater connection requirements imposed in this section by
disconnecting or refusing to supply the culinary water servicing the premises
until proper connection to the wastewater system has been made.
   (3)   Ownership Of Connecting Lines: Unless provision is expressly made
otherwise for ownership of laterals or lines by the owner of the adjacent
property through a written agreement, all lines and laterals connecting the
city POTW to a landowner or user's premises shall be deemed to be the property
of the landowner/user, and all operation and maintenance shall be at the
landowner's/user's expense. The city shall not be liable for blockage or flow
interference in laterals or connecting lines before they connect to the city
wastewater line.
   (4)   POTW Connections: Connection to, or extension of, the city wastewater
main for use by a user shall be the sole responsibility of the user. Acceptance
of any wastewater facility by the city for public use and maintenance, shall
not occur until such facility has been inspected and approved for compliance
with all city, state, and federal requirements.
   (5)   Inspection Of POTW Connections: Any connection to, extension of, or
modification of, the wastewater system shall be under the direction of the
water services director, and inspection of such shall be made by the
appropriate inspector after installation in every case. No backfilling shall be
done until the inspection is made, and the work accepted. In the event of an
installation, repair, or alteration, where no building permit is required,
there shall be no connection, directly or indirectly, with the wastewater
system without notification to, and approval in advance from, the water
services director or his designated representative, as well as the inspection
after installation required above. A reasonable inspection fee shall be paid
for any inspection made under this subsection.
   (6)   Quality Of Installations And Maintenance: All wastewater mains,
manholes, service laterals and other materials used in conjunction with the
wastewater system shall be of such quality and specifications as required by
the "City Of St. George Standard Specifications For Design And Construction",
as last revised. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any drain or
service line to the POTW system unless such person is a contractor properly
licensed by the state. After installation, all private service pipes,
connections and other apparatus shall be maintained in good repair at the
user's expense. No person shall be allowed to dig into the street for purposes
of installing, repairing or maintaining any service pipes, connections or other
apparatus except under the direction of the water services director or his
designated personnel who shall at all reasonable times have free access to
drains and wastewater lines connecting with the wastewater system for the
purpose of examination and inspection. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
PART 3. PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
10.06.301: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
chapter, and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section
10.06.201 of this chapter, within the time limitations specified by EPA, the
State, or the manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary
for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's
expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the
manager before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to
SGRWRF under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.302: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
   (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, SGRWRF may require users to restrict their
discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW, and determine the
user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (2)   The manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on their property, and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization,
   (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors, such as described by the
International Plumbing Code, shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing
excessive amounts of liquid waste, floatable grease, oil, or sand; except, such
interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the manager and shall be
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection, and away from
building entrances and exits. Such interceptors shall be cleaned, repaired, and
maintained by the user at its expense.
   (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   (5)   Sampling manholes shall be located in an area to allow for ease of
cleaning, sampling and inspection by the user and SGRWRF. If located in a
parking area, parking shall not be allowed on or over the sampling manhole.
(Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.303: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLANS:
The pretreatment coordinator shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an
accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan, or other actions to control
slug discharges. The pretreatment coordinator may require any user to develop,
submit for approval, and implement, such a plan, or take such other action that
may be necessary to control slug discharges. An accidental discharge/slug
discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
   (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
   (2)   List and description of stored chemicals;
   (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the manager of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by section
10.06.606 of this chapter; and
   (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.304: HAULED WASTEWATER:
   (1)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the manager, and at such times as are established by the manager.
Such waste shall not violate Part 2 of this chapter or any other requirements
established by SGRWRF. The manager may require septic tank waste haulers to
obtain individual wastewater discharge permits.
   (2)   The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as "industrial septage"
requires prior approval and an individual wastewater discharge permit from the
SGRWRF. The manager shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of such
wastes, if disposal would interfere with the treatment plant operations or
violate Part 2 of this chapter. Waste haulers are subject to all other sections
of this chapter.
   (3)   Waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every load. This
form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler,
truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
PART 4. INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS
10.06.401: WASTEWATER ANALYSIS:
When requested by the pretreatment coordinator, a user must submit information
on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of
the request. The pretreatment coordinator is authorized to prepare a form for
this purpose, and periodically may require users to update this information. If
the user changes or adds a process, the user automatically is required to
update the information provided to the pretreatment coordinator thirty (30)
days prior to the process being changed or added. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.402: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
   (1)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit from the
manager, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely
application pursuant to section
10.06.403 of this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period
specified therein, unless the manager has determined the SIU meets the
requirements of section
10.06.104.RR (3).
   (2)   The manager may require other users to obtain individual wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   (3)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Part 10 through Part
12 of this chapter. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit does
not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State
pretreatment standards or requirements, or with any other requirements of
Federal, State, and local law. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.403: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: EXISTING CONNECTIONS:
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
chapter, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall,
within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the pretreatment coordinator
for an individual wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section
10.06.405 of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW
to continue after one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this
chapter, except in accordance with an individual wastewater discharge permit
issued by the manager. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.404: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW CONNECTIONS:
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW, shall obtain such
permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for an
individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section
10.06.405 of this chapter, shall be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to
the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (Ord. 2018-19,
2018)
10.06.405: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS:
   (1)   All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall submit a permit application. All permittees that will be continuing to
discharge are required to complete an application sixty (60) days prior to the
permit expiring. The SGRWRF may require users to submit all or some of the
following information as part of a permit application:
      (a)   Identifying Information:
         (i)   The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner;
         (ii)   Contact information for the authorized representative and the
duly authorized representative for the facility; and
         (iii)   The description of activities, facilities, and plant
production processes on the premises;
      (b)   Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      (c)   Description Of Operations:
         (i)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of
production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process
diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes;   
         (ii)   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
         (iii)   Number and type of employees, proposed hours of operation, and
actual hours of operation;
         (iv)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day); and
         (v)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points of discharge;
      (d)   Time and duration of discharges.
      (e)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit.
      (f)   Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in section
10.06.202(3) (40 CFR 403.6(e)).
      (g)   Measurement Of Pollutants:
         (i)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing
sources;
         (ii)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
pretreatment coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process;
         (iii)   Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported;
         (iv)   The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section
10.06.610 of this chapter. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or
pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as
required by the pretreatment coordinator, or the applicable standards to
determine compliance with the standard; and
         (v)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in section
10.06.611 of this chapter.
      (h)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
pretreatment coordinator to evaluate the permit application.
   (2)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will
be returned to the user for revision.
   (3)   Based on information provided by the permittee as required in
subsection
10.06.405(1), the SGRWRF will determine, within thirty (30) days: 1) if
additional information is needed; 2) if a permit is not necessary; or 3) if a
permit will be required to be issued before the IU discharge is allowed to the
POTW.
   (4)   Should any of the information requested or supplied be considered by
the user to be of a confidential nature, the user should request confidential
status of specific information in accordance with section Part 8 of this
chapter. Information regarding sampling and analysis of the discharge is not
considered confidential information. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.406: APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS:
   (1)   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
user and contain the certification statement required in section
10.06.614(1).
   (2)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate, because for any reason a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters of the company, a new written
authorization must be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator, satisfying the
requirements of this section, prior to or together with any reports being
signed by an authorized representative. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.407: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
The pretreatment coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a
complete permit application, the manager will determine whether to issue an
individual wastewater discharge permit. The manager may approve, conditionally
approve, or deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
PART 5. INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE
10.06.501: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION:
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. An
individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
five (5) years, at the discretion of the manager. Each individual wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific effective date and expiration date.
(Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.502: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS:
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include conditions deemed
reasonably necessary by the manager to prevent pass through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal,
and protect against damage to the POTW.
   (1)   Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      (a)   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, effective date, and expiration date.
      (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to, and approval from, the SGRWRF, and provisions
for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater
discharge permit.
      (c)   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards in part 403 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, State and local
law.
      (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type, based on Federal, State, and local law.
      (e)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, and local law.
      (f)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
manager to be necessary.
      (g)   Requirements to report to the manager any slug discharge.
      (h)   Requirements to notify the manager of changes to the industrial
user's discharge thirty (30) days prior to the change. The manager shall
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the change prior to the user making the
change at the facility that may impact the discharge at the facility to the
POTW.
   (2)   Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
      (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (b)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW;
      (c)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans, or other special conditions, including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine
discharges;
      (d)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (e)   The schedule of user charges and fees, for the management of the
wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
      (g)   A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, and
local standards, including those which become effective during the term of the
individual wastewater discharge permit; and
      (h)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the manager to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.503: PERMIT APPEALS:
An interested person or entity, including the industrial user, may petition the
SGRWRF to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within fifteen
(15) days of the issuance date.
   (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review is a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
   (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge provision objected to, the reason for the objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge
permit.
   (3)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit is not stayed
pending the appeal.
   (4)   If the SGRWRF fails to act within fifteen (15) days of a petition for
reconsideration, it is deemed denied. Denials and decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
   (5)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Fifth Judicial District Court in and for Washington County, State of Utah.
(Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.504: PERMIT MODIFICATION:
The manager may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   (1)   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
   (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character, since the time of the
individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   (3)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; or
   (4)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the POTW, related personnel, receiving waters, or sludge, as follows:
   (5)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
   (6)   Misrepresentations or intentional or unintentional failure to fully
disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or
in any required reporting;
   (7)   Revision of, or a grant of variance from, categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
   (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater
discharge permit; or
   (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.505: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER:
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner and/or operator
only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days advanced notice to the
manager, and the manager approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer.
Failure to provide advance notice of such transfer to, and approval from, the
manager, renders the wastewater discharge permit void on the date of facility
transfer. The notice to the manager must include a written certification by the
new owner and/or operator which:
   (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
   (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
   (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit; and
   (4)   Acknowledges the conditions of the permit will not change. (Ord. 2018-
19, 2018)
10.06.506: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION:
   (1)   The manager may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (a)   Failure to notify the manager of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      (b)   Failure to provide prior notification to the manager of changed
conditions pursuant to section
10.06.605 of this chapter;
      (c)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (d)   Falsifying self monitoring reports;
      (e)   Falsifying certification statements;
      (f)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (g)   Refusing to allow the manager and/or his or her designee timely
access to the facility premises and/or records;
      (h)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (i)   Failure to pay fines;
      (j)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (k)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (l)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey, or the wastewater
discharge permit application or reapplication;
      (m)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility;
      (n)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms
of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter; or
      (o)   Upon request by the permittee due to a change in ownership, or the
business is moving, or going out of business.
   (2)   Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual
wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a
new individual wastewater discharge permit to that user.
   (3)   Non-compliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed
termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered the opportunity to
show cause under these standards why the proposed action should not be taken.
However, notwithstanding this or any other provision of this chapter, the
manager may in his or her sole discretion, immediately revoke any discharge
permit where the discharge reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to
the health or welfare of persons. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.507: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE:
A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application, in accordance with section
10.06.405 of this chapter, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration
of the user's existing individual wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2018-19,
2018)
10.06.508: REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
   (1)   If another municipality, or user located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the manager shall enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
   (2)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (1), above,
the manager shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality:
      (a)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      (b)   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
      (c)   Such other information as the manager may deem necessary.
   (3)   An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (1), above,
shall contain the following terms and conditions:
      (a)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits,
including required baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) which are at least as
stringent as those set out in section
10.06.204 of this chapter. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance
and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City's
ordinance or local limits;
      (b)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis;
      (c)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection, sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by: a) the
contributing municipality; b) the manager; and c) jointly by the contributing
municipality and the manager;
      (d)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
manager with access to all information that the contributing municipality
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      (e)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      (f)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
      (g)   A provision ensuring the manager or his or her designee access to
the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the manager; and
      (h)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms
of the intermunicipal agreement. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
PART 6. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
10.06.601: BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS:
   (1)   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date
of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on
a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical industrial users currently discharging to, or scheduled to
discharge to, the POTW shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report
which contains the information listed in subsection (2), below. At least ninety
(90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources
that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a
report which contains the information listed in subsection (2), below. A new
Source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   (2)   Users described above shall submit the following information:
      (a)   All information required in section
10.06.405.
      (b)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (i)   The user shall provide the information required in section
10.06.405(1)(g) (i) through (v);
         (ii)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph;
         (iii)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment facility exists. If other wastewaters are
mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should
measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e), to evaluate compliance with the
pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit shall be
submitted to the pretreatment coordinator, along with supporting data;
         (iv)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
sections
10.06.610 and
10.06.611;
         (v)   The pretreatment coordinator may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data if the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures; and
         (vi)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
      (c)   Compliance Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative as defined in section
10.06.104(3), and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operations and maintenance (O & M), and/or additional
pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
      (d)   Compliance Schedule: After it is determined that additional
pretreatment and/or O & M will be required, user must submit a compliance
schedule within thirty (30) days. The compliance schedule shall specify the
shortest timeline for the user to provide such additional pretreatment and/or O
& M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out
in section
10.06.602 of this chapter.
      (e)   Signature And Report Certification: All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with section
10.06.614(1) of this chapter and signed by an authorized representative as
defined in section
10.06.104(3). (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.602: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS:
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
section
10.06.601(2)(d) of this chapter:
   (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   (2)   The user shall submit a progress report to the pretreatment
coordinator no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the
schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or
not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and,
if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule; and
   (3)   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the pretreatment coordinator. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.603: REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE:
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
pretreatment coordinator a report containing the information described in
section
10.06.405(1)(g) and
10.06.601(2)(b) of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long
term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards, expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section
10.06.614 of this chapter. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with sections
10.06.610 and
10.06.611. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.604: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS:
   (1)   All significant industrial users, at a frequency determined by the
pretreatment coordinator, must submit reports, no less than twice per year
(June and December), indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards, and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases
where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management
practice (BMP), or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit
documentation required by the pretreatment coordinator or the pretreatment
standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
   (2)   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with section
10.06.614(1) of this chapter.
   (3)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   (4)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the pretreatment coordinator, using the procedures
prescribed in section
10.06.611 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.605: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
   (1)   Each user must notify the pretreatment coordinator of any significant
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the
change, including changes that may affect slug discharges to the POTW.
Significant changes shall be considered to be changes beyond the typical
operating range of the user, or changes that would have significant impact on
POTW operations.
   (2)   The pretreatment coordinator may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
section
10.06.405 of this chapter.
   (3)   The manager may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit under
section
10.06.507 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under section
10.06.504 of this chapter, in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
   (4)   The manager may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the change
based on the effect the change may have on the POTW and/or the pretreatment
program. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.606: REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS:
   (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge, a slug discharge, or slug load, that might cause
potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately notify either in
person or via a phone conversation with the pretreatment coordinator of the
incident. A phone message does not satisfy this notification requirement. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
   (2)   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s)
of the discharge, and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees of the notification procedures in the
event of a discharge described in subsection (1) above. Employers shall ensure
that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.
   (4)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the pretreatment
coordinator immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential
for a slug discharge. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.607: REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS:
All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports as required by the pretreatment coordinator.
(Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.608: NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify
the pretreatment coordinator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the pretreatment coordinator within
thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the
industrial user is not required if: 1) SGRWRF performs scheduled sampling at
the facility at least once a month; 2) if SGRWRF performs sampling at the
facility, between the time when the initial sampling was conducted, and the
time when the user receives the results of the initial sampling; or, 3) if
SGRWRF has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user,
then SGRWRF will perform the repeat sampling and analysis, unless it notifies
the User of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling
and analysis. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.609: NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
   (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one
hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information: 1) an identification
of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 2) an estimation of the
mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged
during that calendar month; and 3) an estimation of the mass of constituents in
the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12)
months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty
(180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section
10.06.605 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this section does
not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self monitoring requirements of sections
10.06.601,
10.06.603, and
10.06.604 of this chapter.
   (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (1), above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15)
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen
(15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33
(e), requires a one time notification. Subsequent months during which the user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   (3)   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA,
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user shall notify the manager,
the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous
waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of
the effective date of such regulations.
   (4)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated.
   (5)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable Federal, State, or local law. (Ord. 2018-19,
2018)
10.06.610: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application, report, permit or other
requirement by this chapter, shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods,
or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures approved by the
pretreatment coordinator.
   (2)   All laboratory samples collected for this chapter shall be analyzed by
a laboratory that is either certified by the Utah Bureau of Laboratory
Improvements or approved by the manager. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.611: SAMPLE COLLECTION:
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data
obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period
covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
   (1)   Except as indicated in subsections (2) and (3) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using twenty four (24) hour flow proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time proportional composite sampling or
grab sampling is authorized by the pretreatment coordinator. Where time
proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by SGRWRF, the
samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA
guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty four (24) hour period
may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: 1) for cyanide, total
phenols, and sulfides, the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in
the field; and 2) for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be
composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters,
unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies, may be authorized by SGRWRF, as appropriate. In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
   (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds, must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
   (3)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety
(90) day compliance reports required in sections
10.06.601 and
10.06.603, a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for
facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist. For facilities for
which historical sampling data are available, the pretreatment coordinator may
authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by section
10.06.604, the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab
samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.612: DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS:
Written reports are deemed submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which
are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United
States Postal Service, the date the report is received shall govern. (Ord.
2018-19, 2018)
10.06.613: RECORDKEEPING:
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and
make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained
pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any additional
records obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user
independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with BMPs
established under section
10.06.204(3). Records shall include: 1) the date, exact place, method, and time
of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; 2) the dates
analyses were performed; 3) who performed the analyses; 4) the analytical
techniques or methods used; and 5) the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or SGRWRF, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the pretreatment coordinator. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.614: CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS:
Certification Of Permit Applications, User Reports And Initial Monitoring
Waiver: The following certification statement, signed by an authorized
representative as defined in subsection
10.06.104(3), shall be submitted by users submitting permit applications under
section
10.06.406: 1) users submitting baseline monitoring reports under subsection
10.06.601(2)(e); 2) users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical
pretreatment standard deadlines under section
10.06.603; and 3) users submitting periodic compliance reports required by
subsections
10.06.604(1) through (4):
   I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
(Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
PART 7. COMPLIANCE MONITORING
10.06.701: RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The manager or his or her designee shall have the right to enter the premises
of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of
this chapter, and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder. Users shall allow the manager or his or her designee ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and/or the performance of any additional duties.
Inspections and monitoring shall be conducted as frequently as determined by
the SGRWRF and may be announced or unannounced.
   (1)   Where a user has security measures in force that require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards, so, upon presentation of
suitable identification, the manager shall be permitted to enter without delay
for the purpose of performing his or her duties.
   (2)   The manager shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the user's operations.
   (3)   The manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated at least annually, or as required per the manufacturer's
recommendations and specifications to ensure their accuracy.
   (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be removed promptly by the user
at the verbal or written request of the manager and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such obstruction and providing safe and easy access shall be
borne by the user.
   (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the manager or his or her designee
access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
   (6)   The location of the monitoring facility shall provide ample room in or
near the monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples and analysis. Whether constructed on public or private property, the
monitoring facility should be provided in accordance with the SGRWRF's
requirements, and all applicable local construction standard and
specifications. Such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in a manner
that enables the manager to perform independent monitoring activities.
   (7)   All significant industrial users will be inspected at least annually
including review of facilities and reports.
   (8)   SGRWRF may use a camera to photograph areas of the facility as
necessary for carrying out the duties of the industrial pretreatment program
including, but not limited to, documentation of the user's compliance status
and for reinforcement of written reports. The user shall be allowed to review
copies of the photographs for confidentiality claims. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.702: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the manager or his or her designee has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of SGRWRF designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, the manager may seek issuance of a
search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
PART 8. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
10.06.801: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the manager inspection and sampling activities,
shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
manager, that the release of specific information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
user furnishing a report that specific information should be held confidential,
the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall be redacted and not made available for inspection by the public.
Regardless of any such assertion of confidentiality, all information,
unredacted, shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the UPDES program or pretreatment program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person or entity furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics, and other effluent data, as
defined at 40 CFR 2.302, shall not be recognized as confidential information
and shall be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
PART 9. PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
10.06.901: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The manager shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that
provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by POTW, a
list of the users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months,
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all
significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates
subsections (3), (4) or (8) of this section) and shall mean:
   (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in Part 2 of this chapter;
   (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by Part 2 multiplied by the applicable TRC
criteria (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and TRC=1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
   (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by Part 2 (daily maximum, long term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that the manager determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
   (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the manager exercise of
its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   (5)   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
   (6)   Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   (8)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the manager determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 2018-19,
2018)
PART 10. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
10.06.1001: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION:
When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
manager may serve upon that user a written notice of violation, personally or
by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested). Within fifteen (15)
days of receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for
the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, including specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the user to the manager. Submission of such a
plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section
shall limit the authority of the manager to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, before or without issuing a
notice of violation. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1002: CONSENT ORDERS:
The manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the
user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to sections
10.06.1004 and
10.06.1005 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 2018-19,
2018)
10.06.1003: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear
before the manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place
for the show cause hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for
such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested)
at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on
any authorized representative of the user as defined in subsection
10.06.104(3). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1004: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing
that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does
not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be
a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1005: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Manager may issue an order
to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing
the user to:
   (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1006: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
   (1)   When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the manager may fine such user an amount not to exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation,
per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge
limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
   (2)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after sixty (60) calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid
balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one and one-half
percent (1.5%) per month. A lien against the user's real and/or personal
property shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
   (3)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the manager to reconsider the fine, along with full payment of the fine amount,
within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has
merit, the manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's
appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereon,
shall be returned to the user. The manager may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
   (4)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the User. (Ord. 2018-19,
2018)
10.06.1007: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears
to present, or cause, an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The manager may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted
as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension of a permit and/or
discharge to the POTW.
   (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the manager may take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to persons or the environment. The manager may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of
the manager, that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in section
10.06.1008 of this chapter are initiated against the user.
   (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution, and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence. The written statement shall be submitted to the
manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under
sections
10.06.1003 or
10.06.1008 of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1008: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
   (1)   Violations Subject To Discharge Termination: In addition to the
provisions in section
10.06.506 of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
      (a)   Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
      (d)   Refusal of access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in Part 2 of this chapter.
   (2)   Notice Of Discharge Termination: User will be notified of the proposed
termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under
section
10.06.1003 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken.
Exercise of this option by the manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
PART 11. JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
10.06.1101: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
manager may petition the Washington County Fifth District Court through the
City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
individual wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement, imposed by
this chapter on activities of the user. The manager may also seek such other
and further relief in law or equity, including a requirement for the user to
conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1102: CIVIL PENALTIES:
   (1)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable
to the City for a maximum civil penalty of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation.
   (2)   The SGRWRF may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs,
interest, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any other actual damages
incurred by SGRWRF or the City.
   (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained by the user from the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any
other factor as justice requires.
   (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2018-19,
2018)
10.06.1103: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
The SGRWRF will refer to the State of Utah criminal violations of any
pretreatment standards or permit conditions. The Attorney General's office for
Utah will offer the City, wherein the violation occurred, the option to
prosecute the violator. Should the local entity decline, the State or EPA, at
their discretion, may initiate appropriate criminal action. The SGRWRF will
assist the Attorney General's office or EPA any way it can with appropriate
support for the action. The penalties set forth herein are in addition to any
other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under
State or Federal law.
   (1)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, upon conviction, shall be
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for
not more than one (1) year, or both.
   (2)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage, upon conviction, shall be
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of not more than
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for not more than one (1) year, or both.
   (3)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter, upon conviction, shall guilty of a third degree
felony, and be subject to a penalty of not more than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than five
(5) years, or both.
   (4)   In the event of a second or subsequent conviction, a user shall be
punished by a fine of not more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per
violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than five (5) years, or both.
(Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1104: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The SGRWRF may
take any, all, or any combination of these actions, against a noncompliant
user, simultaneously or otherwise. Enforcement of pretreatment violations
generally will be in accordance with the SGRWRF's enforcement response plan.
However, SGRWRF may take other action against a user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, SGRWRF is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against a noncompliant user. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
PART 12. SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
10.06.1201: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter,
a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files
a satisfactory bond, payable to the City, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the manager to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
(Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1202: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter,
a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first
submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore
or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge, including, but not
limited to, liability insurance. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1203: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE:
Whenever a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user
may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user's expense, only after the
user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 2018-19,
2018)
10.06.1204: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
Whenever a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, it hereby is declared a
public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the manager.
Any person or entity creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of title 7, chapter 6 governing such nuisances, including, but not
limited to, reimbursing the City for any costs incurred in removing, abating,
or remedying said nuisance. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
PART 13. AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
10.06.1301: UPSET:
   (1)   For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. Upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
   (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards, if the requirements
of subsection (3), below, are met.
   (3)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (b)   The facility at the time was being operated in a prudent and
workman like manner, and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and
      (c)   The user has submitted the following information to the manager
within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset, and, if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five (5) days:
         (i)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (ii)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times,
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (iii)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (5)   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   (6)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility, and until the facility
is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other situations, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 2018-19,
2018)
10.06.1302: BYPASS:
   (1)   For the purposes of this section:
      (a)   Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user's treatment facility.
      (b)   Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   (2)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of subsections (3) and (4) of this section.
   (3)   Bypass Notifications:
      (a)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the manager, at least ten (10) days before the date of
the bypass.
      (b)   A user shall submit oral notice to the manager of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty four (24)
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain: a) a description of the bypass;
b) its cause; c) the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times;
d) if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and e) steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The manager, in his or her sole discretion, may
waive the written report on a case by case basis if the oral report has been
received within twenty four (24) hours, and the facts merit the waiver.
   (4)   Bypass:
      (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the manager may take an enforcement
action against a user, unless:
         (i)   Bypass was unavoidable in order to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage;
         (ii)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (iii)   The user submitted notices as required under subsection (3) of
this section.
      (b)   The manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the manager determines that it will meet the three (3)
conditions listed in subsection (4)(a) of this section.
      (c)   Bypass shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards, if the requirements
of this subsection (4) are met. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
PART 14. FATS, OILS, GREASE, AND SOIL (FOGS) CONTROL
10.06.1401: GENERAL:
The following section is applicable to commercial and industrial users that
have the potential to discharge deleterious wastewaters containing elevated
levels of fat, oils, grease and/or soil to the POTW. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1402: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are supplemental to the St. George Pretreatment
Ordinance and applicable to this section:
 
                                  Any business or public or private entity,
                                  except for significant industrial users
                                  (SIU), who causes or permits the contribution
COMMERCIAL USER:                  or discharge of wastewater into the POTW; and
                                  who may be regulated, where necessary, to
                                  comply with the St. George Pretreatment
                                  Ordinance.
                                  One or more interceptors receiving
COMMON INTERCEPTOR:               deleterious wastewater from more than one
                                  establishment.
FOG:                              Fats, oil and grease of vegetable and animal
                                  origin.
                                  Fats, oil, grease (of vegetable and animal
FOGS:                             origin), petroleum oils (or crude oil
                                  origin), and soil (sand, dirt, etc.).
                                  Any building, vehicle, place, or structure,
                                  or any room or division in a building,
                                  vehicle, place, or structure, where: 1) food
                                  is prepared, served, or sold for immediate
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE): consumption on or in the vicinity of the
                                  premises; 2) called for or taken out by
                                  customers; or 3) prepared prior to being
                                  delivered to another location for
                                  consumption.
                                  A structure or device designed for the
                                  purpose of removing and preventing fats,
                                  oils, and grease from entering the sanitary
GREASE INTERCEPTOR:               sewer collection system. These devices are
                                  below-ground units in outside areas with a
                                  minimum capacity of one thousand (1,000)
                                  gallons.
                                  A device designed for the purpose of removing
                                  and preventing fats, oils, and grease from
GREASE TRAP:                      entering the sanitary sewer collection
                                  system. These devices are typically compact,
                                  under-the-sink units located near food
                                  preparation areas. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
 
10.06.1403: INTERCEPTOR AND TRAP INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS:
   (1)   Grease and sand/oil interceptors, as described by the International
Plumbing Code (IPC), shall be required of any commercial user when the SGRWRF
determines they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing
FOGS in excessive amounts, except such interceptors shall not be required for
residential dwelling units.
   (2)   Any commercial user utilizing a three (3) compartment sink shall be
required to have either a grease interceptor or grease trap installed at its
own expense and shall be required to comply with maintaining the device as
outlined in the St. George City Pretreatment Operating Plan.
   (3)   All construction plans for interceptors shall be submitted to SGRWRF
for review and approval prior to installation. All interceptors shall be of a
type, construction, and capacity approved by SGRWRF.
   (4)   All interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable
of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of
substantial construction, water tight, and equipped with easily removable
covers which are gas and water tight.
   (5)   All newly constructed commercial structures, strip malls, multi-tenant
planned-occupied buildings, or planned-unoccupied buildings, shall install
independent six inch (6") wastewater discharge lines stubbed out within each
designated future food establishment unit. If a new source commercial
structure, strip mall, or multi-tenant building has planned occupancy by one or
more businesses that do not generate FOG, and therefore do not need a grease
interceptor, and the owner of the structure does not facilitate the
installation of independent six inch (6") wastewater discharge line and install
a common interceptor, then no future food establishments shall be permitted,
unless facilities are retrofitted for independent lines.
   (6)   All newly constructed "stand alone" commercial structures, strip
malls, multi-tenant planned-occupied buildings, where a three (3) compartment
sink will be utilized, will be required to install a grease interceptor.
   (7)   All existing commercial or industrial businesses shall have one year
to install an interceptor upon notification by SGRWRF, where required by SGRWRF
standards.
   (8)   Interceptors for businesses that have closed shall be dewatered and
cleaned by the owner of said establishment. A representative of SGRWRF may
inspect and verify this process has been completed to the satisfaction of
SGRWRF.
   (9)   Grease traps are only allowed in place of grease interceptors when in
the opinion of the manager it is physically impossible to install a grease
interceptor outside of the building or business. As such, a variance request
from the owner or lessee of the property must be made to SGRWRF with a
certification letter from a duly licensed Utah plumber or engineer. (Ord. 2018-
19, 2018)
10.06.1404: GENERAL FOGS WASTE DISCHARGE LIMITS AND REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to discharge within SGRWRF jurisdiction, any sanitary
wastewater, commercial and industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of
this pretreatment chapter. The following are general requirements and
prohibitions applicable to this section:
   (1)   The discharge of any substance into the sewer system that exceeds or
violates general or specific prohibitions listed in section
10.06.201 is prohibited.
   (2)   The discharge into the sewer system of FOGs that may accumulate and/or
cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system, or at the sewer system
lateral, except as provided herein, is prohibited.
   (3)   Installation and use of food grinders in new and/or remodeled FSEs is
not recommended.
   (4)   Emulsifiers, enzymes, or degreasers shall not be added as sewer aids
to any plumbing that leads to any interceptor directly or indirectly.
   (5)   The disposal of cooking oil (yellow grease) into the sewer system is
prohibited. All waste cooking oils shall be collected, stored, and labeled
properly in receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other
acceptable methods of disposal.
   (6)   The discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of 140°F to
any FOGS control device, including interceptors and traps, is prohibited.
   (7)   The discharge of waste from toilets, urinals, washbasins, and other
fixtures containing fecal materials into sewer lines intended for interceptor
service, is prohibited.
   (8)   The discharge to the sewer system of any waste including FOGS and
solid materials, that were otherwise removed from an interceptor or other FOGS
control device, is prohibited. Wastes removed from interceptors must be hauled
off and properly disposed of periodically in compliance with operation and
maintenance requirements.
   (9)   Operation of an interceptor with FOGS and solids (floating + settled)
accumulation, exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of the design hydraulic depth
of the interceptor, is prohibited.
   (10)   Commercial users, during regular business hours, shall provide to the
pretreatment coordinator or his or her designee immediate and safe access to
the users premises, FOGS handling facilities, and BMP facilities.
   (11)   The pretreatment coordinator may require visual monitoring at the
expense of the commercial user to observe conditions of the user's sewer
lateral and lines downstream. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1405: KITCHEN BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) REQUIREMENTS:
All food service establishments (FSEs) shall be required, at a minimum, to
implement and comply with the following kitchen BMPs, whenever applicable:
   (1)   Drain screens (strainers) shall be installed on all drainage pipes in
food preparation areas.
   (2)   All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in
recycling receptacles such as barrels or drums. Such recycling receptacles
shall be maintained properly to ensure they do not leak.
   (3)   All garbage and food waste shall be disposed of directly into trash
bins or containers, and not in sinks, drainage pipes, or the sewer system. Food
waste should be disposed of in lined trash bins.
   (4)   Employee Training: Employees of FSEs shall be trained twice each
calendar year in the following areas:
      (a)   How to "dry wipe/scrape" pots, pans, dishware, and work areas
before washing to remove FOG.
      (b)   How to properly dispose of garbage, food waste, and solids in lined
plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers, to prevent leaking
and odors.
      (c)   The location and use of absorbent products to clean under fryer
baskets and other locations where FOG may be spilled or accumulated.
      (d)   How to properly dispose of cooking oil from fry equipment into a
FOG receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling.
      (e)   Training shall be documented, and employee signatures recorded,
indicating each employee's attendance and understanding of the practices
reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time
by the pretreatment coordinator, or designee.
   (5)   Exhaust filters shall be maintained in good operating condition
utilizing frequent cleaning practices. Wastewater generated from cleaning
exhaust filters shall be disposed properly.
   (6)   Kitchen BMP and "NO GREASE" signs, posters, or similar information, in
appropriate language(s), shall be prominently displayed in the food preparation
and dishwashing areas at all times.
   (7)   Absorbent materials shall be placed under fryers and other areas where
FOG typically or frequently drips or spills.
   (8)   Covered devices shall be used in transporting FOG to prevent spills.
   (9)   FOG containers shall be emptied before they are full to avoid
accidental or incidental spills.
   (10)   "Spill Kits" (e.g., absorbent materials) shall be provided and
readily available in the event of a spill. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1406: INTERCEPTOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All existing and newly constructed interceptors shall be operated in accordance
with the manufacturer's specifications. The maintenance frequency for all
commercial users with interceptors shall be determined by the following:
   (1)   Where installed, an interceptor shall be fully maintained by the user,
at its sole expense, in a continuous and efficient manner, and at all times
subject to SGRWRF inspection and approval.
   (2)   Interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by
the periodic removal of the full contents of the interceptor. Interceptors
shall be fully emptied and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined
floating and settled FOGS accumulation does not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the design hydraulic depth of the Interceptor. This is to ensure that
the minimum hydraulic retention time, and required available volume, is
maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOGS.
   (3)   If an interceptor at any time is observed by the pretreatment
coordinator or his or her designee to contain floating and settled FOGS
accumulation in excess of twenty-five percent (25%), the user shall be required
to have the interceptor serviced as soon as possible, but no later than ten
(10) days from the date the notice of violation was given, such that all FOGS,
sludge, and other materials, are completely removed from the interceptor.
   (4)   The owner of the property on which a common interceptor, and/or the
facilities discharging to a common interceptor, are located shall be primarily
responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, and repair of the interceptor.
   (5)   No commercial user shall increase the use of water or in any other
manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a way of achieving compliance with the
St. George City Pretreatment Ordinance. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1407: GREASE TRAP OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Where installed, a grease trap shall be fully maintained by the user,
at its sole expense, in a continuous and efficient manner, and at all times
subject to SGRWRF inspection and approval.
   (2)   A FSE may use, or be required to install, grease traps, in lieu of
installation of a grease interceptor, when, in the opinion of the manager: 1)
installation of an interceptor cannot physically be accomplished; 2) there is
not adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and a
proposed grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the
private collection lines or the public sewer; or 3) no alternative pretreatment
can be installed. Sizing of grease traps shall be performed by a professional
engineer or plumber registered in the State of Utah, but shall conform to
SGRWRF Design Standards and Construction Specifications as a minimum.
   (3)   Grease traps shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications.
   (4)   Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by
removing accumulated grease on an as needed basis, or the frequency specified
by the manufacturer, but no less than weekly.
   (5)   Grease traps shall be fully emptied of all food residues, and any FOG
waste, during the cleaning and scraping process.
   (6)   Grease traps shall be inspected periodically, but in no event less
than once a month, to check for leaking seams and pipes, and for effective
operation of the baffles and flow-regulating device. Grease traps and their
baffles shall be maintained free of all caked-on FOG and waste. Removable
baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process.
   (7)   Automatic dishwashers and/or food grinder units shall not be connected
to, or discharged to, any grease trap.
   (8)   No FSE shall increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt
to dilute a discharge as a way of achieving compliance with the St. George
Pretreatment Ordinance. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1408: NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A commercial and industrial user shall comply with the following notification
requirements:
   (1)   Notification Of Spills And/Or Sanitary Sewer Overflows (SSO):
      (a)   In the event a user is unable to comply with the FOGS control
requirements due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error, or the
user has reasonable belief that its discharge will violate this chapter, the
user or its representative shall immediately notify the pretreatment
coordinator by telephone.
      (b)   If the material discharged has the potential to cause, or results
in, sewer blockage or SSO, the user shall immediately notify the SGRWRF and the
pretreatment coordinator by telephone at: (435) 634-5849.
      (c)   Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the
pretreatment coordinator no later than five (5) workings days from the date of
the incident, to the following address: Pretreatment Coordinator, SGRWRF - 3780
S. 1550 W., St. George, Utah 84790. The written notification shall state the
date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were
taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to
prevent a recurrence.
      (d)   Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage or
otherwise arising out of a violation of the City Pretreatment Ordinance, or
other applicable law.
   (2)   Commercial Users shall notify the pretreatment coordinator in writing
at least sixty (60) days prior to any facility expansion, and/or remodeling or
process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOGS
discharges, or a change in the nature of the discharge. The user shall submit
any information requested by the pretreatment coordinator for evaluation of the
effect of such expansion and/or remodeling or process modifications on the
user's FOGS discharge to the sewer system. The written notification shall state
the FSE name, name the title of the user's contact person or person most
knowledgeable concerning the facility expansion and/or remodeling or process
modifications, address and telephone number of the user, date of the proposed
facility expansion and/or remodeling or process modifications, and the reasons
for the same. (Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1409: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
The following records shall be maintained for no less than three (3) years, and
the commercial user shall make them available to pretreatment coordinator, or
designee:
   (1)   A record or logbook of interceptor or trap cleaning and maintenance
practices and activities. The record or logbook shall include:
      (a)   Dates cleaned;
      (b)   Name of wastehauler;
      (c)   Any observations concerning the effectiveness of the interceptor or
trap in controlling FOGS; and
      (d)   Any other maintenance performed on the trap or interceptor;
   (2)   A record or logbook of FSE Kitchen BMPs being implemented including
employee training;
   (3)   Any other information deemed appropriate by the pretreatment
coordinator to ensure compliance with the St. George City Pretreatment
Ordinance; and
   (4)   Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral or sewer system.
(Ord. 2018-19, 2018)
10.06.1410: INSPECTIONS AND SAMPLING:
Commercial users are inspected on a regular basis by SGRWRF to determine if the
businesses are in compliance with the St. George City Pretreatment Ordinance.
The purpose of inspections is as follows:
   (1)   To verify if users are complying with this pretreatment chapter;
   (2)   To collect and analyze samples and compare results to established
discharge limitations;
   (3)   To provide evidence in support of enforcement actions;
   (4)   To verify correction of problems; and
   (5)   To maintain records of user discharge constituents. (Ord. 2018-19,
2018)
PART 15. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
10.06.1501: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The SGRWRF may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up
and operating SGRWRF's pretreatment program, which may include:
   (1)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost
of processing such applications;
   (2)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures,
including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users;
   (3)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   (4)   Fees for filing appeals;
   (5)   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs not included in
subsection (2) associated with any enforcement activity taken by the manager to
address IU noncompliance; and
   (6)   Other fees as SGRWRF may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable
by the SGRWRF.
   (7)   SGRWRF shall not adopt any fee or charge to Ivins users that is not
charged also to similarly categorized users in the City of St. George. (Ord.
2018-19, 2018)
TITLE 11
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
Part 1. Construction And Repair Of Streets And Sidewalks
11.01.101: Construction By Persons
11.01.102: Permit Required
11.01.103: Construction Of Driveways
11.01.104: Repair Of Sidewalks
Part 2. Street And Sidewalk Use Regulations
11.01.201: Building Materials In Street; Permit Required
11.01.202: Removal Of Sod Or Earth From Streets Or Other Property
11.01.203: Overflowing Of Water On Public Property
11.01.204: Removal Of Snow, Ice And Other Substances
11.01.205: Irrigation Ditches Across Sidewalks
11.01.206: Placing Or Mixing Sand Or Gravel On Paved Street Or Sidewalk
11.01.207: Trash Or Other Obstruction In Streets, Gutters And Sidewalks
11.01.208: Openings In Street
11.01.209: Doors Opening Into Streets
11.01.210: Discharge Of Water On Sidewalk
11.01.211: Crossing At Intersections
11.01.212: Business To Keep Sidewalk Clean
11.01.213: Placing Goods On Sidewalks For Sale Or Show
11.01.214: Placing Goods On Sidewalks For Receipt Or Delivery
11.01.215: Playing On Sidewalks
11.01.216: Congregating On Sidewalks
11.01.217: Maintenance Of Street Right Of Way
Part 3. Roundabout Regulations
11.01.301: Definitions
11.01.302: Pedestrian Regulations
11.01.303: Restricted Access To Central Island
Part 4. Procedure For Making Private Streets Public Streets
11.01.401: Application Required
11.01.402: Application Review
11.01.403: Public Hearing Required
11.01.404: Findings; Decision; Transfer
PART 1. CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
11.01.101: CONSTRUCTION BY PERSONS:
It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or
employee, to construct a street or sidewalk, which does not conform to
specifications established by the city engineer or other authorized
representative of the city, unless special permission to deviate from such
specification is first obtained from the public works director. (Ord. 2006-18,
2006)
11.01.102: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (1)   No person, either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or employee,
shall construct any permanent sidewalk without first obtaining from the public
works director a permit to do so. The permit shall specify that the sidewalk be
constructed of cement, the character and quality of the cement, the consistent
parts of the mixture and the thickness of the walk.
   (2)   It is unlawful to construct a sidewalk in violation of the
specifications stated in the permit.
   (3)   All sidewalks shall be constructed under the inspection of the
superintendent of streets or his duly authorized representative. (Ord. 2006-18,
2006)
11.01.103: CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAYS:
It is unlawful for any person to construct a driveway across a sidewalk, or cut
or change the construction of sidewalk, curb or gutter without first making
written application and obtaining from the public works director or his
designee a permit to do so. The acceptance of such permit shall be deemed an
agreement on the part of such person to construct said driveway in accordance
with specifications stated in the permit and to keep said driveway,
particularly all portions thereof that are within the public right of way, in
good condition and repair.
   (1)   Exception To Permit: If the construction of a driveway does not
involve either the alteration of an existing sidewalk or a curb cut, then the
property owner shall check with the city to verify that the proposed
construction of the driveway complies with all other applicable legal
requirements. (Ord. 2011-11, 2011)
11.01.104: REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks that are within the public right of way and outside of a property
owner's driveway shall generally be maintained by the city, unless the city
makes a determination that damage to said sidewalk was caused by the property
owner or someone acting on the property owner's behalf. In the event the city
makes such a determination, the city shall give the property owner written
notice thereof in the form of a written notice of violation that also gives
notice of the property owner's right to request a hearing regarding that
determination, all pursuant to the city's administrative code enforcement
procedures set forth in this code. In the event the property owner fails to
repair the sidewalk within the time allowed in the written notice of violation,
the city may pursue all remedies available, including, but not limited to,
those remedies set forth in the city's administrative code enforcement
procedures. (Ord. 2011-01, 2011)
PART 2. STREET AND SIDEWALK USE REGULATIONS
11.01.201: BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREET; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to occupy or use any portion of the public
streets when erecting or repairing any building upon land abutting thereon,
without first making application to and receiving from the public works
director or his designee a permit for the occupation or use of such portions of
streets for such periods of time and under such limitations and restrictions as
may be stated in the permit. Any such permit may be revoked at any time when
the holder thereof fails to comply with any rule or regulation under which it
is granted, or when, in the opinion of the public works director, the public
interest requires such revocation. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.01.202: REMOVAL OF SOD OR EARTH FROM STREETS OR OTHER PROPERTY:
No person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any street or other
public place without a permit from the public works director or his designee.
(Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.01.203: OVERFLOWING OF WATER ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to allow water to overflow from any ditch, canal
and other irrigation systems onto the streets, sidewalks or property of the
city. Exception: incidental water from small landscape sprinkler systems. (Ord.
2014-03, 2014)
11.01.204: REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND OTHER SUBSTANCES:
   (1)   It is unlawful for the owner, occupant, lessor or agent of any
property abutting a paved sidewalk that is immediately adjacent to such
property owner's front and side yard or a privately maintained landscape buffer
between the property and the sidewalk, to fail to remove or have removed from
such paved sidewalk, all hail, snow, sleet, or ice thereon within a reasonable
time after such snow, hail or sleet has fallen or such ice has formed. (Ord.
2014-03, 2014)
   (2)   It is unlawful for any person to deposit onto, or to allow to remain
on the sidewalk or in the gutter, dirt, leaves, weeds or any other material
that can clog or prevent the free flow of water therein. (Ord. 2011-01, 2011)
11.01.205: IRRIGATION DITCHES ACROSS SIDEWALKS:
All owners or occupants of lots in the city who require water from a main ditch
for irrigation or other purposes shall dig ditches, erect flumes, lay pipes and
install culverts, as needed, and maintain the same to convey water under
sidewalks to or from their respective lots. All culverts, ditches, pipes and
flumes conveying water under sidewalks shall meet such reasonable standards and
specifications as may be established by the public works director. (Ord. 2006-
18, 2006)
11.01.206: PLACING OR MIXING SAND OR GRAVEL ON PAVED STREET OR SIDEWALK:
Unless a permit from the superintendent has been obtained, it is unlawful to:
   (1)   Place or pile, or permit to be placed or piled, any sand, gravel,
lime, cement, mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or mixture, or
allow the same to remain on any portion of any paved street or sidewalk.
   (2)   Make or mix or permit to be made or mixed any mortar, plaster,
concrete or any like substance or mixture on any portion of any paved street or
sidewalk. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.01.207: TRASH OR OTHER OBSTRUCTION IN STREETS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS:
It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to place, or permit to be placed, upon or in the sidewalk, parking
area, gutter or on the half of the street next to such premises:
   (1)   Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, sweepings, refuse matter, ice,
snow, water, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substances;
   (2)   Any wagons, lumber, wood boxes, fencing, building material, dead
trees, tree stumps, merchandise, or other thing which shall obstruct such
public street, gutter, parking area or sidewalk, or any part thereof, or the
passage over and upon the same, or any part thereof, except as expressly
authorized by ordinance, without the permission of the public works director
first had and obtained.
   (3)   Any permanent or temporary structure, mechanism, device, vehicle or
other thing of any kind or character, except trees planted pursuant to the
provisions of applicable ordinances. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.01.208: OPENINGS IN STREET:
   (1)   It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building having a
cellar, which opens upon any street or sidewalk, to fail to keep the door or
other coverings in good repair and safe for the passage of the customary
traffic on the street or sidewalk. If the owner or occupant of any such
building shall neglect or refuse to repair properly any such door or covering
within twenty four (24) hours after notice from the public works director or
his designee to do so, the city shall make such repairs, to be made at the
expense of the owner or occupant.
   (2)   It is unlawful to construct or maintain coal holes or other openings
in streets or sidewalks, except with the special permission of the public works
director, and under the direction and supervision of the public works director.
(Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.01.209: DOORS OPENING INTO STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having the control
or management of any alley, road or passageway to construct or hang gates or
doors to such alley, road or passageway so that the gates or doors thereto,
when open, shall project outwardly more than two feet (2') over or upon the
sidewalk beyond the property line. (Prior code § 11-364)
11.01.210: DISCHARGE OF WATER ON SIDEWALK:
It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to fail, refuse or neglect to prevent water from the roof or eaves of
any house, building or other structure, or from any other source under the
control of such person, to be discharged upon the surface of any sidewalk.
(Prior code § 11-365)
11.01.211: CROSSING AT INTERSECTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or park a self-propelled vehicle or
lead, drive or ride any animal upon any sidewalk, except across a sidewalk at
established crossings. (Prior code § 11-366)
11.01.212: BUSINESS TO KEEP SIDEWALK CLEAN:
It is unlawful for any owner or occupants of any place of business to refuse,
neglect or fail to cause the sidewalk abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned
each morning before the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. (Prior code § 11-367)
11.01.213: PLACING GOODS ON SIDEWALKS FOR SALE OR SHOW:
No goods, wares or merchandise shall be placed, maintained or permitted for
sale or show in or on any parking area, street or sidewalk beyond two feet (2')
from the front line of the lot, without first obtaining the written approval of
the city council. Such approval shall be granted only when such sale or show
shall be a promotional activity not exceeding forty eight (48) hours and when
participated in by a majority of firms seeking approval of their business
areas. The city council's written approval shall specifically provide that no
goods, wares or merchandise shall be placed in such a manner as to leave less
than a six foot (6') passageway for pedestrians. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.01.214: PLACING GOODS ON SIDEWALKS FOR RECEIPT OR DELIVERY:
It is unlawful for any person to place, or suffer to be placed or kept upon any
sidewalk, any goods, wares or merchandise which he may be receiving or
delivering, without leaving a foot passageway upon such sidewalk. It shall be
unlawful for any person receiving or delivering such goods, wares or
merchandise to suffer the same to be or remain on such sidewalk for a longer
period than four (4) hours. (Prior code § 11-369)
11.01.215: PLAYING ON SIDEWALKS:
Every person who obstructs the sidewalk or street by playing any game or
engaging in any activity, which obstructs the free travel thereon, is guilty of
an infraction. (Prior code § 11-370)
11.01.216: CONGREGATING ON SIDEWALKS:
It is an infraction for any person or persons to congregate about or upon any
sidewalks, stairway, doorway, window or in front of any business or dwelling
house, theater, lecture room, church or elsewhere and by so doing to obstruct
or interfere with the free passage of persons entering, leaving or occupying
such building or premises. (Prior code § 11-371)
11.01.217: MAINTENANCE OF STREET RIGHT OF WAY:
   (1)   Unused Public Right Of Way: In all areas of the city where there
exists unused public right of way, the immediately adjacent private property
owner shall maintain the real property comprising such unused public right of
way in a neat and orderly manner, equal to the manner in which the owner
customarily maintains, or is required to maintain, his adjoining real property.
Such unused public right of way shall be kept free of weeds, junk or salvage
material, debris, trash, litter, or other solid waste material, and will be
subject to enforcement, including, but not limited to, remedies under the
city's administrative code enforcement procedures.
      (a)   Exceptions to adjoining property owner maintaining unused public
right of way: Property either zoned agricultural or property that is being
actively used for agricultural purposes so long as no irrigation water is
allowed onto the unused public right of way. (Ord. 2011-11, 2011)
   (2)   Parking Strips:
      (a)   Parking Strip Defined: "Parking strip" means that part of the
public right of way set aside as a planting strip or open space and located
between the sidewalk and the back of curb or edge of the roadway.
      (b)   Maintenance Of Parking Strip: In all areas of the city where there
exists a parking strip, the immediately adjoining private property owner shall
maintain the parking strip in a neat and orderly manner equal to the manner in
which the owner customarily maintains, or is required to maintain, his
adjoining real property. Such property shall be kept free of weeds, junk or
salvage material, debris, trash, litter, or other solid waste material, and
will be subject to enforcement, including, but not limited to, remedies under
the city's administrative code enforcement procedures.
   (3)   Landscaping Within Public Right Of Way: Any owner of private property
adjacent to any public right of way who installs or maintains landscaping
within a park strip or between the property and the curb or edge of the roadway
shall:
      (a)   Maintain such landscaping in such a manner as will:
         (i)   Not interfere with the public use of the right of way;
         (ii)   Not cause any damage to any improvements installed in the right
of way; and
         (iii)   Otherwise comply with the requirements of this code regarding
maintenance of such property. (Ord. 2011-01, 2011)
PART 3. ROUNDABOUT REGULATIONS
11.01.301: DEFINITIONS:
CENTRAL ISLAND: The raised area in the center of a roundabout around which
traffic circulates.
ROUNDABOUT: A circular, raised center island with deflecting islands on the
intersecting streets to direct traffic movement counterclockwise around the
circle.
TRUCK APRON: The area surrounding the central island to allow large vehicles to
travel around the roundabout without encroaching on the central island and the
outside edge of which abuts the circulatory roadway of the roundabout. (Ord.
2010-03, 2010)
11.01.302: PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS:
In addition to the pedestrian regulations set forth in the Utah traffic code:
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to cross the circulatory roadway
of a roundabout to the center island of the roundabout.
   (2)   It shall be unlawful, punishable as an infraction, for a pedestrian to
walk upon the truck apron of a roundabout. (Ord. 2010-03, 2010)
11.01.303: RESTRICTED ACCESS TO CENTRAL ISLAND:
Entry onto the central island of a roundabout shall be limited to persons
authorized by Ivins City to perform inspections, repairs, maintenance to
improvements within the central island or for purposes of code enforcement. It
shall be unlawful, punishable as an infraction, for any other person to enter
onto the central island. (Ord. 2010-03, 2010)
PART 4. PROCEDURE FOR MAKING PRIVATE STREETS PUBLIC STREETS
11.01.401: APPLICATION REQUIRED:
   (1)   A homeowners' association seeking to have one or more street(s)
originally constructed as private streets to become public streets to be
henceforth owned and maintained by the city shall file a petition with the city
that is signed by the homeowners' association president and includes the
following:
      (a)   The fee required by the city's consolidated fee schedule;
      (b)   A copy of the subdivision's covenants, conditions and restrictions;
      (c)   A copy of the requisite number of signatures voting to approve
making the private streets within the subdivision public;
      (d)   A complete history of pavement management including the dates of
each type of treatment; and
      (e)   For streets installed prior to 2005, a written report from an
approved testing laboratory reporting data from core samples taken of the
asphalt - the city engineer shall determine what data is required for the
report.
   (2)   In the event the private streets are owned by persons or entities
other than a homeowners' association, then the owner(s) shall all sign and file
a petition with the city with all of the requirements set forth in subsections
(1)(a) through (1)(e) of this section. (Ord. 2016-20, 2016)
11.01.402: APPLICATION REVIEW:
Upon acceptance of a complete petition, staff (as the technical review
committee) shall consider whether the petition meets the following criteria
before making a recommendation to the city council:
   (1)   Whether the street(s) meet the fire code as adopted by the city;
   (2)   Whether the street(s) meet a current street cross section in the
city's adopted transportation master plan;
   (3)   Whether the street(s) were installed per city specifications;
   (4)   Whether the street(s) were regularly and properly maintained since
they were installed to the present;
   (5)   The date the street(s) were last crack sealed and slurried;
   (6)   The year the street(s) were installed;
   (7)   Whether the street(s) passed a current staff inspection and/or made
all of the repairs noted on a punch list following such an inspection. (Ord.
2016-20, 2016)
11.01.403: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED:
Once the technical review committee has made its recommendation, the city
recorder shall schedule a public hearing before the city council in accordance
with section 10-9a-208 of the Utah code and the city council shall determine
whether:
   (1)   Good cause exists for the city to make the private street(s) public;
and
   (2)   Neither the public interest nor any person will be materially injured
by making the private street(s) public. (Ord. 2016-20, 2016)
11.01.404: FINDINGS; DECISION; TRANSFER:
Only upon the city council making the findings required above may the city
council make a decision to allow the city to make public any street(s)
originally constructed as private. Upon such a decision becoming final, the
record owner(s) of the private street(s) allowed by the final decision to
become public shall prepare, sign and submit to the city for recording a
dedication plat and/or warranty deed naming Ivins City as grantee and
transferring an unencumbered interest in the street(s) being made public as
proven by a title report issued not more than thirty (30) days prior to
submission of the foregoing documents to the city. (Ord. 2016-20, 2016)
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
11.02.101: Permit Required
11.02.102: Exceptions
11.02.103: Street Excavation Permit Application
11.02.104: Excavations Subject To Chapter Provisions
11.02.105: Preparation
11.02.106: Backfill Materials
11.02.107: Restoration Of Surfaces
11.02.108: Restoration Of Bituminous, Concrete Or Asphalt Surfaces
11.02.109: Concrete Surfaces
11.02.110: Concrete Base, Bituminous Wearing Surfaces
11.02.111: Gravel Surfaces
11.02.112: Protection Of Public During Excavation Project
11.02.113: Relocation And Protection Of Utilities
11.02.114: Jetting Pipe Permitted When
11.02.115: Inspection And Acceptance
11.02.101: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (1)   No person shall make any excavation in any street, lane or alley, or
remove any pavement or other material, from any street or improvement thereon
without first obtaining a permit from the public works director or his
designee.
   (2)   No person shall excavate any sidewalk without first obtaining a permit
from the public works director or his designee.
   (3)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to waive the
franchise required for any person by city or state law. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.02.102: EXCEPTIONS:
The following types of excavations do not come within the scope of this
chapter:
Excavations of any kind in the city streets in projects designed, contracted
for, and inspected by the city engineer or other authorized personnel of the
city. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.02.103: STREET EXCAVATION PERMIT APPLICATION:
It is unlawful for any person to break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any
manner affect the surface or base of any street, or to place, deposit or leave
upon any street any earth or any other excavated material obstructing or
tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such persons shall
first have obtained an excavation permit therefor from the public works
director or his designee. Any public utility regulated by the state or holding
a franchise from the city which in the pursuit of its calling has frequent
occasion to open or make excavations in streets, may, upon application, receive
a general permit from the city to cover all excavations such utilities may make
within the streets of the city. All permits shall be subject to revocation, and
the city may refuse to issue a permit for failure of the permittee or applicant
to abide by the terms and conditions of this chapter. Excavation permits shall
not be required prior to excavation in case of emergency endangering life or
property, providing the city is notified as soon as practicable and a permit is
applied for upon the next regular working day following the emergency. (Ord.
2006-18, 2006)
11.02.104: EXCAVATIONS SUBJECT TO CHAPTER PROVISIONS:
The following types of excavations are subject to the provisions of this
chapter:
Excavations for installation or repair of water lines, sewer lines, gas lines,
electrical cable and conduits, telephone cable and conduits, and all other
excavations for any other purpose within the street rights of way of the city
or in other public places. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.02.105: PREPARATION:
The pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surface shall be cut vertically along
the lines forming the trench in such a manner as to not damage the adjoining
pavement or hard surfacing. An undercut bevel at the rate of one inch (1") per
foot of thickness will be provided at the proposed junction between the old and
new surfaces. The portion to be removed shall be broken up in a manner that
will not cause damage to the pavement outside the limits of the trench.
However, any pavement damaged by operations outside the limits of the trench
shall be replaced. All waste material resulting from the excavation shall be
removed immediately from the site of the work. (Prior Code § 11-384)
11.02.106: BACKFILL MATERIALS:
   (1)   Materials for backfill will be of select nature. All broken concrete,
peat, decomposed vegetable matter and similar materials obtained from
excavation will be removed from the site prior to beginning of backfilling. All
backfill will be placed in layers not over eight inches (8"), loose measured,
in thickness. Compaction will be obtained by mechanical rollers, mechanical
tampers or similar means. Material for backfilling will have optimum moisture
to ensure compaction to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground
in which the trench was dug. Jetting or internal vibrating methods of
compacting sand fill or similar methods of compacting sand or similar granular
free draining materials will be permitted.
   (2)   The density (dry) of the backfill under pavements, sidewalks, curbs or
other structures will not be less than that existing prior to excavation. The
fill shall be restored and placed in a good condition, which will prevent
settling. (Prior Code § 11-385)
11.02.107: RESTORATION OF SURFACES:
   (1)   General: All street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways or
other hard surfaces falling in the line of the excavation which must be removed
in performance of the work shall be restored in kind by the excavator, unless
directed by the governing body, in accordance with the specifications contained
herein governing the various types of surfaces involved and shall be in
accordance with the city standard specifications for design and construction.
   (2)   Protection Of Paved Surfaces: In order to avoid unnecessary damage to
paved surfaces, track equipment shall use pavement pads when operating on or
crossing paved surfaces.
   (3)   Time: In traffic lanes of paved streets, the excavator shall provide
temporary gravel surfaces or cold mulch in good condition immediately after
backfill has been placed, and shall complete permanent repairs on the street,
sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway and other surfaces, within five (5) days from
the date of completion of the backfill, except for periods:
      (a)   When permanent paving materials is not available;
      (b)   When weather conditions prevent permanent replacement;
      (c)   When extension of time is granted by the superintendent of streets.
   (4)   Temporary Repair: If temporary repair has been made on paved streets
with gravel and a permanent repair cannot be made within the time specified
above due to any of the above mentioned conditions, then the excavator shall be
required to replace the gravel with cold mulch as soon as possible. (Prior Code
§ 11-386)
11.02.108: RESTORATION OF BITUMINOUS, CONCRETE OR ASPHALT SURFACES:
Restoration of bituminous, concrete or asphalt surfaces shall be in accordance
with the city standard specifications for design and construction.
   (1)   Temporary Grade Surface: Where excavations are made in paved areas,
the surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface. The gravel shall
be placed deep enough to provide a minimum of six inches (6") below the bottom
of the bituminous or concrete surface. Normally, this will require nine inches
(9") of gravel for bituminous surfaces, twelve inches (12") of gravel for
concrete, and concrete base for asphalt wearing surfaces. The gravel shall be
placed in the trench at the time it is backfilled. The temporary gravel surface
shall be maintained by blading, sprinkling, rolling or adding gravel to
maintain a safe, uniform surface satisfactory to the inspector until the final
surface is laid. Excess material shall be removed from the premises
immediately. Material for use on temporary gravel surfaces shall be obtained
from sound, tough, durable gravel or rock meeting the following requirements
for gradings:
 
Passing 1" sieve      100 percent
Passing 3/4" sieve    85–100 percent
Passing no. 4 sieve   45– 65 percent
Passing no. 10 sieve  30– 50 percent
Passing no. 200 sieve 5– 10 percent
 
   (2)   Bituminous Surface: The exposed edges of existing pavement shall be
primed with type MC-1 bituminous material. The type, grade and mixture of the
asphalt to be used for street surface replacement shall be approved by the
superintendent of streets. The thickness shall be equal to the adjacent surface
thickness but not less than three inches (3"). The complete surface shall not
deviate more than one-half inch (1/2") between old and new work. (Prior Code §
11-387)
11.02.109: CONCRETE SURFACES:
The subbase for concrete surfaces shall be sprinkled just before placing the
concrete. Joints and surfaces shall be made to match the original surface. The
thickness of concrete shall be equal to the adjacent concrete but in no case
less than six inches (6") thick. The mixing, cement, water content, proportion,
placement and curing of the concrete will be approved by the public works
director or his designee. In no case shall the concrete have less comprehensive
strength than three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch at the end of
twenty eight (28) days. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.02.110: CONCRETE BASE, BITUMINOUS WEARING SURFACES:
This type of surfacing shall be constructed as described in sections
11.02.108 and
11.02.109 of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.02.111: GRAVEL SURFACES:
Trenches excavated through gravel surfaced area, such as gravel roads and
shoulders and unpaved driveways, shall have the gravel restored and maintained
as described in section
11.02.109 of this chapter, except that the gravel shall be a minimum of one
inch (1") more than the thickness of the existing gravel. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.02.112: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC DURING EXCAVATION PROJECT:
Excavation operations shall be conducted in such a manner that a minimum amount
of interference or interruption of street traffic will result. Inconvenience to
residents and businesses fronting on public streets shall be minimized.
Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades shall be available and used where
necessary to prevent accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must
be in place until all of excavator's equipment is removed from site and
excavation has been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface is in place.
From sunset to sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined
by acceptable warning lights, lanterns, flares and other devices. Police and
fire departments shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours in advance
of any planned excavation requiring street closures or detours. (Prior Code §
11-391)
11.02.113: RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES:
An excavator shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written
consent of the public works director and without advance notice to the owner of
the utility. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing utility, it shall
be done by its owner unless the owner otherwise directs. No utility, whether
owned by the city or by a private enterprise, shall be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee or an
expressly written agreement is made whereby the utility owner and the excavator
make other arrangements relating to such cost. The permittee shall support and
protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other
apparatus, which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and shall
do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along
or across the work. In any case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires or
apparatus should be damaged (and for this purpose pipe coating or other
encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a substructure) they
shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them, but the utility owner
shall be reimbursed for the expense of such repairs by the permittee. It is the
intent of this chapter that the permittee shall assume all liability for damage
to substructures, and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such
substructure damage, and such assumption of liability shall be deemed a
contractual obligation which the permittee accepts upon acceptance of an
excavation permit. The city need not be made a party to any action because of
this chapter. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and
location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage.
(Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.02.114: JETTING PIPE PERMITTED WHEN:
Jetting pipe by means of water under pressure, or compressed air, is permitted
only when approved by the city. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.02.115: INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE:
   (1)   In order to ensure proper backfill and restoration of surface, the
permittee shall deposit a surety bond or cash deposit with the city recorder or
designee payable to the city, except that a public utility operating or using
any of the streets under a franchise from the city will not be required to
furnish such bond; providing, such franchise obligates the holder thereof to
restore the streets and to hold the city harmless in the event of any injury to
any person or damage to any property due to negligence of such holder in
conducting excavation and restoration operations under such franchise. The
required surety bond must be:
      (a)   With good and sufficient surety;
      (b)   By a surety company authorized to transact business in the state;
      (c)   Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance;
      (d)   Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this chapter in
order to secure and hold the city and its officers harmless against any and all
claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation permit or for
which the city, the city council or any city officer may be liable by reason of
any accident or injury to any person or property through the fault of the
permittee arising out of failure to properly guard the excavation or for any
other negligence of the permittee;
      (e)   Conditioned to fill up, restore and replace in good and safe
condition, as near as may be to its original condition and to the satisfaction
of the city, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any
street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of twenty
four (24) months after the work shall be done, usual wear and tear expected, as
it was before the work shall have been done.
   (2)   The amount of the surety bond or cash deposit shall be established by
resolution and may be changed from time to time, but until such resolution is
passed, the amount of the surety or cash deposit shall be specified in the
consolidated fee schedule. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
CHAPTER 3
CEMETERIES
SECTION:
11.03.101: Definitions
11.03.102: Cemetery Designated
11.03.103: Chapter Applicability
11.03.104: Cemetery Superintendent; Office Created
11.03.105: Cemetery Superintendent Duties
11.03.106: Burial Requirements
11.03.107: Burial Permit Required
11.03.108: Registration Of Burials
11.03.109: Burials; Disinterment
11.03.110: Burial Of Indigents
11.03.111: Burial; Infants And Children
11.03.112: Vaults Required
11.03.113: Religious And Fraternal Organizations
11.03.114: Sale Subject To Rules
11.03.115: Care And Upkeep By City
11.03.116: Disinterment Errors; City Not Liable
11.03.117: Traffic Rules
11.03.118: Children To Be Supervised
11.03.119: Animals Prohibited
11.03.120: Decorum
11.03.121: Injury To Cemetery Property Prohibited
11.03.122: Landscaping By Private Persons
11.03.123: Placement Of Markers
11.03.124: Collection Of Fees
11.03.125: Fee For Opening Grave
11.03.126: Purchase Price And Fees
11.03.127: Sale Of Lots
11.03.128: Restrictions Of Resale
11.03.129: Contracting For Perpetual Care
11.03.130: Perpetual Care Included
11.03.131: Perpetual Care Fund Created
11.03.132: Duties Of City Treasurer
11.03.133: Income From Fund
11.03.101: DEFINITIONS:
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings unless the
context otherwise clearly requires:
LOT: Means and includes the partial lots or single graves in the city cemetery.
LOT OWNER OR PURCHASER AND GRAVE OWNER OR PURCHASER: The owner or purchaser of
burial privileges or the collateral right of use of any burial lot evidenced by
a deed or burial right for a described lot or by proved and recognized descent
or devise from the original owner.
PLOT: Each single gravesite within a lot. (Prior Code § 8-201)
11.03.102: CEMETERY DESIGNATED:
The city burial ground shall be known and designated by the name of Ivins City
cemetery. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.103: CHAPTER APPLICABILITY:
All cemeteries owned and/or maintained by the city, or which may hereafter be
acquired by the city, wherever situated, are declared subject to the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.104: CEMETERY SUPERINTENDENT; OFFICE CREATED:
There is created the position of cemetery superintendent. (Prior Code § 8-211)
11.03.105: CEMETERY SUPERINTENDENT DUTIES:
The cemetery superintendent shall be designated by the public works director
and shall have the general supervision and administration of the city cemetery,
including, but not limited to:
   (1)   Creating such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the
operation, maintenance, use and protection of the cemetery;
   (2)   Subdividing the cemetery into lots and gravesites;
   (3)   Maintaining a record of the location of the graves and preventing any
lot from being used beyond its capacity;
   (4)   Keeping in proper repair any enclosure around the cemetery and
preventing it being entered by animals and, so far as practical, preventing the
destruction or defacing of any tablet or marker placed or erected therein;
   (5)   Keeping a duplicate plat of the cemetery and, at the request of any
person wishing to purchase any of the lots or parts of lots, pointing out any
of the lots or parts of lots for sale; and upon disposal of any lots or part
thereof, after payment of the lot price has been received in the treasury,
issue a certificate of burial rights, which shall describe the lot or grave to
which the right to burial is granted. The certificate shall be signed by the
cemetery superintendent;
   (6)   Opening any graves in the cemetery upon application to him by any
person having the right to make such application and being responsible for
closing all graves;
   (7)   Removing floral pieces or displays left on any grave as deemed
necessary to the appearance of the cemetery, but such floral pieces or displays
shall not be removed sooner than three (3) days after original placement,
except in an emergency;
   (8)   Keeping the streets, alleys, walks and avenues in the cemetery in good
order and unobstructed;
   (9)   Erecting a suitable marker firmly set upon the northwest corner of
each lot with the number of the lot inscribed thereon and which location shall
be shown on the cemetery records. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.106: BURIAL REQUIREMENTS:
Before any deceased person is buried in the city cemetery, a permit properly
issued by the registrar of the registration district in which the death
occurred or, in the absence of such registrar, a permit duly issued by the
state division of health or other authorized person shall be required by the
cemetery superintendent. After burial, the cemetery superintendent shall
endorse upon the permit a description of the location where the deceased is
buried and shall enter all of the information contained in the permit in the
cemetery records. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.107: BURIAL PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to bury the body of a deceased person in the city
cemetery without first obtaining a certificate of burial right for the lot used
or producing satisfactory evidence of a right to burial based on a properly
acquired certificate of burial right. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.108: REGISTRATION OF BURIALS:
Before any deceased person may be buried in the city cemetery, the relatives or
person having charge of the deceased shall provide the cemetery superintendent
with a written statement which shall be filed by the cemetery superintendent,
which statement shall contain, if known, information about the deceased
regarding his or her name, when and where born, the date and cause of death,
the name of the attending physician, date of burial, name of cemetery, and the
description of the location of the grave. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.109: BURIALS; DISINTERMENT:
It is a class B misdemeanor for any person to:
   (1)   Disinter any body buried in any cemetery, except under the direction
of the cemetery superintendent who shall, before disinterment, require a
written permission from both the city health officer and the owner of the lot
or his or her heirs, which written authorization shall be filed and preserved
in a record kept for such purposes;
   (2)   Disinter or remove the body of a person who has died from a contagious
disease within two (2) years after the date of burial, unless the body is
buried in a hermetically sealed casket or vault and is found to be incased at
the time of disinterment;
   (3)   Inter anything other than the remains of human bodies in the city
cemetery;
   (4)   Bury a body of any person within this city except in the city cemetery
or a private cemetery, unless special permission of the governing body under
such rules and regulations that it may prescribe. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.110: BURIAL OF INDIGENTS:
   (1)   The city council may by resolution designate a portion of the city
cemetery to the burial of indigents. Whenever it is made to appear to the mayor
by proof submitted to him by the cemetery superintendent that any person who
has died does not have the estate sufficient to pay the purchase price of a lot
in the cemetery, and that the nearest relative or representative of such
deceased person desires to have the body of such deceased interred in the
cemetery, the mayor may grant burial space for such deceased person at the
request made to him by the cemetery superintendent.
   (2)   The mayor shall communicate his decision to the cemetery
superintendent. The mayor shall give report of his decision, whether
affirmative or negative, to the governing body at its next regular meeting. All
strangers without funds or other persons who may die in the city may be granted
the privilege granted herein. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.111: BURIAL; INFANTS AND CHILDREN:
   (1)   Lot 83 of the city cemetery as shown on the plat thereof, shall be set
aside for small graves for the interment of infants or other young people
appropriate to the size of the small graves. Such lot currently consists of
eight (8) plots and shall be further divided into sixteen (16) plots.
   (2)   The fees applicable to such plots shall be specified in the
consolidated fee schedule.
   (3)   The cemetery superintendent is directed to make these changes in the
records of the city and to make available lot 83 for such interments. (Ord.
2006-18, 2006)
11.03.112: VAULTS REQUIRED:
   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to be buried in the cemetery unless the
casket shall be placed in a vault made of concrete, propylene, fiberglass,
steel or brick lined or of such other material approved by the city council,
substantially constructed and covered with a similar durable material.
   (2)   No wood shall be used as a permanent part of the construction of any
part of the vault. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006; amd. Ord. 2023-30, 12-21-2023)
11.03.113: RELIGIOUS AND FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS:
The city may contract with religious and fraternal organizations to designate a
reasonable portion of the cemetery in which burials may be restricted to
members of such religious and fraternal organizations and their families. (Ord.
2006-18, 2006)
11.03.114: SALE SUBJECT TO RULES:
Every lot or single grave sold is subject to rules and regulations that have
been or may be adopted. The rules and regulations shall be subject to such
changes as are found necessary for the protection of lot owners, the remains of
the dead and the preservation of the cemetery. (Prior Code § 8-227)
11.03.115: CARE AND UPKEEP BY CITY:
The city reserves the right to enter upon any grave and perform all work
necessary for the care and upkeep of all lots and graves in its cemeteries.
(Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.116: DISINTERMENT ERRORS; CITY NOT LIABLE:
Under no circumstances will the city assume responsibilities for errors in
opening graves. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.117: TRAFFIC RULES:
   (1)   The provisions of the city traffic ordinances relative to the
operation of vehicles and conduct of pedestrians shall be in effect in the
cemetery, except as herein otherwise modified by this chapter.
   (2)   It is unlawful for any person to ride or drive within the city
cemetery at a speed greater than ten (10) miles per hour. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.118: CHILDREN TO BE SUPERVISED:
Children under the age of twelve (12) years shall not be allowed in cemeteries
unless accompanied by their parents or other adults. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.119: ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No animal shall be allowed in any cemetery except in the confines of a vehicle
and must be at all times retained within the confines of the vehicle while the
vehicle remains in the cemetery. (Prior Code § 8-232)
11.03.120: DECORUM:
Cemetery grounds are sacredly devoted to the interment and repose of the dead.
Strict observance of decorum due such a place shall be required of all persons.
(Prior Code § 8-233)
11.03.121: INJURY TO CEMETERY PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
   (1)   It is a class B misdemeanor for any person to tie or attempt to tie
any horse, animal or motor vehicle to any monument, gravestone, tablet, marker,
tree, shrub, fence or enclosure on the premises of the cemetery for the purpose
of injuring, defacing or attempting the removal of same.
   (2)   It is an infraction for any person to injure, deface, break, destroy
or remove any headstone, tombstone, monument, tree, shrub, or any other
property in the cemetery. (Prior Code § 8-234)
11.03.122: LANDSCAPING BY PRIVATE PERSONS:
Except as provided by the cemetery rules and regulations, it is unlawful for
any person to erect or maintain any fence, corner post, coping or boundary of
any kind, to plant any vegetation upon any lot or lots, street, alley or walk
in the cemetery, or to grade the ground or land thereof. The cemetery
superintendent shall, whenever required, furnish the true lines of any lots
according to official survey, shall prevent and prohibit any markings of the
same except by official landmarks, and shall prevent and prohibit any grading
thereof that might destroy or interfere with the general slope of the land.
(Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.123: PLACEMENT OF MARKERS:
It is unlawful for any person to erect, place or cause to be placed any marker
or monument on any lot in the cemetery in violation of the rules and
regulations promulgated by the city council regarding the placement,
construction and design of all such markers. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.124: COLLECTION OF FEES:
The cemetery superintendent shall verify that all required fees have been paid
in advance to the city treasurer for the opening and closing of graves or other
services, which shall include, but not be limited to, properly disinterring
bodies and properly restoring the earth and grounds, recording each burial,
disinterment or removal, and raised monument privileges. The fee shall be such
amounts as are determined by the governing body from time to time by
resolution. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.125: FEE FOR OPENING GRAVE:
   (1)   No grave shall be opened in the city cemetery until payment of a fee
for the labor and expense in so opening the grave shall be paid.
   (2)   The presentation of a receipt from the city recorder or other
authorized person when presented to the cemetery superintendent shall be
authority to open a grave for the burial of a deceased person. However, upon a
contract being entered into between any mortician and the city wherein the
mortician agrees to be responsible and liable for fees for the opening of a
grave, and wherein that mortician will be personally liable for such fees and
for perpetual care payments, the city recorder or other authorized person may
give the cemetery superintendent authority to open graves without the
presentation of a receipt from the city recorder or other authorized person.
(Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.126: PURCHASE PRICE AND FEES:
The city council shall from time to time by resolution fix the size of lots,
the price at which burial rights shall be sold and the fees which shall be
charged for the various cemetery services to be provided. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.127: SALE OF LOTS:
   (1)   The cemetery superintendent is authorized to sell the use of lots in
the city cemetery for burial purposes only and to collect all sums arising from
the sale. The cemetery superintendent shall keep a complete record of all
sales, which record shall describe the location of the lot purchased and the
price paid therefor. The cemetery superintendent shall deliver to each
purchaser a certificate of ownership of burial right for each lot purchased,
which certificate shall, among other things, describe the location of the lot
and the purchase price. In the event of an installment sale, the certificate
shall not issue or be delivered to the purchaser until the entire purchase
price for the lot, together with perpetual care, has been paid in full.
   (2)   A certificate and rights to burial shall be exempt from execution,
taxation or assessment for care and maintenance from and after full payment of
the purchase price. Payments pursuant to this section shall not be construed to
be in payment for cemetery services other than perpetual care or prepaid
maintenance.
   (3)   Perpetual care shall be deemed to include the filling of the grave,
the placing of topsoil upon the grave, seeding the grave with grass and
watering and cutting the grass. No other services are included.
   (4)   No other improvements, changes or service, except perpetual care,
shall be made on any lot without the certificate holder or his heirs first
submitting to, and receiving from the cemetery superintendent, written approval
for such improvements, changes or services, which improvements, changes or
services shall be subject to the rules and regulations. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.128: RESTRICTIONS OF RESALE:
   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to sell a cemetery plot upon the
promise, representation or inducement of resale at a financial profit. A
violation of this section is a misdemeanor and each violation shall constitute
a separate offense.
   (2)   Whenever a certificate to burial rights or lots reverts to the city,
as provided for in this chapter, or becomes vested in the city for any reason,
before new certificates are issued, the original certificate shall be cancelled
or an assignment given, and the record shall be so changed.
   (3)   The certificates shall be issued and signed by the cemetery
superintendent. All lots or parts of lots, as provided in this section,
together with all improvements, shall be exempt from execution and from
taxation and assessment for care and maintenance charges from and after said
payment. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.129: CONTRACTING FOR PERPETUAL CARE:
No grave shall be hereafter opened in the city cemetery until perpetual care
upon the plot where the grave is to be opened shall have been paid for in full.
(Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.130: PERPETUAL CARE INCLUDED:
The perpetual care that the city agrees to give shall consist of care of the
cemetery generally, and shall include, but is not limited to, mowing of all
lots and graves at reasonable intervals, resodding, seeding, and filling in
sunken graves, sodding the surface of the graves to lot level, removing dead
flowers and trimming trees and shrubbery when necessary, raking and cleaning
the lots and straightening of tilting stones or markers, but shall not include
repairing or replacing markers or memorial structures of any nature, except
when the need for repair or replacement is directly caused by the city. (Ord.
2006-18, 2006)
11.03.131: PERPETUAL CARE FUND CREATED:
   (1)   There is established a perpetual care fund according to the laws of
the state and this chapter. All funds received from the sale of perpetual care
services shall be placed in a special perpetual care fund, invested in
compliance with the laws of the state and used for the purposes herein
provided.
   (2)   The income from the perpetual care fund shall be used to pay the
upkeep and development of the cemetery. The city may borrow from the fund from
time to time, but any funds borrowed shall be repaid to the fund with interest
thereon at the prevailing rate paid by the city to borrow funds from commercial
lenders.
   (3)   If the city borrows from the fund, it shall pay into a fund for the
operation of the cemeteries the interest accrued upon money annually. Should it
be found that the interest returned upon the perpetual care funds shall be more
than is required to pay for the operation and upkeep of the city cemetery, then
the surplus shall be added to the principal amount of the perpetual care fund
herein created, and shall be so handled until changed by resolution to provide
for the use of such accumulated interest. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.132: DUTIES OF CITY TREASURER:
It is the duty of the city treasurer to keep an accurate record of the
perpetual care trust fund account, including investments, to see that the
principal portion thereof is properly invested in accordance with resolutions
of the city council and the laws of the state. (Ord. 2006-18, 2006)
11.03.133: INCOME FROM FUND:
All income from investments held in the perpetual care fund shall be credited
to the cemetery maintenance fund for use in providing the perpetual care as
required herein. (Prior Code § 8-274)
CHAPTER 4
PARKS
SECTION:
Part 1. Rules And Regulations
11.04.101: Rules And Regulations
11.04.102: Permits; Park/Pavilion Reservations
11.04.103: Penalty
Part 2. Concessions
11.04.201: Concessions
11.04.202: Penalty
PART 1. RULES AND REGULATIONS
11.04.101: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   (1)   Alcoholic Beverages, Drugs Or Gambling: The sale, consumption or
possession of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances, as well as
gambling of any kind, are prohibited in any and all city parks and recreation
facilities and areas.
   (2)   Camping Or Sleeping Overnight: Camping or sleeping overnight in city
parks is prohibited without advance written permission from the parks and
recreation department.
   (3)   Reserved.
   (4)   Domestic Animal Restrictions: Horses, cattle, livestock and domestic
animals of any kind are prohibited in any city park, except a cat or a dog on a
leash and under the control of a person. Parks designated by the city as
wilderness parks are exempted from application of this section. It is unlawful
for the owner of an animal to permit the animal to defecate upon a public park
unless the owner removes and properly disposes of all animal waste that may
result.
   (5)   Encroachment Of Park Lands: No person shall willingly encroach upon
lands administered by the parks and recreation department.
   (6)   Entertainment And Similar Activities: No entertainment, demonstration,
exhibition, meeting, concert or tournament, whether public or private, shall be
given in any city park without having first obtained a permit therefor from the
parks and recreation department at least fourteen (14) days prior to usage.
   (7)   Fireworks And Explosives: No person shall discharge or set off in any
city parks, or recreation facilities or areas, any firecrackers, rockets or
other fireworks or explosives, except as may be specifically and expressly
permitted and allowed in writing by the city council.
   (8)   Glass Bottles: No person shall bring onto or possess glass bottles on
any city park or recreational area.
   (9)   Large Groups: No group of twenty five (25) or more persons shall use a
city park area without first obtaining a permit therefor from the parks and
recreation department at least seven (7) days prior to usage. Group usage shall
be limited to designated areas. No person shall use loudspeakers, amplifiers or
public address systems in a park without written permission from the parks and
recreation department.
   (10)   League Or Tournament Games; Permit Required: Permits for playing
league or tournament games on city park fields or courts shall be secured from
the parks and recreation department on a first come, first served basis. A
valid permit shall be displayed upon request in order to avoid conflicts in the
use of facilities. Failure by park users to honor a valid permit is unlawful
and may result in the denial of future permits to use the facilities.
   (11)   Littering Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to cause or allow any
foreign material, papers, bottles, cans, rags or discarded articles of any
substantial kind or nature to be left in any city park.
   (12)   Motor Vehicles: No person shall ride in or drive any motor vehicle
(including both on road and off road vehicles, motorized scooters and
minimotorcycles), which is self- propelled upon any city park land, except upon
the roads and parking areas. It is prohibited for any person to commit any act,
by use or operation, of any motor vehicle on any city park land, which, if
committed upon a public highway or street in the state, would be prohibited and
unlawful. Speed limits within all parks shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour
unless otherwise posted. No one shall test or repair any vehicle or mechanical
device in any city park, except any vehicle, which may become disabled while at
the park.
   (13)   Nighttime Use: No persons are permitted in any city park during the
hours of darkness, except in those lighted areas designated for extended use
activities or unless written permission is obtained from the parks and
recreation department. All ball diamond and tennis court lighting shall be
turned off by eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. The city reserves the right to lock
any gate, chain or door offering access to any park, facility or building in
order to restrict nighttime usage thereof.
   (14)   Nuisance: It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to use
threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, to commit any obscene or
indecent act, to fight or to create a public disturbance, or to skateboard or
in-line skate outside designated areas, or to be under the influence of alcohol
or drugs, or to engage in any activity that threatens the safety or well being
of other persons, or to otherwise disturb the peace of park users by begging,
soliciting, making undue noise, or engaging in disruptive activities in any
city park.
   (15)   Open Fires: No person shall make or kindle any open fire in any city
park, except in fireplaces and/or grills provided for this purpose or in
private portable commercially manufactured grills or grills approved safe by
the parks and recreation department. Generally, the use of grills provided for
public use shall be on a first come, first served basis; however, the use of
any grills associated with the use of a park pavilion shall be included with
the reservation of the pavilion.
   (16)   Parking: Parking shall only be in designated parking areas, but in no
event overnight without written permission from the parks and recreation
department. Abandoned vehicles, including vehicles left in the park overnight,
shall be towed at the owner's expense.
   (17)   Refusal To Leave: It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to
leave any park if, after having violated any law or written rule or regulation
of the city concerning conduct in city parks, he or she has been ordered to
leave by a city employee.
   (18)   Signs And Advertising: No person shall, without written permission of
the parks and recreation department, erect, paint, paste or otherwise affix or
distribute any signs, advertisements or circulars on any city park property.
The sale of anything or the solicitation of funds or donations within any city
park is prohibited, except upon written permission of the parks and recreation
department.
   (19)   Teaching In Parks: No person or group may utilize any city park area
or facility for the purpose of teaching an individual or group any recreational
skill for personal profit or financial gain without written permission of the
parks and recreation department.
   (20)   Temporary Closure: The mayor or his designee may temporarily close or
curtail activities upon any city park lands or waters, or any portions thereof,
when it has been deemed to be in the best interest of public safety, conduct,
health or order.
   (21)   Trapping Or Injuring Animals: No person, other than public safety
personnel, shall, in any city park, set a trap or snare or kill, shoot, injure,
annoy, disturb or poison any animal or injure or destroy any nest.
   (22)   Vandalism; Dumping: It shall be unlawful for any person to scratch,
cut, break, move, take or otherwise injure, destroy or deface any restroom,
trees, shrubs, plants, turf, rock, or any building, fence, bridge, sign or
other structure, or to in any way foul or pollute any fountain, water feature,
spring, stream, pond or lake, or to leave waste items or rubbish of any kind,
or to commit any other act of vandalism to public or private property in any
city park. No person shall dump any earth, rubbish or other substance or
material in or upon any city park without written permission from the parks and
recreation department.
   (23)   Fire Lake Park Swim Area At Ivins Reservoir: In addition to the above
rules and regulations applicable to city parks in general, the following shall
be expressly prohibited at the swim area at Fire Lake Park at Ivins Reservoir
(defined as the causeway, the approximately 4 acre swim area, surrounding beach
areas and other improved areas): alcohol; glass bottles/containers; motorized
watercraft; motorized vehicles, including all-terrain vehicles; dogs and other
pets; fires; fireworks; and littering. Generally, Fire Lake Park swim area
hours are from dawn to dusk. The park is closed to the public during
nondaylight hours. It shall be illegal for any members of the public to be at
the park between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. and any vehicles remaining in the parking area during those hours shall be
subject to citation and/or towing at the vehicle owner's expense. (Ord. 2016-
14, 2016)
11.04.102: PERMITS; PARK/PAVILION RESERVATIONS:
The director of the parks and recreation department shall establish policies
and procedures outlining the requirements for obtaining any permits required by
this chapter and for reserving a park or pavilion. (Ord. 2005-33, 2005)
11.04.103: PENALTY:
Any persons violating any of the foregoing rules and regulations, other than
vandalism which shall be prosecuted under provisions for offenses against
property, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. Each violation shall be a
separate offense. (Ord. 2005-33, 2005)
PART 2. CONCESSIONS
11.04.201: CONCESSIONS:
   (1)   Concessions In City Parks: The operation of any and all concessions to
sell or rent any items (such as equipment, food, etc.) in any park or on any
other property owned by the city shall be governed by the provisions of this
section. All concessions shall also comply with any other applicable state or
local laws, including licensing requirements, if applicable.
   (2)   Concession Agreement: The privilege to operate a concession shall be
granted by agreement between the city and the concessionaire. The privilege to
operate a concession shall be determined on a competitive basis with service
clubs being given priority consideration. The concession agreement may be for
such period of time as agreed upon by the city and the concessionaire. The
parks and recreation department shall have the right to review the services
provided by the concessionaire at any time and to revoke the privilege to
operate the concession if it is determined that the concessionaire is not
abiding by the terms of the agreement or is not providing adequate service to
the public. The parks and recreation department director is authorized to
receive concession proposals and approve concession agreements in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
   (3)   Concession Structures:
      (a)   Permanent concessions structures shall not be allowed on city
property unless they are owned by the city. The city may enter into a long term
lease agreement of a city owned concession structure.
      (b)   Temporary concession stands shall be limited to vehicles, trailers
or mobile units approved by the parks and recreation director. These stands
shall be provided and satisfactorily maintained by the concessionaire.
   (4)   Liability Insurance Required: The concessionaire shall file with the
city recorder proof of liability insurance in a minimum amount acceptable to
the parks and recreation director. In addition, a waiver which holds the city
harmless from the acts or omissions of the concessionaire shall also be filed
with the city recorder.
   (5)   Care Of Concession Area: The concessionaire is to provide regular
service and cleanup of the designated areas as set forth in the concession
agreement.
   (6)   Fees For Concessions: The city reserves the right to charge a
percentage of concession revenues as a fee to help offset the costs of city
sponsored recreation programs and property maintenance. (Ord. 2005-33, 2005)
11.04.202: PENALTY:
Any person who operates any unauthorized concession in city parks or facilities
is guilty of a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 2005-33, 2005)
CHAPTER 5
STORMWATER POLLUTION CONTROL
SECTION:
Part 1. General Provisions
11.05.101: Purpose
11.05.102: Definitions
11.05.103: Authority To Access
Part 2. Grading Permits
11.05.201: Permit Required
11.05.202: Application For A Grading Permit
11.05.203: Review And Approval Of Application
11.05.204: Permit Duration
11.05.205: Notice Of Construction/Inspections
Part 3. Stormwater Pollution Control Standards
11.05.301: Stormwater Design And Best Management Practices (BMPs)
11.05.302: UPDES General Construction Stormwater Permit
11.05.303: Sediment And Erosion Control Plan Requirements
11.05.304: Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) Requirements
Part 4. Postconstruction
11.05.401: Stabilization Requirements
11.05.402: Postconstruction Stabilization Standards
11.05.403: Inspection Of Stormwater Facilities
11.05.404: Records Of Installation And Maintenance Activities
11.05.405: Failure To Meet Or Maintain Design Or Maintenance Standards
Part 5. Illicit Discharges
11.05.501: Scope
11.05.502: Prohibition Of Illicit Discharges
11.05.503: Prohibition Of Illicit Connections
11.05.504: Reduction Of Stormwater Pollutants By The Use Of Best Management
Practices
11.05.505: Authority To Detect And Investigate Illicit Discharges
11.05.506: Notification Of Spills
Part 6. Enforcement
11.05.601: Enforcement Authority
11.05.602: Notification Of Violation (NOV)
11.05.603: Conflicting Standards
Part 7. Penalties
11.05.701: Violations
11.05.702: Recovery Of Damages And Costs
11.05.703: Other Remedies
11.05.704: Remedies Cumulative
Part 8. Appeals
11.05.801: Appeal
11.05.802: Appeals To Be In Writing
11.05.803: Upon Receipt Of An Appeal
11.05.804: Appealing Decisions Of The Administrative Law Judge
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
11.05.101: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to:
   (1)   Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of Ivins City;
   (2)   Establish responsibilities for controlling and managing stormwater
runoff;
   (3)   Protect the public health, safety and the general welfare of the city
and its inhabitants by controlling discharges of pollutants to the city's
stormwater facilities and to maintain and improve the quality of the receiving
waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, but not limited to,
lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the city;
   (4)   Enable the city to comply with the Utah pollution discharge
elimination system (UPDES) general permit for discharges from small municipal
separate storm sewer systems. This is in accordance with the national pollution
discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit and applicable federal regulations,
40 CFR section 122.26 for stormwater discharges. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.102: DEFINITIONS:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Physical, structural, and/or managerial
practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution
of water, that have been approved by Ivins City and that have been incorporated
by reference into this chapter as if fully set out therein. For purposes of
this chapter, the relevant BMPs are more particularly defined in the Ivins City
stormwater management program and Ivins City standard specifications for design
and construction.
COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE: A contiguous area where multiple separate
and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on
different schedules under one plan. The status of the common plan of
development shall remain in place until construction of all buildable lots is
finished, and the site is stabilized, regardless of sale of lots as per state
of Utah policies and rules. This shall apply to all subdivisions with vacant
buildable lots which were subdivided after November 1992.
DISCHARGE: Dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place by
any means including any direct or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter
into the municipal separate stormwater facilities.
DRAINAGE STUDY: A study of the hydrology and hydraulics of a project site that
identifies locations and quantities of discharges to, from, and through the
site for various storm events as required by Ivins City.
LAND DISTURBING/GRADING ACTIVITY: Any activity on property that results in a
change in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or
the existing soil topography. Land disturbing/grading activities include, but
are not limited to, development, redevelopment, demolition, construction,
reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation.
POLLUTANTS: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage,
sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and
industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.
STORMWATER FACILITIES: The drainage structures, conduits, ditches, storm
sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of which stormwater is collected,
transported, pumped, treated or disposed of.
UPDES GENERAL PERMIT: Utah pollution discharge elimination system stormwater
general permit for construction activities. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.103: AUTHORITY TO ACCESS:
Qualified personnel representing Ivins City including staff are authorized to
access private properties that discharge to the city's storm drainage system to
inspect stormwater BMPs during construction. See part 4 of this chapter for
postconstruction inspection of stormwater facilities. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
PART 2. GRADING PERMITS
11.05.201: PERMIT REQUIRED:
All land disturbances and grading greater than one acre, or less than one acre
and part of a larger common plan of development or sale require a property
owner to obtain a permit as issued by the city.
   (1)   The following activities are exempt from the permit requirement:
      (a)   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources;
      (b)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted main or accessory use;
      (c)   Any agricultural activity that is consistent with an approved farm
conservation plan or a management plan prepared or approved by the appropriate
city, state, or federal agency;
      (d)   Additions or modifications which disturb less than one acre to
existing developed single-family lots after the initial construction of the
home and stabilization of the lot. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.202: APPLICATION FOR A GRADING PERMIT:
The following information may be required in addition to the standard
information provided:
   (1)   Name of applicant;
   (2)   Business or residence address of applicant;
   (3)   Name, address or telephone number of the owner of the property of
record;
   (4)   Address and legal description of subject property including the tax
reference number and parcel number of the subject property;
   (5)   Name, address and telephone number of the contractor and any
subcontractor(s) who shall perform the land disturbing/grading activity and who
shall implement the erosion and sediment control plan;
   (6)   A statement indicating the nature, extent and purpose of the land
disturbing/grading activity, including the size of the area for which the
permit shall be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates
of the land disturbing/grading activity;
   (7)   Drainage study, if required by the city;
   (8)   A sediment and erosion control plan as provided in part 3 of this
chapter;
   (9)   A stormwater pollution prevention plan as provided in part 3 of this
chapter;
   (10)   Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by payment
of grading permit and other stormwater management fees, as adopted by
resolution and found in the city fee schedule;
   (11)   Air quality/dust control plan as required in this code. (Ord. 2010-
02, 2010)
11.05.203: REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATION:
   (1)   Ivins City will review each application for a grading permit to
determine its conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The city shall
provide one of the following responses in writing:
      (a)   Approval of the permit application;
      (b)   Approval of the permit application, subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this
chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
      (c)   Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for the
denial.
   (2)   If the city has granted conditional approval of the permit, the
applicant shall submit a revised plan that conforms to the conditions
established by the city. No grading permit will be released until the
development plans have been approved. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.204: PERMIT DURATION:
Every grading permit shall expire and become null and void if substantial work
authorized by such permit has not commenced within sixty (60) calendar days of
issuance and becomes null and void if the entire project is not completed
within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance or an extension has been
granted based on ongoing work on the project and substantial work being
completed. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.205: NOTICE OF CONSTRUCTION/INSPECTIONS:
The applicant must notify the city in advance of the commencement of
construction to schedule a preconstruction meeting. Weekly inspections of the
stormwater facilities construction shall be conducted by the contractor, with
exceptions only as allowed by the UPDES general permit. The city will inspect
the site at least monthly. All inspections shall be documented and written
reports prepared as approved by the city. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
PART 3. STORMWATER POLLUTION CONTROL STANDARDS
11.05.301: STORMWATER DESIGN AND BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs):
Anyone subject to this chapter must comply with this code, all stormwater
programs and plans adopted by the city and with the Ivins City standard
specifications for design and construction. These standards include specific
design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater
practice. These standards may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the
discretion of the city. Stormwater facilities that are designed, constructed
and maintained in accordance with these standards and with BMP criteria will be
presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. (Ord. 2010-
02, 2010)
11.05.302: UPDES GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER PERMIT:
Prior to any grading or disturbance, all persons issued a grading permit will
be required to submit a notice of intent (NOI) for stormwater discharges
associated with construction activity under the UPDES general permit to the
state of Utah, department of environmental quality, division of water quality.
This permit requires that an SWPPP is developed in writing as approved by the
city. It is the contractor's responsibility to maintain the stormwater and
drainage controls as required by the UPDES permit till such time as the notice
of termination (NOT) is filed and accepted by the state of Utah. (Ord. 2010-02,
2010)
11.05.303: SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
The sediment and erosion control plan shall accurately describe the potential
for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from land disturbing/
grading activity and shall explain and illustrate the measures that are to be
taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to be
commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition, and
potential for off site damage. The plan shall be sealed by a registered
professional engineer licensed in the state of Utah for disturbances that are
greater than five (5) acres, or part of a subdivision or site development that
requires an approval of site development construction plans. The plan shall
also conform to the requirements found in the Ivins City stormwater management
program, and shall include at least the following:
   (1)   A topographic map with contour intervals of two feet (2') or less
showing present conditions and proposed contours resulting from land
disturbing/grading activity.
   (2)   All existing drainageways, including intermittent and wet weather.
Include any designated floodways or floodplains.
   (3)   Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading and filling.
   (4)   Location, size and layout of proposed stormwater and sedimentation
control improvements.
   (5)   Proposed drainage network.
   (6)   Specific remediation measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation
runoff. Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control measures used,
stabilization measures including vegetation and nonvegetation measures, both
temporary and permanent, will be detailed. Detailed construction notes and a
maintenance schedule shall be included for all control measures in the plan.
   (7)   Specific details for the construction of rock pads, wash down pads,
and settling basins for controlling erosion; road access points; eliminating or
keeping soil, sediment, and debris on streets and public ways at a level
acceptable to the city. Soil, sediment, and debris brought onto streets and
public ways must be removed by the end of the work day by machine, broom or
shovel to the satisfaction of the city. Failure to remove the sediment, soil or
debris shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   (8)   Proposed structures; location (to the extent possible) and
identification of any proposed additional buildings, structures or development
on the site. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.304: STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) REQUIREMENTS:
A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be submitted in writing in
a form approved by the city for the protection, control and restoration of
stormwater quality. The SWPPP shall be complete in accordance with the
requirements of the state of Utah as defined in the stormwater general permit
for construction activities. Property owners are responsible to manage
stormwater runoff and sediment, unless this responsibility is relinquished
through the terms and conditions of an easement, agreement, or contract. The
SWPPP shall include sufficient information to allow the city to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all
proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water
resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for
managing stormwater generated at the project site. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
PART 4. POSTCONSTRUCTION
11.05.401: STABILIZATION REQUIREMENTS:
Any area that has been disturbed by grading activity shall be stabilized
according to a schedule provided by the contractor or the developer and
approved by the city. A plan must be submitted with the final design describing
the vegetative or other stabilization and management techniques to be used at a
site. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized, who will
be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation or other stabilization at the
site, and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate cover is
preserved. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.402: POSTCONSTRUCTION STABILIZATION STANDARDS:
All postconstruction stabilization shall be in accordance with city's
stormwater management plan, Ivins City standard specifications for design and
construction, or other similar guidance documents and policies developed by the
city. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.403: INSPECTION OF STORMWATER FACILITIES:
   (1)   Public Property: Periodic inspections of facilities shall be performed
by the city on public property.
   (2)   Private Property: On private property, the landowner, its successors
and assigns, including any homeowners' association, shall conduct periodic
inspections and maintain the stormwater facilities. This includes all inlets,
pipes, channels, and detention basins built to convey stormwater, as well as
all other structures, improvements, and vegetation provided to control the
quantity and quality of the stormwater. Adequate maintenance is defined as good
working condition so that these stormwater facilities are performing their
designed functions. An annual inspection report must be filled out for
stormwater facilities located on private property and retained for five (5)
years to ensure that the facilities are in good working condition and
acceptable to the city. The owner must provide the records for the city upon
request.
      (a)   Failure Of Private Property Owner To Inspect And/Or Report: The
failure of a private property owner to inspect and/or submit to the city the
annual report as required above shall constitute a violation for which
penalties may be assessed. In the event of such a violation, the city may issue
either an administrative citation or notice of violation pursuant to title 4 of
this code governing administrative code enforcement. Such remedy shall be in
addition to any other remedies available at law or equity.
      (b)   Authority To Access: The failure of a private property owner to
inspect and/or submit to the city the annual report as required above, shall
authorize qualified personnel representing the city to access the private
property that is in violation, provided such access by city personnel is made
after not less than ten (10) days' written notice that also allows the private
property owner to request a hearing before an administrative law judge. Upon
receiving a timely request for hearing, the city shall delay access until after
a ruling by the administrative law judge allowing access. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.404: RECORDS OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES:
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater facility
shall make records of all maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall
retain the records for at least five (5) years. These records shall be made
available to the city upon request. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.405: FAILURE TO MEET OR MAINTAIN DESIGN OR MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance
standards required for stormwater facilities, the city, after reasonable
notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by
performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working
condition. In the event that the stormwater facility becomes a danger to public
safety or public health, the city shall notify in writing the party responsible
for maintenance of the stormwater facility. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have fifteen (15) days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in an approved manner. In the event that corrective
action is not undertaken within that time, the city may take necessary
corrective action. The cost of any action by the city under this section shall
be charged to the responsible party and a lien placed on property for payment.
(Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
PART 5. ILLICIT DISCHARGES
11.05.501: SCOPE:
This part shall apply to all water generated on developed or undeveloped land
entering the city's separate storm sewer system. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.502: PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate
storm sewer system any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any nonstormwater, uncontaminated
discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
   (1)   Water line flushing or other potable water sources,
   (2)   Landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
   (3)   Diverted stream flows,
   (4)   Rising groundwater,
   (5)   Groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
   (6)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
   (7)   Foundation or footing drains,
   (8)   Crawl space pumps,
   (9)   Air conditioning condensation,
   (10)   Irrigation water,
   (11)   Individual residential car washing,
   (12)   Springs,
   (13)   Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
   (14)   Swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than 1 ppm
chlorine),
   (15)   Discharges from firefighting activities,
   (16)   Residual street wash water,
   (17)   Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges,
   (18)   Any other uncontaminated water source,
   (19)   Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to
protect public health and safety,
   (20)   Dye testing if the city has so specified in writing, and
   (21)   Any nonstormwater discharge permitted under a UPDES permit, waiver,
or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the state of Utah, division of water quality, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver,
or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. (Ord.
2010-02, 2010)
11.05.503: PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS:
   (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the separate municipal storm sewer system is prohibited.
   (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.504: REDUCTION OF STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES:
Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the
source of an illicit discharge, will be required to implement, at the person's
expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to
the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid UPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed
in compliance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.505: AUTHORITY TO DETECT AND INVESTIGATE ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
The city has the authority to detect, investigate, eliminate and enforce
against nonstormwater discharges. Enforcement shall follow part 6 of this
chapter as given below. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.506: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting in, or may result in, illicit discharges or
pollutants discharging into the city stormwater facilities, the person shall
take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of
such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, the person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, the person shall notify the city in person or by telephone no later
than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be
confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three (3)
business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator
of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall
be retained for at least five (5) years. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
PART 6. ENFORCEMENT
11.05.601: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The city may issue notices of violation, stop work orders, citations, and
impose civil penalties. The city may complete periodic inspection reports to
ensure that the contractor's chosen BMPs used to address the site stormwater
are performing adequately. If BMPs are not performing, the city will have the
contractor update his erosion and sediment control plan and the stormwater
pollution prevention plan. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.602: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION (NOV):
   (1)   Written Notice: Whenever the city finds that any permittee or any
other person discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this chapter
or a permit or order issued hereunder, the city may serve upon such person
written notice of the violation. Within ten (10) days of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to
the city. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation.
   (2)   Consent Orders: The city is empowered to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will
include specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance
within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the
same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections
(4) and (5) of this section.
   (3)   Show Cause Hearing: The city may order any person who violates this
chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the person
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action
and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why
this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by mail.
   (4)   Compliance Order: When the city finds that any person has violated or
continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, it may
issue an order to the violator directing that, following a specific time
period, adequate structures, devices, be installed or procedures implemented
and properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might
be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including
the construction of appropriate structures, installation of devices, self-
monitoring, and management practices.
   (5)   Cease And Desist Orders: When the city finds that any person has
violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder, the city may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations
and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
      (a)   Comply forthwith; or
      (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.603: CONFLICTING STANDARDS:
Whenever there is a conflict between any standard contained in this chapter and
in the Ivins City stormwater management program adopted by the city, the
strictest standard shall prevail. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
PART 7. PENALTIES
11.05.701: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under this chapter, who
violates any provision of this chapter, who violates the provisions of any
permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who fails or refuses to comply with
any lawful communication or notice to abate or take corrective action by the
city, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.702: RECOVERY OF DAMAGES AND COSTS:
The city may recover:
   (1)   All damages caused by the violator to the city, which may include any
reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and enforcing
compliance with this chapter, or any other actual damages caused by the
violation.
   (2)   The costs of the city's maintenance of stormwater facilities when the
user of such facilities fails to maintain them as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.703: OTHER REMEDIES:
The city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this
chapter, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or equity, shall be no
defense to any such actions. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.704: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
The remedies set forth in this part shall be cumulative, not exclusive, and it
shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one or more of
the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
PART 8. APPEALS
11.05.801: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a civil penalty or damage assessment
as provided by this chapter may appeal said penalty or damage assessment to the
administrative code enforcement administrative law judge. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.802: APPEALS TO BE IN WRITING:
The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city recorder within fifteen
(15) days after the civil penalty or damage assessment is served. (Ord. 2010-
02, 2010)
11.05.803: UPON RECEIPT OF AN APPEAL:
The administrative law judge shall hold a hearing upon receipt of an appeal.
Notice shall be provided to the appealing party at the address provided by the
appealing party at the time of appeal. The decision of the administrative law
judge shall be final. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
11.05.804: APPEALING DECISIONS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:
Any alleged violator may appeal a decision of the administrative law judge
pursuant to section
2.05.103 of this code. (Ord. 2010-02, 2010)
CHAPTER 6
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
11.06.101: Use Of Right-Of-Way For Small Wireless Facilities And Utility Poles
11.06.102: Definitions
11.06.103: Small Wireless Facilities; Restrictions
11.06.104: When Permit Required
11.06.105: Design Standards Applicable To All Small Wireless Facilities
11.06.106: Design Standards Applicable To Co-Located Small Wireless Facilities
11.06.107: Design Standards Applicable To Small Wireless Facilities On New
Stand-Alone Utility Poles
11.06.108: Design Standards Applicable To Decorative Poles
11.06.109: Undergrounding
11.06.110: Application Process
11.06.111: Procedure For Administrative Review Of Applications
11.06.112: Fees
11.06.113: Damage And Repair
11.06.114: Removal Of Small Wireless Facilities
11.06.115: Conflicts
11.06.116: Other Applicable Ordinances
11.06.117: Orders, Rules And Regulations
11.06.118: City Failure To Enforce
11.06.119: Construed According To Utah Law
11.06.101:   USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND UTILITY
POLES:
   (1)   Subject to the provisions of this chapter and along, across, upon or
under a right-of-way, a wireless provider may:
      (a)   Collocate a small wireless facility, including collocation on a
City pole;
      (b)   Install, operate, modify, maintain or replace:
         (i)   A utility pole associated with the wireless provider's
collocation of small wireless facilities;
         (ii)   A stand-alone pole owned by a wireless provider for use with a
small wireless facility; or
         (iii)   Equipment described in Utah Code Annotated subsection 54-21-
101(25)(b)(i) through (ix) required for a wireless provider's operation or
collocation of small wireless facilities.
   (2)   An applicant may not install a new utility pole or a small wireless
facility, including any associated equipment, upon or under a residential
street without the City's discretionary written consent.
   (3)   This chapter applies to the construction, modification, removal and
operation of small wireless facilities installed in the public right-of-way.
   (4)   This chapter does not apply to video service systems, wireline
services, or wireless facilities that are not small wireless facilities.
   (5)   All references to small wireless facilities in this chapter shall
refer only to small wireless facilities in the right-of-way and not small
wireless facilities located anywhere outside of the right-of-way.
   (6)   No person shall install, construct, modify, or otherwise place any
small wireless facility within the public right-of-way except pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (7)   Microwave, macro towers, and other wireless backhaul facilities are
not permitted within the right-of-way.
   (8)   The definitions used in this chapter apply only to this chapter. (Ord.
2021-15, 2021)
11.06.102:   DEFINITIONS:
   (1)   Except as specifically defined in this section, the terms used in this
chapter shall be defined as set forth in the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act, section 54-21-101 Utah Code Annotated ("Act"), or its successor
provision.
CITY POLE: An authority pole owned by Ivins City.
FEES: Either a fee or rate as defined in the Act.
RESIDENTIAL STREET: A public right-of-way that is not more than sixty feet
(60') wide, as shown on a deed, dedication plat, or other official plat record
on file with the Office of the Washington County Recorder and that is adjacent
to single-family residential lots, other multifamily residences or undeveloped
land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restriction.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Does not include: private streets; private abutter's alleys;
utility easements owned by the City, including public utility easements shown
on a recorded subdivision plat; the interior of public parks or other public
grounds including internal sidewalks, parking areas or roads; or trails and
paths that are not immediately adjacent to and parallel with a public right-of-
way.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A type of wireless facility:
   (a)   On which each wireless provider's antenna could fit within an
enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume; and
   (b)   For which all wireless equipment associated with the wireless
facility, whether ground-mounted or pole-mounted, is cumulatively no more than
twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume, not including any:
      (i)   Electric meter;
      (ii)   Concealment element;
      (iii)   Telecommunications demarcation box;
      (iv)   Grounding equipment;
      (v)   Power transfer switch;
      (vi)   Cut-off switch;
      (vii)   Vertical cable run for the connection of power or other service;
      (viii)   Wireless provider antenna; or
      (ix)   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with a particular collocation, unless the cable is a
wireline backhaul facility.
STAND-ALONE POLE: A pole installed by a wireless provider in the public right-
of-way for use in connection with a small wireless facility. (Ord. 2021-15,
2021)
11.06.103:   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES; RESTRICTIONS:
   (1)   A small wireless facility, including associated poles, equipment and
structures, installed under this chapter may not:
      (a)   Obstruct or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a right-of-
way;
      (b)   Be located within two feet (2') of a curb, provided that this
restriction does not apply to an existing utility pole that is used for
collocation unless the pole is proposed to be replaced;
      (c)   Utilize guy wires to support, provided that this restriction does
not apply to an existing utility pole with a guy wire;
      (d)   Interfere with or impair the vision of operators of vehicles at
street intersections or interfere with or impair any aspect of any sight
triangle field of vision; or
      (e)   Obstruct, damage, or interfere with:
         (i)   Another utility facility in a right-of-way; or
         (ii)   A utility's use of the utility's facility in a right-of-way.
   (2)   Construction and maintenance of any pole, equipment or small wireless
facility by a wireless provider shall comply with all applicable legal
obligations for the protection of underground and overhead utility facilities.
   (3)   A wireless provider shall indemnify, save harmless, and defend City,
its officers and employees, from and against all losses, claims, counterclaims,
demands, actions, damages, costs, charges, and causes of action of every kind
or character, including attorneys' fees, arising out of or in connection with
such provider's wireless facilities or use of the public way, unless and to the
extent caused by the City's negligence.
   (4)   A wireless provider is solely responsible for establishing electrical
power service for its small wireless facilities and for the payment of all
electrical utility charges associated with the small wireless facility.
   (5)   All small wireless facilities and wireless provider-owned structures
shall be maintained by the wireless provider in a clean and good condition,
free of graffiti, and rusting, excessive dirt, and peeling paint. The City
shall have the authority to conduct inspections of the small wireless
facilities and structures at any time to determine whether such facilities and
structures comply with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.104:   WHEN PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (1)   When Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain a permit prior to:
      (a)   Collocating a small wireless facility in a public right-of-way;
      (b)   Installing a new, modified, or replacement utility pole, authority
pole or stand-alone pole associated with a small wireless facility in a right-
of-way; or
      (c)   Permanently removing a small wireless facility.      
   (2)   Agreements: The City will not provide a permit to a wireless provider
until the wireless provider and City have first entered into a master license
or franchise agreement.
   (3)   Exceptions To Permitting: Unless the work requires the closing of
sidewalks or vehicular lanes in the public right-of-way, an application for a
permit is not required for:
      (a)   Routine maintenance of a small wireless facility or support
structures for a small wireless facility;
      (b)   The replacement of one small wireless facility with another small
wireless facility of substantially similar or smaller size;
      (c)   The installation, placement, operation or maintenance of a micro
wireless facility that is strung on a cable between two (2) existing utility
poles in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code; or
      (d)   Non-substantial modifications.
   (4)   Notice: A wireless provider shall give notice to the City of an
activity described in subsection (3) of this section at least five (5) business
days prior to conducting the activity. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.105:   DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   (1)   Integrated Design Consideration: Small wireless facilities, shall be
integrated into the stand-alone pole, utility pole or authority pole where
possible and generally shall be installed in a manner minimizing the visual
impact. Whether the small wireless facility is collocated or is placed on its
own pole:
      (a)   Small wireless facilities should not be readily noticed;
      (b)   To the extent possible, all equipment associated with the small
wireless facility, including electric meters, must be located in an above
ground cabinet or underground vault in the landscape buffer;
      (c)   Any small wireless facility and associated equipment located on the
exterior of a pole shall be enclosed in a shroud or enclosure painted to match
the existing pole color;
      (d)   All small wireless facilities shall be constructed out of or
finished with non-reflective materials (visible exterior surfaces only);
      (e)   For metal poles:
         (i)   Cable runs should be inside of the pole to the maximum extent
practicable;
         (ii)   Whenever possible, equipment associated with the small wireless
facility must be enclosed in an above ground utility cabinet or underground
vault; and
         (iii)   Poles used for collocation shall be designed to separate
different pole users, such as through dual chamber or tri-chamber design;
      (f)   If equipment cannot be installed inside of the pole or within the
landscape buffer, pole attachments within fifteen feet (15') of ground level
shall be positioned on the side of the pole facing away from approaching
traffic in the travel lane closest to the pole, provided that if the equipment
would extend over a sidewalk or road surface, the equipment shall be positioned
in a way to avoid such encroachment;
      (g)   Any wireless facility equipment on the outside of a utility pole
shall be placed at least eight feet (8') above the public way, unless otherwise
permitted by City;
      (h)   Shall not be lighted or marked unless required by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), or
other applicable governmental authority; and
      (i)   Signs located at the small wireless facility shall be limited to
ownership and contact information, FCC antenna registration number (if
required) and any other information as required by applicable governmental
authority. Commercial advertising is strictly prohibited.
   (2)   Antennae:
      (a)   Each individual antenna shall be located entirely within a shroud
enclosure of not more than three (3) cubic feet in volume. All antennas
associated with the small wireless facility shall not exceed a combined space
of six (6) cubic feet.
      (b)   The diameter of the antenna or antenna enclosure should generally
not exceed the diameter of the top of the wireless support structure pole, and
to the maximum extent practical, should appear as a seamless vertical extension
of the pole.
      (c)   In no case shall the maximum diameter of the shroud be wider than
one and one-half (1½) times the diameter of the top of the pole.
      (d)   Where maximum shroud diameter exceeds diameter of the top of the
pole, the shroud shall be tapered to meet the top of the pole.
      (e)   Unless technologically infeasible or otherwise appropriate based on
neighborhood context, all antennas shall be mounted to the top of the wireless
support structure pole, aligned with the centerline of the structure.
      (f)   Antennas shall be generally cylindrical in shape.
      (g)   Antennas shall be completely housed within a cylindrical shroud
that is capable of accepting paint to match the wireless support structure.
   (3)   Height Limitations: Except for small wireless facilities on a
residential street:
      (a)   The height of a structure used for collocation of a small wireless
facility, including the wireless facility, measured at the base of the
structure shall not exceed the lesser of:
         (i)   The minimum height needed for the operation of the wireless
facility; or
         (ii)   For a new or modified utility pole or authority pole, fifty
feet (50') above ground level together with the minimum antenna height
necessary for one antenna contained within any approved concealment feature.
      (b)   A utility pole existing on or before September 1, 2018 that is used
for the collocation of a small wireless facility may, on only one occasion, be
increased by up to ten feet (10') to allow for the attachment of the small cell
wireless antenna together with any approved concealment feature.
      (c)   A stand-alone pole shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in height,
including any antenna.
   (4)   Cabinets; Vaults: If a ground mounted or buried equipment cabinet is
proposed, the cabinet or vault:
      (a)   May be placed above ground in a landscaped park strip or, if there
is no landscaped park strip it shall be placed underground;
      (b)   Shall meet the same separation standards as required for a new
utility pole from trees and drive approaches; and
      (c)   For an above ground cabinet:
         (i)   Shall be secured to a concrete foundation or slab with a
breakaway design in the event of collisions; and
         (ii)   Shall not exceed three feet (3') in height, unless special
conditions exist that would result in the cabinet encroaching into the sidewalk
or to within two feet (2') of the curb. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.106:   DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO CO- LOCATED SMALL WIRELESS
FACILITIES:
Collocated small wireless facilities shall, in addition to the requirements of
section
11.06.105  of this chapter, meet the following design standards:
   (1)   To the maximum extent practicable, all small cell facilities,
associated equipment and cabling shall be completely concealed from view.
   (2)   Where equipment cannot reasonably be incorporated into an above ground
utility cabinet, underground vault or the base of an authority pole, it may be
installed within an equipment enclosure mounted to the authority pole; or
   (3)   Equipment enclosures mounted to an authority pole:
      (a)   Protrusion: Shall not protrude more than eighteen inches (18")
beyond the face of the pole to the outermost portion of the enclosure.
      (b)   Installation: Should be installed as flush to the pole as
practical. In no case shall an enclosure be installed more than four inches
(4") from the wireless support structure pole.
      (c)   Multiple Enclosures: Where multiple enclosures are proposed on a
wireless support structure pole, the enclosures shall be grouped as closely
together as possible on the same side of the pole.
      (d)   Enclosure Size: Small wireless facility equipment enclosures should
be the smallest size practicable to house the necessary facilities and
equipment.
      (e)   Enclosure Shape: Small wireless facility equipment enclosures shall
be cylindrical or rectangular in shape and should generally be no wider than
the maximum outside diameter of the pole to which it is attached, to the
maximum extent possible.
      (f)   Attachment: The shroud enclosure shall be securely strapped to the
wireless support structure pole using stainless steel banding straps. Through-
bolting or use of lag bolts on publicly-owned wireless support structures is
prohibited. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.107:   DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES ON NEW
STAND-ALONE UTILITY POLES:
If an applicant proposes to install a new stand-alone utility pole in
connection with a small wireless facility, the pole and facilities shall, in
addition to the requirements of section
11.06.105  of this chapter, meet the following design standards:
   (1)   Design of the pole shall be cylindrical and shall match the aesthetics
of existing City owned streetlight poles and streetlights installed adjacent to
the pole.
   (2)   Together with the small wireless facility components shall be sized to
be visually pleasing.
      (a)   For a pole to be considered visually pleasing, the transition
between the equipment cabinet and upper pole should be considered;
      (b)   The equipment associated with the small wireless facility shall be
enclosed in a separate equipment cabinet or vault in the landscape buffer not
exceeding twenty eight (28) cubic feet in size may be used if the equipment
cannot reasonably be contained in the space allowed;
      (c)   A decorative transition shall be installed over any equipment
cabinet upper bolts, or decorative base cover shall be installed to match the
equipment cabinet size and shall taper between different pole diameters, with
no horizontal or flat spaces greater than 1.5 inches;
      (d)   The upper pole shall be scaled to 0.5 to 0.75 the size of the
equipment cabinet, with a ten inch (10") minimum outer diameter at the widest
portion of the pole;
      (e)   All hardware connections shall be hidden from view;
      (f)   No horizontal flat spaces greater than 1.5 inches shall exist on
the equipment cabinet to prevent cups, trash, and other objects from being
placed on the equipment cabinet;
      (g)   Each pole component shall be architecturally compatible to create a
cohesive aesthetic; and
      (h)   The pole shall be made of steel and shall be powder coated the same
color as City owned poles.
   (3)   Shall not be located within one hundred feet (100') of the apron of a
fire station or other adjacent emergency service facility.
   (4)   Shall be placed in alignment with existing trees, utility poles, and
streetlights.
   (5)   Shall be located such that it in no way impedes, obstructs, or hinders
the usual pedestrian or vehicular travel, affect public safety, obstruct the
legal access to or use of the public ROW, violate applicable law, violate or
conflict with public ROW design standards, specifications, or design district
requirements, violate the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, or
in any way create a risk to public health, safety, or welfare.
   (6)   Shall be located at intersecting property lines as much as possible.
   (7)   Whenever possible, shall be located on the secondary street.
   (8)   Shall be located a minimum of fifteen feet (15') away from trees or
outside of the tree drip line, whichever is greater, to prevent disturbance
within the critical root zone of any tree.
   (9)   Shall be located at least five feet (5') away from the widest part of
an alley or drive approach, including any flare associated with the approach.
   (10)   Shall not be installed between the perpendicular extension of the
primary street-facing wall plane of any single or two-family residence and the
street.
   (11)   When located adjacent to a commercial establishment, such as a shop
or restaurant, care should be taken to locate the pole such that it does not
negatively impact the business.
      (a)   Shall not be located in-front of store front windows, primary
walkways, primary entrances or exits, or in such a way that it would impede a
delivery to the building.
      (b)   Should be located between properties as much as possible. (Ord.
2021-15, 2021)
11.06.108:   DESIGN STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO DECORATIVE POLES:
Small wireless facilities located on decorative poles shall, in addition to any
other requirements of this chapter, meet the following design standards:
   (1)   Decorative Poles: If necessary, to collocate a small wireless
facility, a wireless provider may replace a decorative pole, if the replacement
pole reasonably conforms to the design aesthetic of the displaced decorative
pole as approved by the City Engineer. A replacement pole does not reasonably
conform to the design aesthetic if it extends the current pole height by more
than twenty five percent (25%). (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.109:   UNDERGROUNDING:
   (1)   A wireless provider will place newly constructed lines and cables
underground whenever practicable when building in:
      (a)   New residential subdivision areas where other utilities have been
placed underground;
      (b)   Within areas where other utilities have been located underground.
   (2)   A wireless provider shall locate wires, cables, or other facilities
that are not required to be above ground underground.
   (3)   Any request by a wireless provider for location of any overhead or
aerial facilities (other than the antennas or other facilities required to
remain above ground in order to be functional) shall be considered by City in
accordance with applicable rules and regulations. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.110:   APPLICATION PROCESS:
   (1)   Applications for the installation or collocation of a small wireless
facility shall be filed with the City Engineer on a form or forms to be
furnished by the City Engineer.
   (2)   All applications shall contain the following:
      (a)   The application form shall be signed by the applicant or its
authorized representative;
      (b)   The name, address, telephone, facsimile number, and email address
of the applicant. Where an applicant is not the owner of the utility pole to be
installed, maintained or repaired in the public way, the application also shall
include the name, address, telephone, facsimile number and email address of the
owner;
      (c)   A description of the location, purpose, method of the proposed
work, and surface and subsurface area to be affected;
      (d)   A plan showing the dimensions of any excavation and the facilities
to be installed, maintained, or repaired in connection with the work, and such
other details as the City Engineer may require;
      (e)   Construction drawings which demonstrate the application meets the
minimum requirements of this chapter, including:
         (i)   A scaled site plan, rendering or photo simulation, scaled
elevation view and other supporting drawings and calculations, showing the
location and dimension of all improvements; and
         (ii)   Sufficient information to determine compliance with the
standards and requirements of this chapter, specifically including information
concerning structure height and location within the right-of-way, compliance
with the City's intersection and driveway sight distance standards, and
compliance with the ADA;
      (f)   The appropriate application fee as set forth in subsection
11.05.112(2) of this chapter;
      (g)   An affidavit or attestation that the applicant or, if the applicant
does not provide wireless services, a wireless service provider will provide
wireless service using the small wireless facility and that the installation or
collocation of the small wireless facility shall be completed within two
hundred seventy (270) days after the day on which the City issues a right-of-
way permit except in the case that:
         (i)   The City and the applicant agree to extend the two hundred
seventy (270) day period; or
         (ii)   Lack of commercial power or communications transport
infrastructure to the site delays completion;
      (h)   If the applicant does not provide wireless service to an end user
associated with the small wireless facility or facilities to be installed,
maintained, or repaired, the applicant must demonstrate in a form and manner
specified by the City Engineer that the applicant is authorized to act on
behalf of a wireless service provider;
      (i)   An affidavit or attestation that each proposed small wireless
facility, pole, and associated equipment is eligible for an exemption from
environmental or historical assessment under 47 CFR 1.1312(e) or, if not
exempt, evidence of compliance with such required assessment;
      (j)   An affidavit or attestation from a Utah licensed engineer that the
proposed wireless facility will be in compliance with the radio frequency
emissions limits established by the FCC;
      (k)   The proposed start date of work;
      (l)   The proposed duration of the work, which shall include the duration
of the restoration of the right-of-way physically disturbed by the work;
      (m)   Written certification that all material to be used in the work and
restoration of the right-of-way, will be on hand and ready for use so as not to
delay the work and the prompt restoration of the public way;
      (n)   For an application that proposes collocation of the small wireless
facility:
         (i)   An industry-standard pole load analysis indicating that the
structure on which the wireless facilities will be mounted will safely support
the load;
         (ii)   Evidence that the applicant has permission to collocate the
proposed small wireless facility on the pole; and
         (iii)   If a small wireless facility cannot be safely installed on the
respective structure, the applicant shall either replace the structure with a
compliant structure of the same type, or propose a new location;
      (o)   For an application that proposes use of a decorative pole, a copy
or other documentation that the applicant has complied with section
11.06.108  of this chapter;
      (p)   Written certification that the applicant and the wireless service
provider are in compliance with all terms and conditions of this chapter, the
orders, and all applicable rules and regulations of the City Engineer, and that
the applicant and owner are not subject to any outstanding assessments, fees or
penalties that have been finally determined by the City;
      (q)   Evidence of insurance as required by either section
11.06.113  of this title or the applicable agreement with the City;
      (r)   Certification of the applicant and owner's financial ability to
compensate the City for the use of the public way during the term of the
respective master license or franchise agreement or master license agreement;
      (s)   Any other information that may reasonably be required by the City
Engineer.
   (3)   After an application has been approved, the applicant shall obtain any
required permits, including right-of-way, excavation or electrical permits,
prior to commencing installation or construction of the small wireless
facility. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.111:   PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS:
   (1)   City shall review a complete application, including a consolidated
application of up to twenty-five (25) small wireless facilities, and approve or
deny the application within the time frames and subject to the standards
contained in the Act.
   (2)   City is a category two (2) authority for purposes of determining the
total number of small wireless facility applications allowed on a monthly basis
under the Act.
   (3)   If construction of an approved small wireless facility is not complete
within two hundred seventy (270) days after an application has been approved,
the approval shall lapse and a new application will be required for the
designated location. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.112:   FEES:
   (1)   Right To Use And Occupy: Unless a wireless provider is subject to the
Municipal Telecommunications License Tax under title 10, chapter 1, part 4 Utah
Code Annotated, for the right to use and occupy the right-of-way:
      (a)   The wireless provider shall pay to the City an annual fee equal to
the greater of:
         (i)   Three and one-half percent (3.5%) of all annual gross revenue
related to the wireless provider's use of the right-of-way within the City; or
         (ii)   Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) annually for each small
wireless facility located in the City.
      (b)   The annual fee, together with the fee described in subsection (3)
of this section, shall be paid on or before December 31, with the fee for any
new small wireless facility installed in the prior year pro-rated by the number
of months after the facility has been approved. Upon written request by City to
the wireless provider, payments shall be made on a monthly basis.
      (c)   Annually, on or before December 31, a person required to make a
payment under subsection (1)(a) of this section shall provide City with gross
revenue upon which payments are calculated and a description, of reasonable
specificity, of the small wireless facilities which have generated the revenue
upon which the payment is based.
         (i)   Such report shall include such information related to such
payment as the City may reasonably request.
         (ii)   The records pertaining to the reports and payment required by
this chapter, including but not limited to any records deemed necessary or
useful by the City to calculate or confirm gross revenue, and all other records
of the wireless provider reasonably required by City to assure compliance by
the wireless provider with the terms of this chapter shall be open to
inspection by the City and its duly authorized representatives upon reasonable
notice at all reasonable business hours of the wireless provider.
   (2)   Application Fee: With each application to locate a small wireless
facility within the City, an applicant shall pay an application fee of:
      (a)   Collocation: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per small wireless
facility on the same application where the application requests collocation of
the facility; or
      (b)   Stand-Alone Pole: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per small
wireless facility on the same application where the application requests the
installation, modification or replacement of a stand-alone pole associated with
the facility.
   (3)   Annual Fee: The wireless provider shall pay the City an annual fee for
each collocation on a City pole in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
pole.
   (4)   Other Fees: A wireless provider or applicant shall pay all other
applicable fees established by City, specifically including but not limited to
electrical permit fees and right-of-way permit fees prior to installing an
approved small wireless facility in the right-of-way. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.113:   DAMAGE AND REPAIR:
   (1)   If a wireless provider's activity disrupts or causes damage to a
right-of-way, the wireless provider shall restore or repair the right-of-way to
substantially the same condition as before the disruption or damage and in
accordance with City's engineering standards.
   (2)   If a wireless provider fails to make a repair required by the City
under subsection A of this section within a reasonable time after written
notice, the City may:
      (a)   Make the required repair; and
      (b)   Charge the wireless provider the reasonable, documented, actual
cost for the repair.
   (3)   If the damage described in subsection A of this section causes an
urgent safety hazard, the City may:
      (a)   Immediately make the necessary repair; and
      (b)   Charge the wireless provider the reasonable, documented, actual
cost for the repair. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.114:   REMOVAL OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   (1)   Abandoned System: In the event that: a) the use of any portion of a
small wireless facility is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12)
months, and thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the City
to the last known address of the wireless provider; b) the term of the
applicable master license agreement has expired; or c) any small wireless
facility has been installed in the rights-of-way without complying with the
requirements of this chapter or master license agreement; a wireless provider
shall be deemed to have abandoned such small wireless facility.
   (2)   Removal Of Abandoned Facility: The City, upon such terms as it may
impose, may give a wireless provider written permission to abandon, without
removing, any small wireless facility, or portion thereof, directly
constructed, operated or maintained under a master license agreement. Unless
such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a
wireless provider shall remove within a reasonable time the abandoned small
wireless facility and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any
affected rights-of-way to their former state at the time such system was
installed and in accordance with the then adopted engineering standards, so as
not to impair their usefulness. In removing its facilities and equipment, a
wireless provider shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation necessarily
made by it and shall leave all rights-of-way in as good condition as that
prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any
authority pole or other utility wires, poles or attachments. The City shall
have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the rights-of-way,
attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and
insurance provisions of this chapter and any security fund provided in a master
license agreement shall continue in full force and effect during the period of
removal and until full compliance by a wireless provider with the terms and
conditions of this section.
   (3)   Transfer Of Abandoned Facility To City: Upon abandonment of any small
wireless facility or wireless support structure in place, a wireless provider,
if required by the City, shall submit to the City a written instrument,
satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City the ownership of
such poles or equipment allowed to remain within the right-of-way.
   (4)   Removal Of Above-Ground System: At the expiration of the term for
which a master license agreement is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier
expiration, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the City
shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its expense, all
above-ground portions of small wireless facilities within a reasonable period
of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days.
   (5)   Leaving Underground System: Upon written approval by City, a wireless
provider may abandon underground portions of a small wireless facility in place
so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the rights-of-way
or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other person.
   (6)   Provider Defaults: If a wireless provider defaults under any provision
of this chapter and such default is not cured within thirty (30) days following
notice by City to wireless provider of its default, City shall maintain all its
rights and remedies, at law and in equity, including the ability to charge
fines, recover fees and costs. In the alternative, the City may remove the
small wireless facilities and associated equipment and charge the reasonable,
documented, actual cost to the wireless provider. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.115:   CONFLICTS:
In the event of a conflict between any provision of this chapter and a master
license agreement entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this chapter shall
control. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.116:   OTHER APPLICABLE ORDINANCES:
The use of the right-of-way under this chapter is subject to the police powers
of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and
welfare of the public. A person using the right-of-way pursuant to this chapter
or a master license agreement shall comply with all applicable general laws and
ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to its police powers. (Ord. 2021-15,
2021)
11.06.117:   ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, the City may adopt
such orders, rules and regulations which are reasonably necessary to accomplish
the purposes of this chapter and are consistent herewith. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.118:   CITY FAILURE TO ENFORCE:
A person shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or any master license or franchise granted pursuant
to this chapter by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt
compliance. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
11.06.119:   CONSTRUED ACCORDING TO UTAH LAW:
This chapter and any master license agreement granted pursuant to this chapter
shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the
State. (Ord. 2021-15, 2021)
TITLE 13
PRESERVATION OF CULTURAL RESOURCES
CHAPTER 1
PROTECTION OF NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL RESOURCES
SECTION:
13.01.101: Definitions
13.01.102: Conflicts Avoidance
13.01.103: Discovery Of Cultural Resources; Procedures
13.01.101: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, "Native American cultural resources" are defined as:
   (1)   Human remains;
   (2)   Funerary objects associated with human remains;
   (3)   Religious items; and
   (4)   Petroglyphs/pictographs. (Ord. 94-7, 1994)
13.01.102: CONFLICTS AVOIDANCE:
Conflicts can be avoided by conforming development design to avoid suspected
cultural resource sites. Consultation with local Native Americans, possibly
including the state division of Indians affairs, and developers during planning
phases prior to start of excavation, can avoid expense and delay. (Ord. 94-7,
1994)
13.01.103: DISCOVERY OF CULTURAL RESOURCES; PROCEDURES:
   (1)   When cultural resources are uncovered, found or identified, the
discoverer is required to immediately stop all activity endangering or
potentially endangering the cultural resource and notify the city.
   (2)   When notified, the city staff will immediately notify the Washington
County coroner and the Shivwits Paiute band chief. If no human remains are
identified in the discovery, the requirement to notify the county coroner is
removed.
   (3)   Under no condition shall remains be given to curator facilities,
universities or others. The remains shall not be used for display under any
conditions.
   (4)   The Shivwits Paiute band shall determine the disposition of the
remains immediately after the county coroner has determined the remains to be
Native American. The remains become a Native American responsibility once they
are identified as Native American.
   (5)   The Shivwits Paiute band must respond within twenty four (24) hours of
notification by city staff of discovery of the remains. Longer than twenty four
(24) hours' response shall be indication of no interest, and construction
activity may resume. A request for additional time because of a justifiable
reason, presented in writing, shall be granted.
   (6)   Cultural items other than human remains, where possible, are to be
given to the Shivwits Paiute band for their disposition. Cultural resources
that cannot be moved because of size or weight shall be protected from
destruction. The property owner is responsible to provide protection adequate
to prevent destruction and/or vandalism.
   (7)   The Shivwits Paiute band will remove the cultural resources within
twenty four (24) hours of notification. Exceptions will be made for weather.
   (8)   In those cases where the density of cultural resources uncovered or
anticipated to be uncovered is extensive, as determined by the Shivwits Paiute
band, the developer shall employ a Native American monitor on site to
facilitate with this chapter. Appropriate additional time for removal of
cultural resources shall be negotiated between the landowner and chief of the
Shivwits Paiute band. (Ord. 94-7, 1994)
TITLE 14
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
14.01.101: International Building Code Adopted
14.01.102: Revisions
14.01.103: Appendix J Adopted
14.01.101: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
The 2018 edition of the International Building Code, as adopted by the State of
Utah, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and
the demolition of such structures; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code, is hereby referred to
and adopted as the Building Code for Ivins City, together with the additions,
insertions, and changes specifically set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2020-05,
2020)
14.01.102: REVISIONS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Section 1612.3: Insert: Ivins City; August 23, 1982.
(Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.01.103: APPENDIX J ADOPTED:
Appendix J of the 2018 edition of the International Building Code entitled
"Grading" is hereby adopted as part of the Building Code for Ivins City. (Ord.
2020-05, 2020)
CHAPTER 2
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
14.02.101: International Residential Code Adopted
14.02.102: Revisions
14.02.101: INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:
The 2015 edition of the International Residential Code, as adopted by the State
of Utah, regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition
of detached one and two (2) family dwellings and multiple single family
dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height with separate
means of egress; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Residential Code, is hereby referred to and
adopted as the Residential Code for Ivins City, together with the additions,
insertions, and changes specifically set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2020-05,
2020)
14.02.102: REVISIONS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section R101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Table R.301.2(1): Insert: Ground Snow Load 21 lbs. Roof Snow Load - 15 lbs.
Wind Speed (mph) - 115. Seismic Design Category Do- soils/engineering.
Weathering - moderate/severe. Frost Line Depth - 12 inches. Termite - moderate
to heavy. Decay - none/slight. Design Temperatures - winter dry bulb 2.5% 102°,
summer wet bulb 2.5% 70°.
Section P2603.5.1: Insert: 12 inches; 12 inches.
(Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
14.03.101: National Electrical Code Adopted
14.03.101: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The 2020 edition of the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the State of
Utah, is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code for Ivins City. (Ord. 2020-05,
2020; amd. Ord. 2021-13, 2021)
CHAPTER 4
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
14.04.101: International Plumbing Code Adopted
14.04.102: Revisions
14.04.101: INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
The 2018 edition of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of
Utah, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code,
is hereby referred to and adopted as the Plumbing Code for Ivins City, together
with the additions, insertions, and changes specifically set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.04.102: REVISIONS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Section 106.6.2: Fee schedule deleted.
Section 106.6.3: Fee refunds deleted.
Section 108.4: Insert: Class B Misdemeanor; one thousand; six (6) months.
Section 108.5: Insert: one thousand; five hundred.
Section 305.4.1: Insert: 12 inches; 12 inches.
Section 903.1: Insert: 8 inches.
(Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
CHAPTER 5
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
14.05.101: International Mechanical Code Adopted
14.05.102: Revisions
14.05.101: INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The 2018 edition of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted by the State
of Utah, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Mechanical Code, is hereby referred to and adopted as the Mechanical Code for
Ivins City, together with the additions, insertions, and changes specifically
set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.05.102: REVISIONS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Section 106.5.2: Fee schedule deleted.
Section 106.5.3: Fee refunds deleted.
Section 108.4: Insert: Class B Misdemeanor; one thousand; six (6) months.
Section 108.5: Insert: one thousand; five hundred.
(Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
CHAPTER 6
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
14.06.101: International Fire Code Adopted
14.06.102: Revisions
14.06.103: Appendices
14.06.101: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
The 2018 edition of the International Fire Code, as adopted by the State of
Utah, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire
and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in Ivins City and providing
for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire
Code, is hereby referred to and adopted as the Fire Code for Ivins City,
together with the additions, insertions, and changes specifically set forth in
this chapter. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.06.102: REVISIONS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Section 110.4: Insert: Class B Misdemeanor, $1,000.00, six (6) months.
Section 112.4: Insert: five hundred; one thousand.
(Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.06.103: APPENDICES:
The following appendices published with the 2018 edition of the International
Fire Code are hereby adopted as part of the Fire Code for Ivins City:
Appendix B, entitled "FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS;"
Appendix C, entitled "FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION;"
Appendix D, entitled "FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS," except for the requirement
for fire lane signage. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
CHAPTER 7
FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
14.07.101: International Fuel Gas Code Adopted
14.07.102: Revisions
14.07.101: INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED:
The 2018 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted by the State of
Utah, regulating and governing fuel and gas systems and gas-fired appliances;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Fuel Gas Code, is hereby referred to and adopted as the Fuel Gas Code for Ivins
City, together with the additions, insertions, and changes specifically set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
14.07.102: REVISIONS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
Section 106.6.2: Insert: Fee schedule deleted.
Section 106.6.3: Insert: Fee refunds deleted.
Section 108.4: Insert: Class B Misdemeanor; one thousand; six (6) months.
Section 108.5: Insert: one thousand; five hundred.
(Ord. 2020-05, 2020)
CHAPTER 8
ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
14.08.101: UBC Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings Code Adopted
14.08.101: UBC ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE ADOPTED:
The 1997 edition of the UBC abatement of dangerous buildings code, as adopted
by the state of Utah, is hereby adopted as the abatement of dangerous buildings
code for Ivins City. (Ord. 2010-14, 2010)
CHAPTER 9
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
SECTION:
14.09.101: International Energy Conservation Code Adopted
14.09.102: Revisions
14.09.101: INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED:
The 2009 edition of the international energy conservation code, as adopted by
the state of Utah, is hereby adopted as the energy conservation code for Ivins
City. (Ord. 2010-14, 2010)
14.09.102: REVISIONS:
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Ivins City.
(Ord. 2010-14, 2010)
CHAPTER 10
OUTDOOR LIGHTING 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2021-02, 2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See Ch. 16-23 of this code.
CHAPTER 11
REGULATIONS FOR LANDSCAPING AND WATER
CONSERVATION FOR DEVELOPING LAND
SECTION:
Part 1. General Provisions
14.11.101: Short Title
14.11.102: Conflict
14.11.103: Applicability
14.11.104: Purpose
Part 2. Definitions
14.11.201: Definitions
Part 3. Single-Family And Two-Family Residential Water Efficiency Standards
14.11.301: General
14.11.302: Construction Standards
14.11.303: Landscape Standards
Part 4. Multi-Family Development Water Efficiency Standards
14.11.401: General
14.11.402: Construction Standards
14.11.403: Landscape Standards
Part 5. Nonresidential Zones And Development Water Efficiency Standards
14.11.501: General
14.11.502: Construction Standards
14.11.503: Landscape Standards
Part 6. Landscape And Irrigation Design Standards For
All New Development In Any Zone
14.11.601: General
14.11.602: Plant Selection And Maintenance
14.11.603: Tree Selection
14.11.604: Irrigation Design Standards
14.11.605: Mulch Required
14.11.606: Metering
Part 7. Resort Development Water Efficiency Standards
14.11.701: General
14.11.702: Construction Standards
14.11.703: Landscape Standards
14.11.704: Required Documentation
14.11.705: Plant Selection
14.11.706: Tree Selection
14.11.707: Irrigation Design Standards
14.11.708: Mulch Required
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
14.11.101: SHORT TITLE:
The short title for this ordinance is the “Landscaping and Water Conservation
Ordinance.” (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.102: CONFLICT:
Restrictive Covenants in Conflict with Water Efficiency Standards: Any
provisions in homeowners or property owners association governing documents,
such as bylaws, declarations, operating rules, covenants, conditions, and
restrictions that govern the operation of a common interest development,
recorded after passage of this ordinance, are void and unenforceable if they
conflict with the water efficiency standards in this ordinance, or if they have
the effect of prohibiting or restricting compliance with this chapter. (Ord.
2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.103: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this title are applicable to all new construction,
development and major landscape improvements in the city served by the Water
Conservancy District, excepting vested properties which are properties with a
previously approved Development Agreement or Conditional Use Permit, and
excepting K-12 schools.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable and if any provision, clause,
sentence, word, or part thereof is held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or
inapplicable to any person or circumstances, such illegality, invalidity,
unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, clauses, sentences, sections, words or parts thereof of
this ordinance or their applicability to other persons or circumstances. (Ord.
2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.104: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this title have been established to reduce water usage due to
stressed water supplies. Some provisions of this code are recommended by State
regulations to comply and qualify for State water conservation rebate programs.
Other provisions of this code are necessary to comply with the Water Efficiency
Standards established by the board of the Washington County Water Conservancy
District which are set as a requirement of the Regional Water Supply Agreement.
(Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
PART 2. DEFINITIONS
14.11.201: DEFINITIONS:
 
              A dedicated active play area where irrigated grass is used as the playing
              surface, such as a sports field designed for public use. Active recreation areas
              shall be:
              i)   A minimum of 1,500 contiguous square feet of grass area;
              ii)   Not less than 30 feet in any dimension;
ACTIVE        iii)   Not less than 10 feet from areas dedicated to vehicular use, such as a
RECREATION    street or parking lot;
AREA:         iv)   Designed and located to be accessible to large populations, such as at a
              school, daycare, recreation center, senior center, public park, private park,
              water park or religious institution; and
              v)   Co-located with amenities, including but not limited to trash bins, benches,
              tables, walking paths, drinking water, playground equipment and/or other
              recreational amenities.
COMMON AREA:  The area which is available for common use by all owners or renters in a
              development.
CONTROLLER:   A device used in irrigation systems to automatically control when and how long
              sprinklers or drip irrigation systems operate.
              An irrigation system that delivers water by adding water at the plant’s base and
DRIP          root zone, usually measured in gallons per hour. Drip irrigation exhibits a
IRRIGATION:   droplet, trickle, umbrella, or short stream pattern, to reduce evaporation,
              overspray, and water use, and improving water conservation.
DRIP EMITTER: A drip irrigation fitting that delivers water slowly at the root zone of the
              plant, usually measured in gallons per hour.
GRADING PLAN: The grading plan shows all finish grades, spot elevations, drainage as necessary,
              and new and existing contours with the developed landscaped area.
GRASS:        A surface layer of earth containing closely mowed and irrigated nonagricultural
              grass with its roots.
GRASS AREA:   The total square footage of grass located within the landscape area.
GROUND COVER: Material planted in such a way as to form a continuous cover over ground that can
              be maintained at a height no more than twelve (12) inches.
              Elements of landscape constructed from non-living materials such as concrete,
HARDSCAPE:    boulders, brick, blacktop, and lumber. It includes patios, decks, and paths, but
              does not include driveways and sidewalks.
HYDROZONE:    Portion of landscape area having plants with similar water needs and rooting
              depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.
IRRIGATION    A plan that shows the components of the irrigation system with water meter size,
PLAN:         backflow prevention, precipitation rates, flow rate, and operating pressure for
              each irrigation circuit, and identification of all irrigation equipment.
              A person who holds a professional license to practice landscape architecture in
LANDSCAPE     the state of Utah. Per State Code, licensed landscape architects, licensed
ARCHITECT:    architects, licensed land surveyors, and licensed engineers can professionally
              stamp plans that fall under the practice of landscape architecture. This includes
              commercial landscape and irrigation plans.
              For developments regulated by Chapters 3 (single-family and twin home) or Chapter
              4 (non-residential): Area within a lot or parcel that is not the home footprint,
LANDSCAPE     driveway, sidewalk, patio, swimming pool or water feature. For developments
AREA:         regulated by Chapter 5 (multifamily) or Chapter 7 (resorts): Area within the
              development that is not a building footprint, driveway, parking lot, sidewalk,
              patio, sports court, swimming pool, water feature, and other hard surfaces.
LANDSCAPE     A person who may or may not hold professional certificates for landscape design/
DESIGNER:     architecture and may be the owner of the property or in the landscaping business.
              The documentation of graphic and written criteria, specifications, and detailed
LANDSCAPE     plans to arrange and modify the effects of natural features to comply with the
DOCUMENTATION provisions of this ordinance. The Landscape Documentation Package shall include a
PACKAGE:      project data sheet, a site plan, a planting plan, an irrigation plan,
              construction details, and a grading plan.
              Any combination of berms; living plants, such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground
LANDSCAPE OR  covers, annuals, perennials, grass, or seeding; natural features such as rock,
LANDSCAPING:  stone, or bark chips; and structural features, including but not limited to
              outdoor artwork, screen walls, fences or benches that create an attractive and
              pleasing environment.
              Any organic material such as leaves, bark, wood chips, straw; inorganic material
              such as crushed stone or gravel; other materials left loose and applied to the
MULCH:        soil surface for the beneficial purpose of controlling weeds and conserving soil
              moisture. For the purposed of this standard, ungrouted pavers, stepping stones
              and artificial turf manufactured to be permeable to air and water may be
              considered mulch.
              Any residential use comprised of a dwelling or dwellings designed for occupation
              by more than one family in any zone, but for purposes of this ordinance,
MULTIFAMILY:  excludes: Single-family dwellings and twin homes (two family dwellings),
              dwellings containing an approved internal accessory dwelling unit, dwellings
              which are an approved accessory dwelling unit to a primary dwelling, resorts, and
              hotel rooms.
PARK STRIP:   A typically narrow landscaped area located between the back-of-curb and sidewalk.
PLANT LIST:   A list of locally adaptable and environmentally sustainable plants for compliant
              Planting Plans as provided by the Washington County Water Conservancy District.
PLANTING BED: Areas of the landscape that consist of plants, such as trees, ornamental grasses,
              shrubs, perennials and other regionally appropriate plants.
PLANTING      A Planting Plan that clearly and accurately identifies the type, size, and
PLAN:         locations for new and existing trees, shrubs, planting beds, ground covers, grass
              areas, driveways, sidewalks, hardscape features, and fences.
PRECIPITATION The depth of water applied to a given area, usually measured in inches per hour.
RATE:
PRESSURE      A valve installed in an irrigation mainline that reduces a higher supply pressure
REGULATING    at the inlet down to a regulated lower pressure at the outlet.
VALVE:
              A full-service lodging and recreational facility located in a Resort Commercial
              zone that is the primary provider of a range of amenities, recreation, or
RESORT:       wellness facilities to emphasize a leisure or wellness experience beyond those
              found at motels and hotels. Separately platted residences or commercial
              facilities will be deemed part of the Qualified Resort so long as they are
              intended to be rented or otherwise used as a part of the hotel operations.
SECONDARY     Non-potable water that is untreated and used for irrigation of outdoor
IRRIGATION    landscaping Also called secondary water.
WATER:
              Any residential use comprised of a dwelling designed for occupation by only one
SINGLE-       family in any zone, and for purposes of this ordinance includes primary
FAMILY:       dwellings, dwellings containing an approved internal accessory dwelling unit, and
              approved accessory dwelling units.
SLOPE:        A vertical rise in feet measured over a horizontal distance, expressed as a
              percentage, measured generally at right angles to contour lines.
SMART         A smart/internet-connected device used in irrigation systems to automatically
IRRIGATION    control when and how long sprinklers or drip irrigation systems operate.
CONTROLLER:
              Any residential use comprised of a dwelling (twin home or duplex) designed for
TWO-FAMILY:   occupation by two families in any zone, but for purposes of this ordinance
              excludes dwellings containing an approved internal accessory dwelling unit, or
              dwellings which are an approved accessory dwelling unit to a primary dwelling.
VESTED        Properties with a previously approved Development Agreement or Conditional Use
PROPERTIES:   Permit.
WATER-        A plant that can generally survive with available rainfall once established, with
CONSERVING    possible supplemental irrigation needed or desirable during spring and summer
PLANT:        months or during drought periods.
              Fountains, ponds, waterfalls, man-made streams, and other decorative water-
WATER         related constructions provided solely for aesthetic or beautification purposes.
FEATURE:      May be referred to as decorative or ornamental water features. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-
              2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
 
PART 3. SINGLE-FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS
14.11.301: GENERAL:
These provisions are applicable to all new single-family and two-family (twin
home/duplex) residential construction and development irrespective of its
underlying zoning classification, except new single-family and two-family (twin
home/duplex) residential construction and development within a resort which is
subject to the requirements of Chapter 7. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord.
2023-21, 2023)
14.11.302: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (1)   New single-family and two-family (twin home/duplex) residential
dwellings one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or greater shall install
hot water recirculation systems.
   (2)   New single-family and two-family (twin home/duplex) residential
dwellings shall install WaterSense labeled fixtures, or fixtures that are at
least as water-efficient, including, but not limited to faucets, showerheads,
toilets, and urinals.
   (3)   New single-family and two-family (twin home/duplex) residential
dwellings shall install Energy Star qualified appliances, or appliances that
are at least as energy efficient.
   (4)   Exterior, decorative water features must be limited to an aggregate
capacity of three hundred (300) gallons or less and recirculating pumps are
required in each feature. Exterior decorative water features shall only be
located on individual single-family and two-family lots and not as entry
features to a subdivision or community or in common areas. The feature is also
limited to 25 square feet per parcel and is limited to the parcel. The capacity
of the water feature in gallons shall be deducted from the allowed amount of
grass using one gallon equals two square feet of grass.
   (5)   The square footage of any uncovered pool will be deducted from the
allowed amount of grass. A pool is considered uncovered if it does not have a
UL approved cover that is electrically operated. Twenty-five percent (25%) of
the square footage of any pool with a UL approved electrically operated cover,
or indoor pools, will be deducted from the allowed amount of grass. (Ord. 2022-
06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.303: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
   (1)   For all new single-family and two-family (twin home/duplex)
residential construction or development, the landscaping shall meet the
following requirements:
      (a)   Grass area must not exceed eight percent (8%) of the lot square
footage, up to a maximum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of grass area.
However, all lots are permitted six hundred (600) square feet of grass even if
the eight percent (8%) calculation is less.
         (i)   Grass areas shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet in any
dimension.
         (ii)   These restrictions also apply to single family developments
with limited common areas designated for the exclusive use of the adjacent
dwelling.
      (b)   Grass is not permitted in common areas of a development unless it
is an active recreation area.
      (c)   In addition, grass is prohibited in park strips, landscape buffers,
and on any slope that exceeds ten percent (10%); and
      (d)   Any lot in any zone which is larger than one-half (1/2) acre must
use secondary irrigation where available to irrigate any agricultural,
horticultural, or gardening uses which are permitted in the applicable zone.
(Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
PART 4. MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS
14.11.401: GENERAL:
These provisions are applicable to all new multifamily construction and
development irrespective of its underlying zoning classification, except new
construction and development within a resort which will be subject to the
requirements of Part 7. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.402: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (1)   New multifamily dwellings shall install WaterSense labeled fixtures,
or fixtures that are at least as water-efficient, including, but not limited to
faucets, showerheads, toilets, and urinals. All fixtures shall meet or exceed
the water conservation requirements specified by Utah Code.
   (2)   New multifamily dwellings shall install Energy Star qualified
appliances, or appliances that are at least as energy efficient.
   (3)   Exterior, decorative water features must be limited to an aggregate
capacity of three hundred (300) gallons or less and recirculating pumps are
required in each feature. The feature is also limited to 25 square feet per
parcel and is limited to the parcel. Exterior decorative water features shall
not be located as entry features to the development or in common areas. The
capacity of the water feature in gallons shall be deducted from the allowed
amount of grass using one gallon equals two square feet of grass.
   (4)   The square footage of any uncovered pool will be deducted from the
allowed amount of grass. A pool is considered uncovered if it does not have a
UL approved cover that is electrically operated.” Twenty-five percent (25%) of
the square footage of any pool with a UL approved electrically operated cover,
or indoor pools, shall be deducted from the allowed amount of grass.
   (5)   All townhome and condominium units shall be separately metered,
submetered, or equipped with alternative technology capable of tracking the
water use of the individual unit, and the information shall be made available
to the individual unit.
   (6)   Separate water meters are required, where secondary water is
available, for all outdoor water usage, including landscaping. (Ord. 2022-06,
6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.403: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
For all new multifamily construction or development, the landscaping shall meet
the following requirements:
   (1)   Grass area must not exceed five percent (5%) of the total
development’s square footage.
      (a)    Up to 100 square feet of grass per dwelling unit is allowed when
used in functional applications.
      (b)   Properties with less than 6 dwelling units area allowed up to 600
square feet of grass.
      (c)   Grass areas shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet in any
dimension.
   (2)   Grass is not permitted in common areas of a development unless it is
an active recreation area.
   (3)   In addition, grass is prohibited in park strips, landscape buffers,
and on any slope that exceeds ten percent (10%); and
   (4)   Landscape and irrigation installers shall follow the planting plans
that have been signed and approved by the city.
   (5)   Each project shall propose and follow an approved Planting Plan that
has a minimum of twenty percent (20%) vegetative cover (based on the American
Society of Landscape Architects “Landscape Architecture Documentation
Standards: Principles, Guidelines and Best Practices”) of a landscaped area
with water-efficient shade trees (however, fruit and nut trees are allowed) and
bushes adequate in number and configuration to visually enhance the project,
prevent heat islands, and prevent soil erosion.
   (6)   If secondary irrigation water is available, each project shall connect
to the system for all outdoor water use. A city may make minor exceptions,
allowing use of treated water for outdoor plantings in small beautification
areas, in its sole discretion.
   (7)   Misting systems are permitted from May through September when
temperatures exceed 90 degrees. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21,
2023)
PART 5. NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES AND DEVELOPMENT WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS
14.11.501: GENERAL:
These provisions are applicable to all new construction and new development in
all nonresidential zones, and nonresidential development in any zone, except
development within a resort which is subject to the requirements of Chapter 7.
(Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.502: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (1)   Hot water recirculation systems shall be installed.
   (2)   WaterSense labeled fixtures, or fixtures that are at least as water-
efficient, shall be installed, including, but not limited to faucets,
showerheads toilets, and urinals. All fixtures shall meet or exceed the water
conservation requirements specified by Utah Code.
   (3)   Energy Star qualified appliances, or appliances that are at least as
energy-efficient, shall be installed.
   (4)   Except for hotels, all individually platted units shall be separately
metered, submetered, or equipped with alternative technology capable of
tracking the water use of the individual unit, and the information shall be
made available to the individual unit. All nonresidential projects require
separate water meters for all outdoor water usage, including landscaping, where
and when secondary water is available.
   (5)   All carwash projects shall recirculate and limit the maximum amount of
water to thirty-five (35) gallons per vehicle washed.
   (6)   Exterior, decorative water features must be limited to an aggregate
capacity of three hundred (300) gallons or less for each individually platted
property, and recirculating pumps are required in each feature. The feature is
also limited to 25 square feet per parcel and is limited to the parcel.
Exterior decorative water features shall not be located as entry features to a
development. The capacity of the water feature in gallons shall be deducted
from the allowed amount of grass using one gallon equals two square feet of
grass. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.503: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
   (1)   All new construction and new development in all nonresidential zones,
and nonresidential development in any zone, shall meet the Landscape Design
Standards and Irrigation Design Standards of this ordinance.
      (a)   Grass is not permitted outside of an active recreation area, when
appropriate based on the planned use. In addition, grass is prohibited in park
strips, all landscape areas less than eight feet wide, and on any slope that
exceeds ten percent (10%). Grass areas shall have a minimum width of eight (8)
feet in any dimension. Grass shall not be within 10 feet of a roadway.
      (b)   Landscape and irrigation installers shall follow the plans that
have been signed and approved by the city.
      (c)   Each project shall propose and follow an approved Planting Plan
that has a minimum of twenty percent (20%) vegetative cover (based on the
American Society of Landscape Architects “Landscape Architecture Documentation
Standards: Principles, Guidelines and Best Practices”) of a landscaped area
with water-efficient shade trees (however, fruit and nut trees are allowed) and
bushes adequate in number and configuration to visually enhance the project,
prevent heat islands, and prevent soil erosion.
      (d)   If secondary irrigation water is available, each project shall
connect to the system for all outdoor water use. A city may make minor
exceptions, allowing use of treated water for outdoor plantings in small
beautification areas, in its sole discretion.
   (2)   Required Documentation:
      (a)   Landscape Documentation Package: A copy of a Landscape
Documentation Package shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to
the issue of any building permit. A copy of the approved Landscape
Documentation Package shall be provided to the property owner or site manager.
The Landscape Documentation Package shall be prepared by a landscape designer
or a professional landscape architect (PLA).
   (3)   Misting systems are permitted from May through September when
temperatures exceed 90 degrees. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21,
2023)
PART 6. LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION DESIGN STANDARDS FOR ALL NEW DEVELOPMENT IN
ANY ZONE
14.11.601: GENERAL:
Landscape and irrigation design standards for all new development in any zone
except new construction and development within a resort which will be subject
to the requirements of Chapter 7. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21,
2023)
14.11.602: PLANT SELECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
Plants shall be well-suited to the microclimate and soil conditions at the
project site. Native, locally adaptable, and environmentally sustainable plants
are acceptable. See the Washington County Water Conservancy District’s
recommended plant list on wcwcd.org. Plants with similar water needs shall be
grouped together as much as possible into hydrozones for efficient irrigation.
Invasive plant species as identified by the city shall not be planted.
   (1)   Areas with slopes greater than ten percent (10%) shall be landscaped
with deep-rooting, water-conserving plants that do not include grass.
   (2)   Park strips and landscape buffers shall be landscaped with water-
conserving plants and/or mulch that do not include grass.
   (3)   Landscaping shall be maintained in a live and thriving condition, with
consideration for normal growth and water needs; and fertilized, mowed,
trimmed, edged, mulched and free from weeds, dead plants, litter, refuse, or
debris in compliance with regionally accepted horticultural practice and city
ordinances. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.603: TREE SELECTION:
Tree species shall be selected based on growth characteristics and site
conditions, including available space, overhead clearance, soil conditions,
exposure, and desired color and appearance. Trees shall be suited for water-
efficient landscapes; however, fruit and nut trees are allowed. Trees shall be
selected and planted in accordance with the following city guidance:
   (1)   Broad canopy trees are recommended where shade or screening of tall
objects is desired;
   (2)   Low-growing trees are recommended for spaces under utility wires;
   (3)   Select trees from which lower branches will be trimmed to maintain a
healthy growth habit where visual clearance and natural surveillance is a
concern;
   (4)   Narrow or columnar trees are recommended for small spaces, or where
awnings or other building features limit growth, or where greater visibility is
desired between buildings and the street for natural surveillance;
   (5)   Tree placement shall provide canopy cover (shade) and avoid conflicts
with existing trees, retaining walls, above and below ground utilities,
lighting, and other obstructions. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21,
2023)
14.11.604: IRRIGATION DESIGN STANDARDS:
   (1)   Pressure Regulation. A pressure regulating valve shall be installed by
the builder or developer, and maintained by the owner, if the static service
pressure exceeds ninety (90) pounds per square inch (psi). The pressure-
regulating valve shall be located between the meter and the first point of
water use, or first point of division in the pipe, and shall be set at the
manufacturer’s recommended pressure for the sprinklers.
   (2)    Irrigation Controller. It is required that landscaped areas use a
WaterSense labeled smart irrigation controller, or controllers that are at
least as water-efficient, which automatically adjusts the frequency and/or
duration of irrigation events in response to changing weather conditions. All
controllers shall be equipped with automatic rain delay or rain shut-off
capabilities and have memory retention capability to retain pre-programmed
irrigation schedules. Sites are not exempt from water waste prohibitions.
   (3)   Low-volume irrigation equipment (i.e., drip emitters, bubblers) shall
be provided for each tree.
   (4)   Drip irrigation shall be used to irrigate plants in non-grass areas.
Sprinkler lines and drip lines shall not be connected to the same valve.
   (5)   High conservation efficiency spray nozzles are required for sprinkler
applications.
   (6)   Sprinkler heads shall have matched precipitation rates with each
control valve circuit.
   (7)   Filters, pressure regulators, flush end assemblies, and emitters rated
for 20 gallons per hour or less shall be provided for drip irrigation lines.
   (8)   Landscape watering with potable (treated) water is prohibited based on
Ivins City requirements, which are currently from eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. to
eight o’clock (8:00) p.m., from June 1 to September 1, to maximize irrigation
efficiency.
   (9)   Water waste is prohibited. Waste includes overwatering, irrigating
during a precipitation event, water that sprays or flows off your property,
failure to comply with drought restrictions and/or a failure to repair
irrigation system leaks and/or malfunctions in a timely manner.
   (10)   Program valves for multiple repeat cycles are required to reduce
runoff on slopes and for soils with slow infiltration rates.
   (11)   To the extent possible, spray irrigation should be free from
obstructions such as trees, signs, posts, enclosures, etc. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-
2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.605: MULCH REQUIRED:
   (1)   All Planting Beds must have mulch upon the soil surface with
exceptions for areas being restored to appear as native desert. (Ord. 2023-21,
2023)
14.11.606: METERING:
   (1)   All attached and detached single-family dwelling units with ground
floor square footage shall be separately metered, submetered, or equipped with
alternative technology capable of tracking the water use of the individual
unit.
   (2)   All non-single family residential projects require separate meters for
outdoor water use when irrigating more than 5,000 square feet. (Ord. 2023-21,
2023)
PART 7. RESORT DEVELOPMENT WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS
14.11.701: GENERAL:
The provisions of this Chapter are applicable to all new construction, and new
development within any resort.
Specific provisions of this Chapter can be waived by the City if a hydrologist,
water use engineer, landscape architect that is licensed in the State of Utah,
or similarly qualified expert approved by the City provides a statement and
supporting documentation showing that the design meets or exceeds all the water
conservation measures and goals in this chapter. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd.
Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.702: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (1)   Within the resort development, new single-family, two-family (twin
home/duplex), and three-family (triplex) residential dwellings 1,200 square
feet or greater shall install hot water recirculation systems.
   (2)   All water fixtures shall be WaterSense labeled fixtures, or fixtures
that are at least as water-efficient, including, but not limited to faucets,
showerheads, toilets, and urinals. All fixtures shall meet or exceed the water
conservation requirements specified by Utah Code.
   (3)   All appliances shall be Energy Star qualified appliances, or
appliances that are at least as energy-efficient.
   (4)   Exterior, decorative water features must have recirculating pumps. The
feature is also limited to 25 square feet per parcel and is limited to the
parcel. This excludes any area of a golf course and water features within a
golf course. Exterior decorative water features shall not be used as entry
features to the resort development. The allowed amount of grass will be reduced
based on the capacity of the water feature in gallons using one gallon equals
two square foot of grass.
   (5)   The square footage of any uncovered pool will be counted towards the
allowed amount of grass. A pool is considered uncovered if it does not have a
UL approved cover that is electrically operated.” Twenty-five percent (25%) of
the square footage of any pool with a UL approved electrically operated cover,
or indoor pools, will be counted towards the allowed amount of grass.
   (6)   Except for hotel rooms, all residential and nonresidential units shall
be separately metered, submetered, or equipped with alternative technology
capable of tracking the water use of the individual unit, and the information
shall be made available to the individual unit. All nonresidential projects
require separate water meters for all outdoor water usage, including
landscaping. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.703: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
   (1)   Grass area must not exceed eight percent (8%) of the square footage of
the total resort development. This excludes the grass area of any golf course.
Grass areas shall have a minimum width of eight (8) feet in any dimension.
Grass shall not be within 10 feet of a roadway.
   (2)   Grass is not permitted outside of an active recreation area. Grass is
prohibited in park strips, landscape buffers, and on any slope that exceeds ten
percent (10%); and
   (3)   Any lot in any zone which is larger than one-half (1/2) acre must use
secondary irrigation where available to irrigate any agricultural,
horticultural, or gardening uses which are permitted in the applicable zone.
   (4)   Landscape and irrigation installers shall follow the plans that have
been signed and approved by the city.
   (5)   Each project shall propose and follow an approved Planting Plan that
has a minimum of twenty percent (20%) vegetative cover (cover based on
landscaping standards at maturity) of a landscaped area with water-efficient
shade trees (however, fruit and nut trees are allowed) and bushes adequate in
number and configuration to visually enhance the project, prevent heat islands,
and prevent soil erosion.
   (6)   If secondary irrigation water is available, each project shall connect
to the system for all outdoor water use. A city may make minor exceptions,
allowing use of treated water for outdoor plantings in small beautification
areas, in its sole discretion.
   (7)   Golf courses using district or city supplied water shall have a
separate meter for irrigation.
   (8)   All golf courses, without regard to date of construction, shall be
required to submit and follow a water budget and identify water conservation
measures for regular city and water provider review.
   (9)   Misting systems are permitted from May through September when
temperatures exceed 90 degrees. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21,
2023)
14.11.704: REQUIRED DOCUMENTATION:
Landscape Documentation Package: A copy of a Landscape Documentation Package
shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the issue of any
building permit. A copy of the approved Landscape Documentation Package shall
be provided to the property owner or site manager. The Landscape Documentation
Package shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect (PLA) and
installed and maintained according to industry standards. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-
2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.705: PLANT SELECTION:
Plants shall be well-suited to the microclimate and soil conditions at the
project site. Native, locally adaptable and environmentally sustainable plants
are acceptable. See the Washington County Water Conservancy District’s
recommended plant list on wcwcd.org. Plants with similar water needs shall be
grouped together as much as possible into hydrozones for efficient irrigation.
Invasive plant species as identified by the city shall not be planted.
   (1)   Areas with slopes greater than 10% shall be landscaped with deep-
rooting, water-conserving plants that do not include grass.
   (2)   Park strips and landscape buffers shall be landscaped with water-
conserving plants and/or mulch that do not include grass. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-
2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.706: TREE SELECTION:
Tree species shall be selected based on growth characteristics and site
conditions, including available space, overhead clearance, soil conditions,
exposure, and desired color and appearance. Trees shall be suited for water-
efficient landscapes (however, fruit and nut trees are allowed). Trees shall be
selected and planted in accordance with the following city guidance:
   (1)   Broad canopy trees are recommended where shade or screening of tall
objects is desired;
   (2)   Low-growing trees are recommended for spaces under utility wires;
   (3)   Select trees from which lower branches will be trimmed to maintain a
healthy growth habit where visual clearance and natural surveillance is a
concern;
   (4)   Narrow or columnar trees are recommended for small spaces, or where
awnings or other building features limit growth, or where greater visibility is
desired between buildings and the street for natural surveillance;
   (5)   Tree placement shall provide canopy cover (shade) and avoid conflicts
with existing trees, retaining walls, above and below ground utilities,
lighting, and other obstructions, and be placed to protect view corridors and
viewsheds; and
Trees shall be irrigated on a separate hydrozone as needed for efficient
irrigation and allow for watering under water-shortage conditions when other
plant material may not be watered due to drought conditions. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-
2-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.707: IRRIGATION DESIGN STANDARDS:
   (1)   Pressure Regulation. A pressure regulating valve shall be installed by
the builder or developer, and maintained by the owner, if the static service
pressure exceeds ninety (90) pounds per square inch (psi). The pressure-
regulating valve shall be located between the meter and the first point of
water use, or first point of division in the pipe, and shall be set at the
manufacturer’s recommended pressure for the sprinklers.
   (2)   Irrigation Controller. It is required that landscaped areas use a
WaterSense labeled smart irrigation controllers or controllers that are at
least as water-efficient, which automatically adjusts the frequency and/or
duration of irrigation events in response to changing weather conditions. All
controllers shall be equipped with automatic rain delay or rain shut-off
capabilities and have memory retention capability to retain pre-programmed
irrigation schedules. Sites are not exempt from water waste prohibitions.
   (3)   Low-volume irrigation equipment (i.e., drip emitters, bubblers) shall
be provided for each tree.
   (4)   Drip irrigation shall be used to irrigate plants in non-grass areas.
Sprinkler lines and drip lines shall not be connected to the same valve.
   (5)   High conservation efficiency spray nozzles are required for sprinkler
applications.
   (6)   Sprinkler heads shall have matched precipitation rates with each
control valve circuit.
   (7)   Filters, pressure regulators, flush end assemblies, and emitters rated
for 20 gallons per hour or less shall be provided for drip irrigation lines.
   (8)   Landscape watering with potable (treated) water is prohibited based on
Ivins city requirements, which are currently from eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. to
eight o’clock (8:00) p.m., from June 1 to September 1, to maximize irrigation
efficiency.
   (9)   Water waste is prohibited. Waste includes overwatering, irrigating
during a precipitation event, water that sprays or flows off your property,
failure to comply with drought restrictions and/or a failure to repair
irrigation system leaks and/or malfunctions in a timely manner.
   (10)   Program valves for multiple repeat cycles are required to reduce
runoff on slopes and for soils with slow infiltration rates.
   (11)   To the extent possible, spray irrigation should be free from
obstructions such as trees, signs, posts, enclosures, etc. (Ord. 2022-06, 6-2-
2022; amd. Ord. 2023-21, 2023)
14.11.708: MULCH REQUIRED:
   (1)   All Planting Beds must have mulch upon the soil surface with
exceptions for areas being restored to appear as native desert. (Ord. 2023-21,
2023)
TITLE 15
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15.01.101: Overview
15.01.102: Short Title
15.01.103: Statement Of Purpose
15.01.104: Interpretation
15.01.105: Coordination With Other Documents
15.01.106: Orderly Development Required
15.01.107: Compliance Required
15.01.108: Amendments
15.01.109: Public Notice
15.01.110: Penalties For Violation
15.01.111: Appeals
15.01.101: OVERVIEW:
The activities related to the use, sale and development of land have been
determined by federal and state law to be in the public interest for local
government to oversee and regulate in order to bring about the safe and orderly
creation (and maintenance) of communities. These activities may include
subdividing land into lots for sale, building structures, constructing roads,
constructing trails and/or installing utilities. In order to effectively
regulate these activities, communities are empowered to establish review and
permitting processes. This title contains the review and permitting processes
related to land development activities in the city. This title contains the
review and permitting processes for conventional subdivision developments and
phased subdivisions. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.01.102: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the IVINS CITY SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE, also known
as title 15 of this code, and is herein referred to as "this title". (Ord.
2006-02, 2006)
15.01.103: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
This title, and any rules, regulations and specifications hereafter adopted,
are adopted for the following purposes:
   (1)   To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare;
   (2)   To promote cohesive, orderly growth and development by efficient
layout and use of building lots, roads and public services and utilities;
   (3)   To encourage and promote the conservation, wise use and management of
natural resources in order to preserve the integrity, stability and beauty of
the community and value of the land;
   (4)   To maintain and enhance property values;
   (5)   To minimize conflict among the uses of lands and buildings;
   (6)   To implement the goals and objectives of the city general plan;
   (7)   To implement the goals and objectives of the city design guidelines
and standard specifications for design and construction;
   (8)   To inform the public of the requirements and conditions necessary to
obtain approvals and permits to change or create property boundaries (subdivide
land);
   (9)   To preserve the natural beauty of the city and preserve the natural,
cultural and historic features and enhance the quality of life in the city;
   (10)   To minimize traffic congestion and enhance mobility;
   (11)   To encourage efficiencies in public services and promote a
sustainable community;
   (12)   To protect view corridors and privacy;
   (13)   To promote and preserve open space, including parks, trails,
landscaped buffer areas, perimeter landscaping, natural washes and other
natural undeveloped areas; and
   (14)   To eliminate or minimize nuisances, clutter and visual blight, and to
prevent pollution or degradation of air, streams, ponds and the night sky.
(Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.01.104: INTERPRETATION:
   (1)   Greater Restrictions Prevail: In their interpretation and application,
the provisions of this title shall be considered as minimum requirements,
unless expressly in conflict with the terms of LUDMA. Where the provisions of
this title impose greater restrictions than LUDMA or any other statute, other
regulations, ordinance or covenant, the provisions of this title shall prevail,
unless expressly in conflict with the terms of LUDMA or any other controlling
statute. Where the provisions of any statute, other regulation, ordinance or
covenant impose greater restrictions than the provision of this title, the
provisions of such statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant shall
prevail. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
   (2)   Definitions: Whenever any word or phrase used in this title is not
defined herein, but is defined in related sections of Utah Code Annotated or in
this code, such definition is incorporated herein and shall apply as though set
forth herein in full, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary
intention. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural, the term
"shall" is always mandatory and the term "may" is permissive.
   (3)   Severability Of Parts: The various sections, subparagraphs, sentences,
phrases and clauses of this title are hereby declared to be severable. If any
such part of this title is declared to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction or is amended or deleted by the city council, all remaining parts
shall remain valid and in force.
   (4)   Rounding: Rounding to whole numbers may be used to determine distance
or height, but not in determining maximum or minimum area or other quantitative
standards or requirements. A decimal ending with five (5) or greater may be
rounded up to the next whole number.
   (5)   Time Computation: Unless otherwise specified herein, a period of time
specified in this title shall be calendar days beginning on the day after the
act, event or decision to which the time period refers and ending at eleven
fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. the last day of the time period. (Ord. 2006-02,
2006)
15.01.105: COORDINATION WITH OTHER DOCUMENTS:
This title, together with the city general plan ("general plan"), the city
zoning ordinance ("zoning ordinance"), the city design guidelines ("design
guidelines"), and the city standard specifications for design and construction
("standard specifications") shall guide the use of all land within the
municipal boundaries of the city. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.01.106: ORDERLY DEVELOPMENT REQUIRED:
All subdivisions, site plans, condominiums and other developments shall be
developed in an orderly manner and in such a way that the required improvements
will be continuous and available as necessary during construction activities
within the project, and that all of the improvements will be made available for
the full, effective and practical use and enjoyment thereof by the purchaser,
grantee, assignee, transferee or lessee of any of the lands developed within
the time herein provided or in phases specified. Developments shall be planned
and developed to accommodate the continuation of roads, utilities, drainage and
other infrastructure to adjoining properties. Oversizing of lines or
infrastructure in the development may be necessary to accommodate future
development outside of the project. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.01.107: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   (1)   No tract of land shall be divided, subdivided, reconfigured, developed
or redeveloped except in conformance with provisions of this title, the zoning
ordinance and all other applicable ordinances and regulations.
      (a)   All developments that require site plan approvals, even when a
development may not involve the subdivision of lots or require a final plat to
be approved and recorded, shall follow the subdivision application and review
process and all applicable design and construction regulations in this Title 15
Subdivision Regulations.
   (2)   No plat, condominium, subdivision amendment or reconfiguring of
property shall be recorded except in accordance with the provisions of this
title and the zoning ordinance.
   (3)   All licenses, permits, agreements and plans issued or approved by the
city shall comply with all requirements and standards of city ordinances.
   (4)   All subdivisions, condominiums, site plans, construction and
infrastructure shall be designed and constructed in conformance with city
ordinances, engineering regulations and requirements.
   (5)   All uses shall be conducted in conformance with city ordinances,
approved plans and requirements.
   (6)   Land which is to be subdivided shall not be transferred, sold or
offered for sale prior to recording the subject plat or until all requirements
of this title for subdivisions, condominiums or other development have been
met.
   (7)   No building permit may be issued for any structure or development on
any land that has been divided, subdivided, reconfigured, developed or
redeveloped in a manner not in conformance with the provisions of this title,
the zoning ordinance, and all other applicable ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 2006-02, 2006; Ord. 2024-07, 2024)
15.01.108: AMENDMENTS:
   (1)   The city council may, from time to time and in a manner consistent
with the general plan, amend any provision of this title. Amendments shall be
approved in accordance with all public notice and public hearing requirements
imposed by state law or local ordinance.
   (2)   Any amendment or revision to this title shall supersede any prior
provisions or ordinances. Provisions of this title not affected by the
amendment or revision shall continue to be valid and shall not be considered a
new enactment when amendments or revisions are adopted. Any prior provisions of
city ordinances, which do not conform to provisions of this title, are declared
void. Any uses, structures or buildings which were conforming to previous
provisions of this title but do not now conform shall be nonconforming uses,
structures or buildings. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.01.109: PUBLIC NOTICE:
   (1)   Notice of public hearings and public meetings shall be provided in the
manner set forth in Title 16, Chapter 10 of the Ivins City Code.
   (2)   If notice given under the authority of this section is not challenged
in accordance with applicable appeal procedures thirty (30) days from the date
of the hearing for which the notice was given, the notice is considered
adequate and proper. The notice provided in this section may be referred to in
this title as “required notice”. The cost of required notices shall be paid by
the applicant. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006; amd. Ord. 2016-02, 2016; Ord. 2023-09,
2023)
15.01.110: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
In addition to denial, suspension or refusal to act on a developer or
landowner's request, any person who shall violate the provisions of this title
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor unless otherwise established by law.
Each day of violation shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
the penalties of this section or any other law, ordinance or other provision.
(Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.01.111: APPEALS:
The requirements and procedures for appealing decisions of the city land use
authorities in administering or interpreting the city land use ordinances,
including this title, are set forth in title 16, chapter 30 of this code, and
are hereby incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
15.02.101: General
15.02.102: Definitions
15.02.101: GENERAL:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used
in the interpretation and construction of this title. Words used in the present
tense include the future; the singular includes the plural; the word "shall" is
mandatory and not directory; the word "may" is permissive. Words used in this
title, but not defined herein, shall have the meaning first as defined in any
other ordinance adopted by the city and then its common, ordinary meaning.
(Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.02.102: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions set forth in section 10-9a-103 of the Utah Code Annotated,
1953, as amended, and the Ivins City zoning ordinance are hereby incorporated
as additional definitions pertaining to this title.
APPLICANT: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or such owner's duly
authorized agent. Any agent must have written authorization from the owner.
CITY COUNCIL: The elected city officials consisting of council members and
mayor. Three (3) voting members of the city council constitute a quorum.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of the city or his authorized representative.
CLUSTERED DEVELOPMENT: The development of land with pockets of higher density
land use to encourage the preservation of large pockets of undeveloped land.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2892.gif]
COMMISSION: The Ivins City planning commission.
COMMISSION'S AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE: The planning commission chairperson or
other city employee or official who has been designated by the commission to
represent the city in enforcing or carrying out the functions of the commission
as set forth in this title.
CONCEPT PLAN: A sketch or rough drawing submitted prior to the preliminary plat
for subdivisions to enable a subdivider to reach general agreement with the
planning commission and city staff as to the form of the plat and the
objectives of these regulations and to receive guidance as to the requirements
for subdivisions within Ivins City.
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION: The division of land in a standard and more
traditional configuration of lots.
DESIGN GUIDELINES: The document adopted by the city council to direct and guide
the aesthetics of development in Ivins City.
DEVELOPER: Either: a) an applicant for subdivision approval; b) an applicant
for a building permit or other permit; or c) the owner of any right, title or
interest in real property for which subdivision approvals are sought.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: The agreement between the city and the owner/developer
that outlines the duties, responsibilities, obligations, commitments and
promises of the city and the owner/developer.
DUST CONTROL PLAN: A narrative plan that may include map exhibits prepared by
the developer that establishes management practices to be employed and
temporary facilities to be installed by developer to control fugitive dust that
is released into the air or onto public streets during the construction within
the subdivision.
EASEMENT: Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a
specified purpose, such as utilities and irrigation ditches, of any designated
part of the owner's property. An easement may be for use under, on the surface,
or above the owner's property.
ELECTRONIC FORMAT: Drawings, maps, calculations, documents or other data
required by the city to be provided on a disk readable by an IBM compatible
computer. Types of electronic files including versions will be as requested by
city staff.
ENGINEER: The certified engineer or surveyor, registered with the state to
practice as a professional engineer, engaged by the subdivider to prepare plans
and plats or to compile such data as may be required in connection therewith in
accordance with the provisions of this title or the zoning ordinance.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN: A plan submitted at preliminary plan
and with the construction drawings, including narrative and/or drawings
prepared by the developer, that establishes management practices to be employed
and temporary and permanent facilities to be installed to control soil erosion
and prevent sedimentation impacts to adjacent properties and public facilities
during and after the construction of the subdivision.
FEE SCHEDULE: The schedule or any appendix of fees adopted periodically by
resolution of the city council setting forth various fees charged by the city.
FINAL PLAT: A map of a subdivision, required of all subdivisions, which is
prepared for final approval and recordation, which has been accurately
surveyed, so that streets, lots and other divisions thereof can be identified.
GENERAL PLAN: The Ivins City general plan, as adopted, that sets forth general
guidelines for proposed future development of the land within the city.
GEOTECHNICAL REPORT: A report submitted with the preliminary plan, prepared by
and stamped by a licensed geotechnical engineer that evaluates the existing
soil conditions of the project site prior to new development. The geotechnical
report should include descriptions of generalized site conditions, surface and
subsurface conditions, and recommendations for site preparation, excavation,
grading, structural fill, foundation design, seismic considerations, concrete
design, concrete and metal corrosion protection, pavement design and soil
moisture control. The report would also include exhibits and appendices showing
a vicinity map, site plan, boring locations, boring logs, test results and any
other information used by the geotechnical engineer in determining his or her
design recommendations.
GRADING PLAN: A drawing showing the proposed grading of a subdivision in
reference to the existing topography of the site.
   (1)   Preliminary Grading Plan: A drawing submitted with or incorporated
into the preliminary plan that shows existing contour topography overlaid with
approximate proposed grading information, including contour topography,
retaining wall locations and slopes for the subdivision area.
   (2)   Final Grading Plan: A drawing submitted with the construction drawings
showing the proposed grading of a subdivision site by identifying contour
topography, spot elevations, slopes, curb elevations, road grades, road
profiles, building pad elevations, cross sections, retaining wall elevations,
etc., for existing and proposed conditions.
HYDROLOGY REPORT: A report, prepared by a professional engineer, for the
removal of excess water from the subdivision site. The report shall evaluate
probable storm events that will generate excess water and compares the water
discharges onto and from the site for predevelopment conditions to
postdevelopment conditions. The report shall identify improvements and
management practices to safely convey drainage and mitigate any impacts due to
the proposed subdivision development, all prepared in accordance with the city
standard specifications for design and construction. A preliminary hydrology
report shall be submitted with the preliminary plan. The final hydrology report
shall be submitted with the construction drawings.
LUDMA: The Utah municipal land use development and management act as set forth
as chapter 10-9a of the Utah code.
LANDSCAPED BUFFER AREA (OR STREETSCAPE BUFFER): Landscaped open space along
public streets.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or proposed to be occupied by a building or
structure, together with such yards, open spaces, lot width and lot area as are
required by the city land use ordinances.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE (DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT): A lot where the front lot line and
back lot line both front on a street.
LOT, FLAG (FLAG LOT): A "leftover" lot that has access to a public or private
street by a narrow strip of land.
MODEL HOME: A residential structure that meets all residential occupancy
requirements, used for sales purposes only. A subdivision may have up to a
maximum of five (5) model homes in any subdivision, provided each has a
substantially different floor plan.
OPEN SPACE: Land areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures, parking
areas, streets or roads. Open space may be devoted to landscaping, preservation
of natural features and recreational areas and facilities.
OWNER: Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others, has a legal or
equitable title to property.
PHASED SUBDIVISION: Conventional subdivisions that are proposed to be completed
in designated phases.
PHASED SUBDIVISION MASTER PLAN: A document prepared for future and/or phased
development. The development master plan encompasses the design and general
development parameters for the entire phased development project.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of Ivins City, Utah.
PRELIMINARY PLAN: The drawings prepared to indicate the proposed layout of a
subdivision for the purpose of resolving most technical details in compliance
with all regulations.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any street dedications, installations of curb, gutter,
sidewalk, road base and asphalt, water, sewer and storm drainage facilities, or
other utility or service required to provide services to a lot, parcel,
building or structure.
SECURITY AGREEMENT: Agreement to install improvements secured by cash bond,
cash escrow, an irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination of the
preceding as approved by the city council.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION (OR STANDARD
SPECIFICATIONS): The standards and construction requirements for improvements,
including streets, water, sewer, storm drainage, etc.
STANDARD SUBDIVISION: A subdivision that conforms to the zoning district in
which it is located without seeking any density bonus or overlay. The approval
or denial of a standard subdivision application is an administrative decision.
STREET:
Cul-De-Sac Street: A minor terminal street provided with a turnaround.
Half Street: The portion of a street within a subdivision comprising at least
one-half (1/2) of the minimum required right of way on which improvements are
constructed and in accordance with one-half (1/2) of an approved typical street
section.
Private Street: A right of way which has been reserved by dedication unto the
subdivider or lot owners, to be used as a private access to serve property and
complying with the adopted street cross section standards of the city for the
type of street as described herein.
Public Street: A public right of way, including a highway, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, road, lane, walk, alley, viaduct, tunnel, bridge, public easement, or
other way. For cross sections and descriptions of various types of public
streets, see the Ivins transportation master plan.
SUBDIVIDER: A person who:
   (1)   Having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be
divided into a subdivision;
   (2)   Directly or indirectly, sells, leases or develops, or offers to sell,
lease or develop, or advertises for sale, lease or development, any interest,
lot, parcel, site, unit or plat in a subdivision;
   (3)   Engages directly, or through an agent, in the business of selling,
leasing, developing or offering for sale, lease or development a subdivision;
or
   (4)   Is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct, or indirect
common control with any of the foregoing.
SUBDIVISION: Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be divided
into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or other division of
land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease or
development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions.
   (1)   "Subdivision" includes: a) the division or development of land,
whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise and testacy, map, plat or
other recorded instrument; and b) except as provided for below, divisions of
land for all residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be
used for commercial, agricultural and industrial purposes.
   (2)   "Subdivision" does not include: a) a bona fide division or partition
of agricultural land for the purpose of joining one of the resulting separate
parcels to a contiguous parcel of unsubdivided agricultural land, if neither
the resulting combined parcel nor the parcel remaining from the division or
partition violates an applicable land use ordinance; or b) a recorded agreement
and/or appropriate deed between owners of adjoining unsubdivided properties
adjusting their mutual boundary if no new lot is created and the adjustment
does not violate applicable land use ordinances; or c) a recorded document,
executed by the owner of record, revising the legal description of more than
one contiguous unsubdivided parcel of property into one legal description
encompassing all such parcels of property or joining a subdivided parcel of
property to another parcel of property that has not been subdivided, if the
joinder does not violate applicable land use ordinances. However, if the
location of utility lines or meters is affected, a subdivision application
shall be required.
   (3)   The joining of a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided does not constitute a "subdivision" under
this definition as to the unsubdivided parcel or subject the unsubdivided
parcel to this subdivision ordinance.
TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE: Committee established and created by the city
manager to assure that proposed use, activity, building or structure is
consistent with the general plan and complies with the requirements of the land
use ordinances. Committee members include representatives from city
departments, and other persons as may be designated by the city manager,
responsible for reviewing and coordinating applications for any land use
application approval, permit or license.
TOPOGRAPHIC (TOPO) MAP: A graphic representation of natural and manmade
features of a place or region in such a way as to show their relative positions
and elevations.
UTILITY BOARD: The review board, consisting of city officials and department
heads, which meets monthly with public utilities representatives (i.e., joint
utility committee) to assess utility needs and availability, review subdivision
submittals and conduct other department business.
VICINITY MAP: A map showing project location relative to Ivins City boundaries,
major roads and minor roads that serve the property.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the city manager, with the
advice and consent of the mayor and city council, to carry out the
administrative responsibilities of the land use ordinances. It is the
responsibility of the zoning administrator to ensure all procedures and other
provisions of the land use ordinances are consistently and equitably applied.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The Ivins City zoning ordinance, as adopted. (Ord. 2006-02,
2006; amd. Ord. 2007-05, 2007; Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
CHAPTER 3
TYPES OF SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
15.03.101: General
15.03.102: Conventional Subdivision
15.03.103: Phased Subdivision
15.03.101: GENERAL:
All subdivisions of land shall be divided, subdivided, reconfigured, developed
or redeveloped in accordance with the provisions of this title, the state land
sales practices act, the zoning ordinance, the general plan, the design
guidelines, the standard specifications, and all other applicable ordinances in
this code and the state code. Specific procedures for each type of subdivision
are outlined in chapters of this title as noted below. General subdivision
procedures are outlined in chapter 4 of this title. General design regulations
are outlined in chapter 5 of this title. Procedures for phased subdivisions
have additional requirements as outlined below. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.03.102: CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION 1 :
The purpose and intent of the conventional subdivision procedure is to allow
the division of land in all zones in a standard and more traditional
configuration of lots. While creative and innovative land development is
encouraged, the conventional subdivision may be best suited for smaller acreage
subdivisions and/or tract developments. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 4 of this title for approval process and chapter 5 of this
  title for required improvements.
15.03.103: PHASED SUBDIVISION 1 :
Conventional subdivisions may be phased subdivisions if the project is proposed
to be completed in designated phases. The purpose of the phased subdivision
procedure is to provide general development parameters for subdivision phases
in the phased subdivision master plan prior to the detailed and comprehensive
requirements of the preliminary plan and final plat. The owner/developer shall
enter into a development agreement with the city that outlines the duties,
responsibilities, obligations, commitments and promises of the parties. (Ord.
2006-02, 2006)
 
Notes
  2. See chapter 4 of this title for approval process, chapter 5 of this title
1 for required improvements, and chapter 6 of this title for additional
  standards and requirements.
CHAPTER 4
SUBDIVISION APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS
SECTION:
Part 1. Pre-Application Consultation
15.04.101: Purpose Of Consultation
15.04.102: Applicability
15.04.103: Time
15.04.104: Feedback
15.04.105: No Vesting
Part 2. Preliminary Plan
15.04.201: Purpose
15.04.202: Application
15.04.203: Review Process
15.04.204: Approval And Expiration
Part 3. Final Plat
15.04.301: Purpose
15.04.302: Application
15.04.303: Review Process
15.04.304: Approval And Expiration
15.04.305: Development Agreement
15.04.306: Preparation Of Final Plat Mylar; City Signatures On Mylar
15.04.307: Final Plat Recording
PART 1. PRE-APPLICATION CONSULTATION
15.04.101: PURPOSE OF CONSULTATION:
The purpose of the pre-application consultation is to provide an opportunity
for an informal evaluation of the applicant's proposed subdivision and to
familiarize the applicant with the applicable provisions of the General Plan,
Zoning Ordinance, this Title, infrastructure requirements and any other issues
that may affect the applicant's proposal in planning and designing the
subdivision. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 2024)
15.04.102: APPLICABILITY:
A pre-application consultation may be requested by an applicant prior to
submittal of a preliminary plan application. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord.
2024-07, 2024)
15.04.103: TIME:
If such a request is made by an applicant, the city shall, within 15 business
days after the request, schedule a meeting with the technical review committee
to review applicant's pre-application and give initial feedback. An electronic
copy of the pre-application plan is to be provided with the application. (Ord.
2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 2024)
15.04.104: FEEDBACK:
At the pre-application meeting, city staff shall provide or have available on
the city website, the following:
   (1)   Copies of applicable land use regulations;
   (2)   A complete list of standards required for the project;
   (3)   Preliminary and final application checklists; and
   (4)   Feedback on the pre-application plan. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord.
2024-07, 2024)
15.04.105: NO VESTING:
The pre-application consultation is an informal evaluation and does not vest
the applicant with any property development rights. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd.
Ord. 2024-07, 2024)
PART 2. PRELIMINARY PLAN
15.04.201: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the preliminary plan is to review and resolve most of the
technical details of the subdivision design in order to minimize changes and
revisions, which might otherwise be necessary on the final plat. The
preliminary plan, and all information and procedures relating thereto, shall in
all respects be in compliance with the provisions of this title and all other
applicable ordinances, including the General Plan which should be utilized in
planning and designing the subdivision. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord. 2024-07,
2024)
15.04.202: APPLICATION:
A preliminary plan application shall be completed by the applicant using the
form provided by the City and shall be submitted to the City zoning
administrator. It shall include the following:
   (1)   Owner's signed affidavit and consent.
   (2)   The full payment of the preliminary plan application fee set by city
council resolution.
   (3)   Subdivision preliminary plan. One (1) twenty-four inch by thirty-six
inch (24" x 36") or larger copies of the subdivision preliminary plan, one (1)
eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduced copies of the subdivision
preliminary plan, and one (1) copy of the proposed subdivision preliminary plan
in electronic format. The preliminary plan must include the following elements:
   
      (a)   Names, addresses and phone numbers of applicant, as well as
applicant's engineer, surveyor and/or architect.
      (b)   Vicinity map showing the project locations relative to city
boundaries, major roads and minor roads that serve the property;
      (c)   Date, scale, north arrow, name of subdivision (applicant must check
with the Washington County recorder to determine if proposed subdivision name
has been used);
      (d)   The assessor's parcel number, address, acreage, dimensions and
certified legal description (prepared by licensed surveyor) of the property to
be subdivided;
      (e)   Existing streets (with names) and right of way widths, buildings,
culverts, bridges, waterways, irrigation ditches and systems, wells, springs,
utilities, fencing, easements, rights of way, flood boundary, surface
watercourse features, geologic hazards, parks, trails, open space, storm drain
and sanitary sewer systems, topography (contours at maximum two foot (2')
intervals), survey monuments, section lines, other features and infrastructure
on or adjacent to the property or other information requested by the public
works director or city engineer;
      (f)   Proposed subdivision boundary and dimensions, streets (with names
and widths), lot layout, lot sizes and dimensions, phasing, gross lot density,
curbs, gutters, park strips and landscaping, water ways, demolition, sidewalks,
fencing, easements, parks, trails, open space, public land dedications, storm
and subsurface drainage systems, detention areas and potential flood boundary,
sanitary and any other infrastructure or improvements on or adjacent to the
subject property and other information requested by the public works director
or city engineer;
      (g)   All property lines of adjacent properties within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of the boundary of the proposed subdivision with the names of the
owners and the parcel tax identification numbers;
      (h)   "Preliminary grading plan" as defined in chapter 2 of this title,
and in accordance with the standard specifications;
      (i)   Preliminary landscaping plan; and
      (j)   Preliminary lighting plan.
   (4)   Traffic impact study, as required by the transportation master plan,
in electronic format.
   (5)   "Geotechnical report", as defined in chapter 2 of this title and in
accordance with the standard specifications, in electronic format.
   (6)   Preliminary "hydrology report", as defined in chapter 2 of this title
and in accordance with the standard specifications, in electronic format.
   (7)   Preliminary title report verifying ownership of the property being
subdivided (subject property").
   (8)   Documentation regarding agreements with adjacent owners, agreements
for the provision of utilities and easements, encumbrances and traffic impacts,
as well as any documentation regarding compliance with any federal, state, or
local requirements affecting the subject property.
   (9)   If the application is for a subdivision that does not meet the
definition of a "standard subdivision", the applicant shall provide a list of
names and addresses, and two (2) sets of address labels and postage, for owners
of record of properties located within three hundred feet (300') of the
boundary line of the subject property.
      (a)   The list must be no older than thirty (30) days from the date of
submission.
      (b)   The applicant is responsible for the completeness and accuracy of
the list but is entitled to rely upon the records in the Washington County
recorder's office.
      (c)   Failure to provide an accurate list may delay the approval of the
subdivision.
   (10)   For phased subdivisions, include a phasing master plan indicating the
areas to be phased and the proposed sequence of each phase.
   (11)   A plan for the continued maintenance of the subdivision amenities,
such as the use of a homeowners' association. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord.
2024-07, 2024)
15.04.203: REVIEW PROCESS:
   (1)   Standards For Review:
      (a)   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the zoning ordinance,
design guidelines, standard specifications, and all relevant sections of this
title.
      (b)   The capacity and adequacy of public services and utility services
must be adequate to service the proposed subdivision. Services required for the
proposed subdivision may include roads, gas, electric, telephone, mail, police
and fire protection, water, sewer and recreation.
      (c)   Preliminary engineering plans shall indicate that public services
(including roads, fire, police, gas, water, sewer, electricity, telephone and
recreation) are available and meet the requirements of this title and all
applicable codes and regulations. If public improvements are not available, the
technical review committee may recommend one of the following to assure that
adequate public services are available at the time of final plat recording:
         (i)   Allow the applicant to voluntarily construct those public
improvements which are necessary to service development as determined by the
technical review committee by entering into an appropriate form of development
agreement;
         (ii)   Allow the applicant to phase the proposed development
consistent with the availability of adequate public improvements;   
         (iii)   Defer final plat approval and issuance of building permits
until all necessary public improvements are adequate and available; or
         (iv)   Deny the preliminary plan approval and allow the applicant to
reapply when adequate public improvements are available.
   (2)   Completeness Review:
      (a)   The zoning administrator and the technical review committee shall
review the preliminary plan application for completeness.
      (b)   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the zoning
administrator shall provide notice to the applicant along with an explanation
of the application's deficiencies. There will be no further review or
consideration of an incomplete application until the applicant submits
additional information to cure the deficiencies.
      (c)   An application will only be considered complete if it:
         (i)   Includes all required forms, plans, reports, documents and other
support materials; and   
         (ii)   Includes payment of the full application fee as set forth on
the City's fee schedule.
      (d)   Additional supplementary materials may be submitted after a
completeness review is complete and the application has been accepted for
review, provided they are submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the
first public meeting or hearing to be held on the application. The City may
postpone and reschedule a public meeting or hearing if such materials are
submitted less than thirty (30) days prior to the public meeting or hearing.
   (3)   Substantive Review:
      (a)   Technical Review Committee: After the preliminary plan application
is determined to be complete, it shall be scheduled for a substantive review by
the technical review committee. The technical review committee shall provide
the applicant with written comments and necessary corrections. The applicant
shall then respond to the written comments, make the necessary corrections and
submit a revised plan (if required) before the application can proceed. Upon
receiving applicant's response, corrections and revised plan (if required), the
revised plan may be scheduled for a second review by the technical review
committee. If the technical review committee determines that the applicant has
properly responded to the prior written comments, made the necessary
corrections, submitted a revised plan (if required) and meets the requirements
for preliminary plan submittals, the zoning administrator shall prepare a staff
report and schedule the preliminary plan application for review and
consideration by the planning commission. If the application did not fully
respond to the written comments, make all the necessary corrections and submit
a revised plan as required, the application cannot proceed. Before the
application is scheduled for further review by the technical review committee,
the applicant must pay in advance the required fee or such additional review
(s).
      (b)   Planning Commission: For standard subdivisions, once the technical
review committee has completed its review and determined that the preliminary
plan application is ready to be reviewed and considered by the planning
commission, the preliminary plan application will be scheduled on the planning
commission agenda for review and approval. Any subdivision that does not meet
the definition of a "standard subdivision" shall require a public hearing prior
to approval by the planning commission. Notice of public meetings and public
hearing, if required, shall be given as set forth in Title 16, Chapter 10 of
the Ivins City Code.
   (4)   Special Technical Review:
      (a)   The technical review committee will determine if the project has
complex technical issues that require in-depth special technical reviews by
third party contractors hired by the City. A list of possible complex technical
issues could include presence of expansive clay soils, high traffic generation,
high water usage, or other geologic hazards. If more than two (2) reviews are
necessary, applicant will be required to pay an extra fee based on the
additional costs of these services.
      (b)   If third party contractors are hired by the City to review these
types of issues, the applicant will be required to pay an extra fee based on
the additional costs of these services. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord. 2024-07,
2024)
15.04.204: APPROVAL AND EXPIRATION:
A preliminary plan approval shall remain valid for one year from the date of
approval. If a final plat is not approved within one year of the date of the
preliminary plan approval, the preliminary plan shall expire and become null
and void. The planning commission may grant a one-time six (6) month extension
for obtaining final plat approval, provided the applicant submits the request
for extension prior to expiration of the preliminary plan, uses the required
city form and pays the required fees in full. In the event a preliminary plan
expires, the applicant will have to completely restart the approval process.
For multi-phased subdivisions, final plat for at least one phase must be
approved within one (1) year of the preliminary plan approval. The preliminary
plan for all phases for which a final plat has not been approved will expire
three (3) years from the date of the preliminary plan approval unless otherwise
specified in a written development agreement approved by the city council.
(Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 2024)
PART 3. FINAL PLAT
15.04.301: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the final plat is to verify that it conforms to the approved
preliminary plan prior to recording with the Washington County recorder. A
final plat application shall be submitted to the city only after the
preliminary plan has been approved. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord. 2024-07,
2024)
15.04.302: APPLICATION:
The final plat application shall be completed by the applicant using the form
provided by the city and shall be submitted to the city zoning administrator.
It shall include the following:
   (1)   Applicant's signed affidavit and consent.
   (2)   The full payment of the final plat application fee set by city council
resolution.
   (3)   A current title report, dated not more than thirty (30) days before
the proposed recording of the final plat, showing the identity of the vested
owner(s) and all recorded matters of title regarding the property being
subdivided. Applicant must provide additional documentation of owning entities
that are not individuals that is satisfactory to the technical review
committee.
   (4)   When a subdivision contains lands which are reserved in private
ownership for community use, including common areas, the applicant shall submit
with the final plat, the name, articles of incorporation and bylaws of the
owner, or organization empowered to own, maintain and pay taxes on such lands
and common areas with proof of filing with the state.
   (5)   The plan for continued maintenance of common areas and public areas.
   (6)   Subdivision final plat. One (1) twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch
(24" x 36") or larger copies of the subdivision final plat, one (1) eleven inch
by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduced copies of the subdivision final plat, and
one (1) copy of the subdivision final plat in electronic format. The final plat
application must include the following elements:   
      (a)   Names, addresses and phone numbers of applicant, as well as
applicant's engineer, surveyor and/or architect;
      (b)   The subdivision name prominently printed on the plat;
      (c)   Vicinity map showing the project locations relative to city
boundaries, major roads and minor roads that serve the property;
      (d)   Date, scale and north arrow;
      (e)   The assessor's parcel number, address, acreage, dimensions and
certified legal description prepared by a Utah licensed surveyor of the
property to be subdivided;
      (f)   An accurately drawn subdivision boundary showing proper bearings
and dimensions properly tied to public survey monuments and drawn slightly
bolder than lot and street lines;
      (g)   All survey and mathematical information and data necessary to
locate all monuments, to locate and retrace all interior and exterior boundary
lines appearing thereon, including bearing and distance of straight lines, and
central angle, radius and arc length of curves, and such information as may be
necessary to determine the location of beginning and ending points of curves.
All boundary corners and monuments within the subdivision shall show the Utah
coordinate system 1983 south zone grid coordinates and shall reference existing
monumentation on the Washington County horizontal control network. Lot and
boundary closure shall be calculated to the nearest one-hundredth (1/100) of a
foot.
      (h)   All lots, blocks and parcels offered for dedication for any purpose
delineated and designated with dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown
and defined in every case. The square footage of each lot shall be shown.
Parcels offered for dedication, other than for streets or easements, shall be
clearly designated on the plat. Sufficient linear, angular and curved data
shall be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of the boundary
lines of every block, lot and parcel which is part thereof. No ditto marks
shall be used for lot dimensions.
      (i)   The right of way lines of each street and the width of any portion
being dedicated and widths of any existing dedications. The widths and
locations of adjacent streets and other public properties within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of the subdivision shall be shown with dashed lines. If any
street in the subdivision is a continuation or an approximate continuation of
an existing street, the conformity or the amount of nonconformity of such
existing streets shall be accurately shown.
      (j)   All lots and blocks numbered consecutively under a definite system
approved by the city engineer. Numbering shall continue consecutively
throughout the subdivision with no omissions or duplications.
      (k)   All streets within the subdivision shall be numbered (named streets
shall also be numbered) in accordance with, and in conformity with, the adopted
street system of the city. Named streets are optional; however, all named
streets must also be numbered. In the case of corner lots, an address may be
assigned for each part of the lot having street frontage.
      (l)   The sidelines of all easements shall be shown by fine dashed lines.
The width of all easements, and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate
the same with respect to the subdivision, shall be shown. All easements shall
be clearly labeled and identified. Easements shall be ten feet (10') from the
property line for all front yards and seven and one-half feet (7½') from the
property line for all side and rear yards. Larger easements may be required
under specific circumstances requiring greater areas.
      (m)   All fully and clearly shown stakes, monuments and other evidence
indicating the boundaries of the subdivision as found on the site. Any monument
or benchmark that is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all
improvements shall be replaced by the developer under the direction of the city
engineer. The following required monuments shall be shown on the final plat:
         (i)   The location of all monuments placed in making the survey,
including a statement as what, if any, points were reset by ties; and
         (ii)   All right of way monuments at angle points and intersections as
approved by the city engineer.
      (n)   The name of the surveyor, together with the date of the survey, the
scale of the map and the number of sheets. The following certificates,
acknowledgments and descriptions shall appear on the title sheet of the final
plat, and such certificates may be combined where appropriate:
         (i)   Registered land surveyor's "certificate of survey" in a form
acceptable to the city;
         (ii)   Owner's "dedication certificate" in a form acceptable to the
city;
         (iii)   Necessary notary public's acknowledgment of signatures; and
         (iv)   A correct metes and bounds description of all property included
within the subdivision.
      (o)   Plats shall contain blocks for signature of the city engineer, city
attorney, planning commission and city council. (A signature line for the mayor
and an attestation by the city recorder.) A block for the Washington County
recorder shall be provided in the lower right corner of the final plat.
      (p)   Such other affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments, endorsements
and notarial seals as are required by law, by this title, city staff, city
engineer or city attorney.
      (q)   Other information such as the location of jurisdictional boundary
lines (federal emergency management agency, U.S. army corps or corps of
engineers, bureau of land management, U.S. fish and wildlife service, state
institutional trust lands agency, etc.), adjoining lot lines or property
owners, fencing notes, or any other special notes or requirements as deemed
appropriate by the city staff, city engineer, city attorney or city council.
      (r)   The developer shall note on the final plat those public right of
way areas, including public park strips.
      (s)   All easements and rights of way within or required for the
subdivision shall be shown on the plat.
   (7)   Stamped engineered construction drawings. Submit three (3) copies in
accordance with the standards provided in Chapter 5 of this title and the
standard specifications. Review and approval of these drawings will be in
accordance with the standard specifications.
   (8)   Cost estimate of all required improvements in accordance with the
standard specifications.
   (9)   Final drainage report. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 2024)
15.04.303: REVIEW PROCESS:
   (1)   Completeness Review:
      (a)   The zoning administrator and the technical review committee shall
review the final plat application for completeness.
      (b)   If an application is determined to be incomplete, the zoning
administrator shall provide notice to the applicant along with an explanation
of the application's deficiencies. There will be no further review or
consideration of an incomplete application until the applicant submits
additional information to cure the deficiencies.
      (c)   An application will only be considered complete if it:
         (i)   Includes all required forms, plans, reports, documents and other
support materials; and   
         (ii)   Includes payment of the full application fee as set forth on
the city's fee schedule.
      (d)   Additional supplementary materials may be submitted after a
completeness review is complete and the application has been accepted for
review, provided they are submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the
first public meeting or hearing to be held on the application. The city may
postpone and reschedule a public meeting or hearing if such materials are
submitted less than thirty (30) days prior to the public meeting or hearing.
   (3)   Substantive Review:
      (a)   Technical Review Committee: After the final plat application is
determined to be complete, it shall be scheduled for a substantive review by
the technical review committee. The technical review committee shall provide
the applicant with written comments and necessary corrections. The applicant
shall then respond to the written comments, make the necessary corrections and
submit a revised plan, if required, before the application can proceed. Upon
receiving applicant's response, corrections and revised plan (if required), the
final plat application may be scheduled for a second review by the technical
review committee. If the technical review determines that the applicant has
properly responded to the prior written comments, made the necessary
corrections and submitted a revised plan (if required) meets the requirements
for final plat submittals, the zoning administrator shall prepare a staff
report and schedule the final plat application for review and consideration by
the Final Plat Review Authority. If the applicant did not fully respond to the
written comments, make all the necessary corrections and submit a revised plan
as required, the application cannot proceed. Before the application is
scheduled for further review by the technical review committee, the applicant
must pay in advance the required fee or such additional review(s).
      (b)   Final Plat Review Authority: The Final Plat Review Authority shall
be made up of the City Engineer or Assistant Engineer. Once the technical
review committee has completed its review and determined that the final plat
application is ready to be reviewed and considered by the Final Plat Review
Authority, the final plat application will be submitted to the Final Plat
Review Authority for approval. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord. 2024-07, 2024)
15.04.304: APPROVAL AND EXPIRATION:
A final plat approval shall remain valid for one year from the date of
approval. If a final plat is not recorded within one (1) year of the date of
the final plat approval, the final plat shall expire. The Final Plat Review
Authority may grant a one-time six (6) month extension for recording the final
plat, provided the applicant submits the request for extension prior to
expiration of the final plat, uses the required city form and pays the required
fees in full. In the event a final plat expires, the applicant will have six
(6) months to reapply for final plat approval. If the applicant fails to
reapply for final plat approval within six (6) months of expiration, then all
previous approvals shall be null and void, requiring the applicant to
completely restart the approval process. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord. 2024-
07, 2024)
15.04.305: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
   (1)   A development agreement is not required as a condition for developing
land if the city's land use regulations establish all applicable standards for
development on the land.
   (2)   A development agreement will be required for all phased subdivisions
to memorialize such things as the timing of the phasing, the minimum number of
lots to be included in a phase, and an infrastructure plan that will ensure
each phase has all required infrastructure installed prior to the first
certificate of occupancy being issued. At a minimum, the final plat for the
first subdivision phase must be recorded within one (1) year from the approval
date of the development agreement and the required paved fire access roads for
each phase is either fully installed or bonded prior to issuing the first
certificate of occupancy for each phase. (Ord. 2023-22, 2023; amd. Ord. 2024-
07, 2024)
15.04.306:   PREPARATION OF FINAL PLAT MYLAR; CITY SIGNATURES ON MYLAR:
   (1)   Preparation Of Final Plat Mylar: Once all requirements have been met,
redline corrections made, revised plans and plat submitted, city staff review
completed, and the Final Plat Review Authority has approved the final plat, the
applicant shall submit a twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") Mylar
drawing of the corrected final plat with the signatures of the owners,
lienholders and other required signatures.
   (2)   City Signatures On Final Plat Mylar:
      (a)   Final Plat Review Authority: Upon approval of the final plat, the
Final Plat Review Authority and the mayor shall sign the Mylar.
      (b)   City Engineer: The city engineer shall review the Mylar and verify
that the information thereon complies with the approved final plat and that it
remains in compliance with general good engineering practices, engineering and
surveying standards set forth in this title, other applicable Ivins City
ordinances, and engineering and surveying standards adopted by the Ivins City
council. The city engineer shall also confirm that the survey description is
correct and that all easements are correctly described and located on the
Mylar. Once the city engineer has reviewed the foregoing and is satisfied that
the Mylar is in compliance with all requirements of this title, he shall sign
the Mylar.
      (c)   City Attorney Review: The city attorney shall review the Mylar and
the current title report. The legal description in the title report shall be
compared, for accuracy, with any legal description on the Mylar, in the
restrictive covenants, articles, consents and other legal documents. All
persons shown on the title report as owners or lienholders must have signed the
Mylar and had their signature acknowledged by a notary on the plat. All
lienholder consents must not only show consent to recording of the plat and any
restrictive covenants, but must also indicate the lienholder's approval of, and
joinder in the dedication of, any public streets or rights of way and all
lienholders must have signed the Mylar indicating such. The city attorney shall
also verify that the applicant has submitted the required improvement
guarantee, verification from the Washington County treasurer that all taxes or
special assessments payable on all property within the subdivision, including
any interest and penalties thereon, have been paid in full, verification from
the Washington County water conservancy district that all water impact fees
have been satisfied, and any other documents and information required by the
city attorney. Once the city attorney has reviewed the foregoing and is
satisfied that the Mylar is in compliance with all requirements of this title,
he shall sign the Mylar. (Ord. 2024-07, 2024)
15.04.307:   FINAL PLAT RECORDING:
The city recorder, or designee, shall record the final plat at the office of
the Washington County recorder. The final plat may not be recorded until all of
the following items have been completed:
   (1)   The final plat has been approved by the Final Plat Review Authority
and all requirements of the city engineer and city attorney have been met;
   (2)   All required signatures, including the mayor's signature and the city
recorder's certification have been applied to the Mylar plat drawing;
   (3)   The security for improvements as determined by the city engineer and
approved by the city attorney has been properly posted with the city recorder
or improvements have been completed and accepted by the city;
   (4)   All necessary deeds and agreements have been executed and submitted to
the city;
   (5)   A development agreement, if applicable, for the project has been
signed and approved;
   (6)   All impact fees, development fees and other fees have been paid to the
city;
   (7)   Verification from the Washington County treasurer that all taxes or
special assessments payable on all property within the subdivision, including
any interest and penalties thereon, have been paid in full; and
   (8)   Where required, verification from the Washington County water
conservancy district that all water impact fees have been paid. (Ord. 2024-07,
2024)
CHAPTER 5
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
Part 1. Required Improvements And General Provisions
15.05.101: Required Improvements
15.05.102: Design Standards
15.05.103: Architectural Style
15.05.104: Preservation Of Natural Features
15.05.105: Preparation Of Construction Plans
15.05.106: Separate Application For Review Of Construction Plans
Part 2. Lots And Parcels
15.05.201: General Requirements
15.05.202: Grading Requirements
15.05.203: Double Frontage Lots
15.05.204: Flag Lots
Part 3. Streets And Roads
15.05.301: Transportation Master Plan Conformance
15.05.302: Street Requirements
15.05.303: Sidewalk Requirements
Part 4. Landscaped Buffer Areas
15.05.401: Purpose
15.05.402: Dedication And Maintenance
15.05.403: General Requirements
15.05.404: General Landscaping Requirements
Part 5. Fencing
15.05.501: Purpose
15.05.502: General Requirements
15.05.503: Fencing Design
Part 6. Utilities
15.05.601: General Utility Requirements
15.05.602: Drawing Of Record
15.05.603: Responsibility For Improvements
Part 7. Construction
15.05.701: Construction Of Improvements
15.05.702: Inspections
15.05.703: Construction Final Completion
15.05.704: Warranty Period
15.05.705: Maintenance Of Improvements
Part 8. Bonding Requirements For Improvement Guarantee
15.05.801: Improvement Bond
15.05.802: Restoration Bond
15.05.803: Warranty Bond
Part 9. Building Permits And Certificates Of Occupancy
15.05.901: Building Permits
15.05.902: Certificates Of Occupancy
PART 1. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
15.05.101: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The following improvements, utilities and services shall be provided by a
developer of a subdivision, condominiums, or any development that requires that
public services be provided to serve the development in accordance with the
general requirements listed above:
   (1)   A public street system including curb, gutters, sidewalks, street
paving, landscaped buffers and other necessary appurtenances in accordance with
the transportation master plan and other city ordinances. Private streets may
be alternatively provided where appropriate in accordance with the
transportation master plan. Access to the development shall be in accordance
with city adopted fire code.
   (2)   A culinary water system, including the mains, valves, blowoffs, fire
hydrants, pressure reducing valves and service laterals to each lot or parcel
in the project.
   (3)   A public sanitary sewer system, including the mains, manholes, and
service laterals which must be extended from the sewer main to each lot or
parcel in the project.
      (a)   When allowed by section
10.03.302 of this code, a developer may require each individual subdivided lot
to provide an advanced on site wastewater treatment system in lieu of providing
a public sanitary sewer system.
   (4)   A secondary water system to provide water for outside landscaping to
each lot in the project. The secondary water system shall be of similar type
and requirements as the culinary water system and shall comply with all related
standards and specifications.
   (5)   A subsurface water drain system shall be provided when deemed
necessary by site conditions to lower or remove shallow groundwater on the
site. The system shall be inspected and approved by the city and shall become
the responsibility of the homeowners and/or developer. The city shall not be
responsible for the maintenance or failure of the subsurface drains or for
damage resulting from inadequate, clogged, or defective drains.
   (6)   A storm drainage system and detention basins shall be installed as
required by the city. The drainage shall comply with drainage studies,
downstream facilities and capacities, and shall conform to the general plan and
the city's storm drain capital facilities plan. All developments are required
to provide safe and adequate drainage for the existing flows occurring on, or
passing through, the project.
   (7)   Provisions for other franchised utilities such as power, phone, gas,
and cable TV as necessary for the project. The developer is required to
coordinate the installation and maintenance of these utilities.
   (8)   Permanent monuments shall be furnished, accurately established and set
by a certified Utah licensed land surveyor at such points as necessary to
define and establish all lot lines and rights of way within the project.
   (9)   Street signs shall be installed in conformance with city standards.
   (10)   Streetlights in conformance with city standards shall be installed at
all street intersections, school and pedestrian crossings, and on public
streets at intervals and locations specified by the standard specifications.
   (11)   Fencing shall be provided where required in accordance with this
chapter and all other city ordinances.
   (12)   Extensions of off site utilities and other facilities that are
necessary to provide services to the proposed project in accordance with
standards as required by the city. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.102: DESIGN STANDARDS:
All improvements in the proposed project shall be in accordance with city
standards specifications, city design guidelines, and development standards of
title 16, "Zoning Regulations", of this code. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.103: ARCHITECTURAL STYLE:
The exterior color and materials of all buildings, structures, walls and fences
shall comply with the design guidelines. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.104: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES:
Existing major natural geographic and landmark topographic land features,
including major rock formations, major washes, wetlands and lava rock, shall be
preserved and may not be removed or damaged, except in conformance with
approved development plans and in conformance with this title and the zoning
ordinance. Development shall be designed to minimize excavation and scarring of
these natural features. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.105: PREPARATION OF CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
Complete and detailed construction plans and drawings of all improvements shall
be prepared in conformance to the standard specifications. Refer to the
standard specifications for required elements and submittal requirements. They
shall be submitted to the city for review at the same time the final plat is
being reviewed. Final approval of the project shall not be granted until the
plans have been reviewed and recommended for approval by the city engineer.
Plans for all street utilities shall be included in the same plans. (Ord. 2016-
02, 2016)
15.05.106:   SEPARATE APPLICATION FOR REVIEW OF CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
Construction plans are submitted with the final plat application for all
subdivisions. For developments that are not subdivisions and do not require a
recorded plat but do have an approved site plan that would require site
construction plans to be approved by the public works department and the City
Engineer, a separate application shall be made to the public works/engineering
department for review and approval. The following items shall be submitted:
   (1)   Application form.
   (2)   Application fee set by resolution by the city council.
   (3)   Stamped engineered construction drawings. Submit three (3) copies in
accordance with this chapter, to be reviewed and approved in accordance with
the standard specifications.
   (4)   Final Drainage Study (if not approved prior).
   (5)   Maintenance and inspection agreement for low impact development
facilities.
   (6)   Cost estimate of all required improvements in accordance with the
standard specifications. (Ord. 2024-07, 2024)
PART 2. LOTS AND PARCELS
15.05.201: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements pertaining to subdivisions or other developments
shall be incorporated into project design and implemented by the developer:
   (1)   Each lot or parcel shall be of adequate shape and size to accommodate
yard area, frontage/width, parking, access, landscaping, building and other
requirements of the zoning district in which the lot or parcel is proposed and
to accommodate reasonable use of the property.
   (2)   Allowances for existing topography, easements, vegetation, waterways
and other natural or historic features of the property shall be accommodated in
the design of lots or parcels.
   (3)   Individual lots or parcels may not be created which would be divided
by a city boundary or a zone boundary. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.202: GRADING REQUIREMENTS:
Grading shall conform with standard specifications, title 16, "Zoning
Regulations", of this code, and all adopted codes and regulations. (Ord. 2016-
02, 2016)
15.05.203: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS:
Double frontage lots may only be allowed where lots back onto collector or
arterial streets.
   (1)   On a case by case basis, double frontage lots may be approved
elsewhere due to:
      (a)   Property constraints;
      (b)   Traffic considerations; or
      (c)   Other special circumstances.
   (2)   Where double frontage lots are approved, the following may be
required:
      (a)   An approved decorative masonry wall along the rear lot;
      (b)   Limited access on arterial and collector streets;
      (c)   No access from the street which is established along the rear of
the lot; and
      (d)   Altered park strips and sidewalks along the rear frontages of the
lot.
   (3)   The minimum lot width for corner lots shall be ten feet (10') wider
than the minimum width required for an interior lot in the same zone. (Ord.
2016-02, 2016)
15.05.204: FLAG LOTS:
   (1)   Flag lots may only be allowed under the following conditions:
      (a)   Significant natural features exist on the property that are not
created by the applicant, such that a flag lot would better utilize the
irregularly shaped properties;
      (b)   The flag lot facilitates infill development; or
      (c)   The flag lot eliminates access to an arterial street.
   (2)   Where flag lots are allowed, the following shall be required:
      (a)   The access strip to a flag lot shall be a minimum of twenty feet
(20'), shall be part of the lot and no access shall be permitted across another
property;
      (b)   The large portion of the flag lot shall meet all lot width and yard
requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. The narrow portion
of the lot, however, may be included in the calculation of the lot area;
      (c)   The "leftover" lot resulting from the creation of a flag lot shall
also meet all the width and yard requirements for the zoning district in which
it is located; and
      (d)   All flag lots shall have frontage upon a dedicated roadway or a
publicly approved street. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
PART 3. STREETS AND ROADS
15.05.301: TRANSPORTATION MASTER PLAN CONFORMANCE:
The subdivision plan shall be in compliance with the city transportation master
plan. Applicants shall take into account proposed streets and street widths
indicated in the transportation master plan. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.302: STREET REQUIREMENTS:
Streets shall be designed and constructed according to the cross sections,
policies, and design standards set forth in Ivins transportation master plan
and city standard specifications.
   (1)   The developer shall dedicate right of way and install improvements for
proposed streets which are planned to adjoin or traverse the project or which
are necessary for the development. The entire proposed right of way shall be
dedicated to the city according to the design width specified by the Ivins
transportation master plan. The city may participate in a percentage of the
cost of improvements for arterial and major collector streets as proposed in
the Ivins City capital facilities plan.
   (2)   Subdivisions and other developments shall be designed to provide
future access to adjoining vacant parcels. Developments shall also be designed
so that existing stub streets in existing developments will be connected to the
proposed streets and accesses. Where a stub street is provided which accesses
more than two (2) lots on each side, a temporary turnaround and public use
easement at least eighty feet (80') in diameter, or equivalent hammerhead
turnaround, shall be provided as approved by the fire marshal. The city may
require improvements to be installed in temporary turnaround areas.
   (3)   Generally, fire apparatus access roads, including cul-de-sac and dead
end streets, may not exceed seven hundred fifty feet (750') in length, as
measured from the center of the intersection of a connecting through street to
the center of the turnaround area, without special approval by the city council
for circumstances where it would be impracticable to comply with the seven
hundred fifty foot (750') maximum length. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac
street may not be extended by additional turnarounds between the intersecting
through street and the cul- de-sac. However, if the distance from the end of a
proposed cul- de-sac to a connecting road is less than two hundred feet (200'),
where conditions permit, connection to the connecting road shall be required if
doing so does not violate requirements of the Ivins City transportation master
plan, does not disturb or eliminate any unique geographical feature, including
boundaries where the abutting property is tortoise habitat, state park, Indian
reservation or owned by the bureau of land management (BLM) thereby making it
impracticable to install a connecting road, and does not prevent full
development of approved densities.
   (4)   Cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum pavement turnaround diameter of
ninety six feet (96') with a minimum right of way line diameter of one hundred
fifteen feet (115').
   (5)   Streets in subdivisions, excluding collector streets, exceeding eighty
feet (80') in length are encouraged to be curvilinear or provide sufficient
alignment variation to calm traffic and enhance aesthetic appeal in the
subdivision.
   (6)   Subdivision streets shall be designed to approach an arterial or
collector street in accordance with the standard specifications. (Ord. 2016-02,
2016)
15.05.303: SIDEWALK REQUIREMENTS:
Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of public and private streets, with
exceptions for low volume roads as identified in the transportation master
plan.
   (1)   A ten foot (10') asphalt trail may substitute for sidewalks on both
sides of the street in the identified rural zone. Landscaped areas, in
compliance with the design guidelines, between the street curb and gutter and
the sidewalk, and between the sidewalk and outside right of way boundary, are
encouraged.
   (2)   The sidewalk may be placed in the landscaped buffer area.
   (3)   If sidewalks serving public streets are not placed within a dedicated
right of way, an easement for access and maintenance will be required.
   (4)   The minimum sidewalk width requirements shall be in accordance with
the cross sections depicted in the transportation master plan and the standard
specifications.
   (5)   Required sidewalk and bike paths shall be serpentined on streets with
a landscape buffer greater than fifteen feet (15') wide. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
PART 4. LANDSCAPED BUFFER AREAS
15.05.401: PURPOSE:
Landscaped buffer areas are intended to provide an area of landscaped open
space along all public streets which form the perimeter of the subdivision
where front yards of homes do not front the street and on all public streets
within the subdivision where front yards of homes do not front the street. The
intent is to provide the general public using the public streets with a more
open view of the scenic vistas prominent in the community and a less congested
experience as they travel along the public streets within the community. It is
further the intent to provide a common and consistent appearance of all public
streets within the community. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.402: DEDICATION AND MAINTENANCE:
After satisfactory installation of the landscaping in the landscaped buffer
area, and one hundred percent (100%) release of the security for said
landscaping, the city will accept the dedication of, and responsibility for
maintenance of, the landscaped buffer area along arterial and major collector
streets. The developer shall note on the final plat and in the covenants and
restrictions for the development, all other public street landscaped buffer
areas which the development homeowners shall be required to maintain. Failure
to place such notes will not nullify the owners' responsibility as described in
this section. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.403: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
All public streets which form the perimeter of any residential or
nonresidential development, and all public streets within any residential or
nonresidential development where homes or buildings within the development will
not front on the streets, shall provide a minimum landscaped buffer area that
meets the requirements set forth in the cross sections of the transportation
master plan and the following:
   (1)   Uneven, creative landscaped buffer areas with varied setbacks and wall
heights are preferred.
   (2)   Stepped and staggered buffer walls shall not exceed forty foot (40')
increments of variation of height and setback.
   (3)   Serpentine sidewalks, which are encouraged, may be located within the
buffer area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2894.gif]
(Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.404: GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Landscaping, in accordance with the design guidelines, shall be
provided according to an approved plan. Landscaping may include berming,
contouring, rocks, boulders and drought tolerant desert vegetation.
   (2)   The developer shall note on the final plat or site plan, and in the
covenants and restrictions for the development, those public right of way
areas, including park strips, for which the homeowners shall have
responsibility for landscape improvements and maintenance. Failure to place
such notes will not nullify owners' responsibilities for park strips and
medians as described in this section. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
PART 5. FENCING
15.05.501: PURPOSE:
Fencing may be used to provide privacy to property owners, buffer conflicting
uses, or to provide an architectural/design element to a development project.
Fencing is encouraged to be as low profile and open as possible to protect
scenic vistas from public streets and discourage separation from the community.
The materials, location, height and all elements of fencing shall comply with
the design guidelines. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.502: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Permanent fencing shall be incorporated into the development design and
implemented by the developer in compliance with the design guidelines and shall
meet the following general requirements:
   (1)   All fencing designed and installed by the developer shall be approved
by the city and shall be considered part of the project improvements for
purposes of security and occupancy;
   (2)   All applicable zoning and building code requirements pertaining to
fencing shall be met; and
   (3)   All fencing installed by the developer shall be maintained in good
condition by the owners after the improvements guarantee is released, unless
said fencing is specifically accepted by the city for maintenance. (Ord. 2016-
02, 2016)
15.05.503: FENCING DESIGN:
The following design requirements pertaining to fencing shall be incorporated
into the development design and implemented by the developer in compliance with
the design guidelines. The developer shall install fencing at his/her expense
as follows:
   (1)   An approved fence between the development and any incompatible use
identified by the city, such as canals, ditches, flood channels or other
waterways or other hazardous or unsightly uses.
   (2)   An approved fence between the development and incompatible zones.
   (3)   An approved fence between public streets and rear and side yards of
single-family residential lots or parcels in agricultural and residential
zones.
   (4)   Concept drawings must be submitted to city staff for review prior to
construction.
   (5)   Building permits are required for fences or walls exceeding six feet
(6') in height.
   (6)   Fence height shall be measured from the natural grade to the top of
the fence or wall.
   (7)   Fence heights along public streets shall not exceed the maximum
heights shown in the chart that follows, except when natural lot elevation
would dictate a fence height too low to protect privacy. A five foot (5') fence
or wall may be built if the twelve foot (12') required buffer area is met.
   (8)   Fences and walls shall not exceed forty feet (40') of unbroken lengths
to reduce visual mass. Walls and fences that exceed forty feet (40') in length
shall be designed to vary in height and be stepped in an offset manner.
   (9)   When a fence or wall on a public street creates a continuous surface
greater than twenty feet (20') in length, it shall be softened visually with
acceptable vegetation.
 
Public Street Buffer Areas (Measured Maximum Height Of Fence, Including Berm
From The Street Curb To The Fence)   (Measured From Grade Back
                                     Of Curb To The Top Of Fence)1
   12 feet to 15 feet             6.0 feet
   Over 15 feet to 20 feet        6.5 feet
   Over 20 feet to 25 feet        7.0 feet
   Over 25 feet to 30 feet        7.5 feet
   Over 30 feet to 35 feet        8.0 feet
   Over 35 feet                   8.5 feet
 
Note:
1.    An additional 36 inches of open design fence, such as wrought iron, may
be added to the top of any fence along the rear property boundaries for safety
purposes.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2896.gif]
(Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
PART 6. UTILITIES
15.05.601: GENERAL UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
All utilities shall be designed in accordance with the City standard
specifications or for private franchised utilities shall be in conformance with
each utility's standards. Public utilities shall also be in conformance with
the general plan, master plans, capital facility plans, impact fee facility
plans, and City ordinances including City administrative rules and regulations
as approved by the City. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
   (1)   All utilities shall be provided through underground service in
properly recorded easements or rights-of-way.
      (a)   Existing overhead power lines adjacent to, and on the same side of
the street as, proposed development projects shall be relocated underground.
         (i)   Exceptions: Development projects in the Historic Township that
are not on a minor/major collector or arterial street; or the line voltage is
more than fifteen kilovolts (15 kV). (Ord. 2018-03, 2018)
   (2)   Underground utilities shall be installed only after the street has
been rough graded to a line and grade approved by the City.
   (3)   All utilities and other improvements that will be placed beneath the
asphalt pavement section shall be installed prior to the placement of any road
base and asphalt, and shall include any necessary crossing of other
improvements or utilities.
   (4)   All utilities shall extend through and/or to future connection points
for same, including the farthest point of the development for future growth, as
required by the City.
   (5)   The developer shall be responsible for the coordination of utility
installation with existing utilities, including the rerouting of existing
utilities.
   (6)   Right-of-way and easement dedications shall be provided in accordance
with City requirements and as necessary to provide all of the required
improvements listed above.
   (7)   Developers of subdivisions or condominiums, or any other development,
shall be required to design, construct and dedicate public improvements which
are necessary to serve the development and connect to existing and future
infrastructure.
   (8)   Impact and other fees and dedications associated with the development
are also required in addition to the construction and dedication of public
improvements required with the development. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.602: DRAWING OF RECORD:
Drawing of record, also known as as built drawings, are required for
developments that include the installation of public utilities. These drawings
shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements established by the City
standard specifications. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.603: RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPROVEMENTS:
   (1)   Prior to final acceptance of public improvements by the City as
prescribed in this title, the developer shall be responsible for the proper
replacement, repair and maintenance of any public improvements associated with
the development which were installed by the developer. The developer shall be
obligated to the city to replace, repair and/or maintain any defective,
damaged, or deteriorating public improvements related to the development at
his/her expense until the time that said public improvements are inspected and
accepted by the city.
   (2)   In the event that certain areas or structures are provided within the
subdivision for private recreational use or as service facilities, the owner of
such land and buildings shall establish an arrangement to assure a continued
standard of maintenance consistent with the conditions of subdivision approval.
(Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
PART 7. CONSTRUCTION
15.05.701: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
No construction shall be started until the final plat and construction drawings
have been approved except as agreed by development agreement. The developer/
property owner may begin construction after:
   (1)   Final plat has been approved.
   (2)   Development agreement has been approved and recorded.
   (3)   Construction permit obtained from city including payment of fee.
   (4)   Restoration bond established with city.
   (5)   All necessary state and federal permits obtained.
   (6)   Preconstruction meeting held in accordance with standard
specifications. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.702: INSPECTIONS:
   (1)   Frequency: Construction work involving the installation of public
improvements in subdivisions and other developments shall be subject to the
inspection of the public works director and city engineer.
   (2)   Requests For Inspection: Requests for inspections shall be made to the
city engineer by the person responsible for the construction. Requests for
inspection on work shall be made one working day prior to the commencement of
the work. Inspections shall be made by the city engineer after various phases
of the construction work are completed. Any faulty or defective work shall be
corrected by the developer or the developer's contractor within a period of
thirty (30) days from the date of the city engineer's written notification to
the developer that correction of the faulty or defective work is required.
(Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.703: CONSTRUCTION FINAL COMPLETION:
The following items shall be provided prior to final completion of the project
and start of the warranty period:
   (1)   All required improvements have been installed and all punch list items
provided by the city have been satisfied.
   (2)   Final walk-through inspection has been completed by city.
   (3)   Final testing report submitted, reviewed and approved by the city.
   (4)   Record drawing has been submitted, reviewed and approved by the city.
   (5)   All disturbed areas have been stabilized and/or revegetated in
accordance with stormwater pollution prevention requirements.
   (6)   Warranty bond has been posted as security during the warranty period.
(Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.704: WARRANTY PERIOD:
   (1)   The warranty period shall commence on the date of final completion and
shall continue for one year thereafter for all improvements.
   (2)   If any deficiencies are found by the city during the warranty period
in materials or workmanship, the developer shall promptly resolve such defects
or deficiencies and request the city engineer to reinspect the improvements. If
the defective or deficient improvements are not corrected, the city will give
notice to the developer of the action to file on the security agreement for
completion of the improvements. If necessary the warranty period may be
extended until such deficiencies are corrected.
   (3)   At the end of the one year period, as applicable, the developer shall
request the city staff to make a final warranty period inspection of all
improvements. If the city engineer verifies that the improvements are
acceptable, the remaining warranty bond posted as security by the developer
under the security agreement shall be released. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.705: MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
   (1)   Upon final completion of the project, the city will assume all
maintenance of public facilities with the exception of landscaping which shall
be maintained by the developer for the duration of the warranty period.
   (2)   In the event that certain areas or structures are provided within the
subdivision for private recreational use or as service facilities, the owner of
such land and buildings shall establish an arrangement to assure a continued
standard of maintenance consistent with the conditions of subdivision approval.
(Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
PART 8. BONDING REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE
15.05.801: IMPROVEMENT BOND:
In order to ensure proper completion and maintenance of required improvements
for a subdivision or condominium in the city, the developer or owner shall
provide an improvement bond of the type described below for completion with the
city to install improvements to city standards.
   (1)   Types Of Improvement Bonds Allowed:
      (a)   The developer/property owner shall either provide a cash bond
deposited with the city, an irrevocable letter of credit, or an escrow security
agreement with a financial institution where the full cash amount is held in a
separate escrow account as security for the city, for the improvements on the
final plat or site plan as directed by the city manager, city engineer or city
attorney. A surety bond is not an allowed type of improvement bond. The
improvement bond shall be posted prior to the city attorney's signing of the
final plat or site plan, and prior to recording of any accompanying documents.
A description of the required improvement bond shall be included in the
recorded development agreement.
      (b)   The cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or escrow security
agreement shall ensure the timely and satisfactory construction of all required
public improvements, private streets and sidewalks, perimeter walls, and
landscaped buffer areas and provide a guarantee for said improvements. The city
engineer shall determine the amount of the improvement guarantee, which shall
be one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of the improvements.
The improvement guarantee may be reduced at intervals at the request of the
developer/owner as improvements are installed as specified in the city
engineer's estimated cost of the improvements to be installed down to the
amount of the required warranty bond plus five percent (5%) until final
acceptance by the city engineer following the warranty period.
      (c)   For required street improvements on unimproved public streets not
yet ready to have such improvements installed, a cash bond in the amount of one
hundred percent (100%) of the estimated required street improvements shall be
obtained. The cash bond shall be in the form of cash deposited with Ivins City
for the future construction by the city of the required street improvements.
The city shall bear the risk of any increased future costs of installing the
required improvements. If the city has not commenced the installation of the
required improvements for which a cash bond has been deposited with the city
within ten (10) years from the posting of the cash bond, the city shall refund
the cash bond, without interest thereon, to the developer/property owner who
deposited the cash bond with the city.
   (2)   Installation Of Improvements: The developer/property owner may install
improvements after approval of the final plat and recording of the development
agreement in lieu of bonding for required improvements. All improvements shall
be completed in accordance with approved construction drawings as required by
this title and shall be approved by the city engineer prior to the recording of
the final plat. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.802: RESTORATION BOND:
A restoration bond equal to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per disturbed acre
for the project or phase of the project being constructed with a minimum of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). This bond shall be posted in cash to
the city prior to construction of any improvements in accordance with the
recorded development agreement. This restoration bond is intended to protect
the city from unfinished improvements that may create safety hazards or
nuisance and debris problems. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.803: WARRANTY BOND:
   (1)   The amount of the warranty bond shall be ten percent (10%) of the
lesser of the:
      (a)   City engineer's original estimated cost of completion; or
      (b)   Developer/property owner's reasonable proven cost of completion.
   (2)   The warranty bond types are limited to the same types allowed for the
improvement bond. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
PART 9. BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
15.05.901: BUILDING PERMITS:
   (1)   Building permits may be issued for model homes and other on site
amenities if:
      (a)   The final plat has been approved by the city council, planning
commission, all affected government agencies, city departments and public
utilities; and
      (b)   Satisfactory security guarantees for completion of public
improvements have been submitted and approved or improvements have been
installed or are being installed in accordance with the recorded development
agreement.
   (2)   No other building permits will be issued, and the developer may not
begin construction on any off site or on site improvements or on any building
structure, until:
      (a)   The development agreement has been recorded and the final plat is
approved (and recorded if improvements are bonded) and the developer/property
owner and all approvals of the city council, planning commission, all affected
government agencies, city departments and public utilities have been given. The
development agreement shall contain satisfactory security guarantees for
installation of public improvements or provisions for the completion of
improvements.
      (b)   Water, sewer, storm drain and all other public utilities are
provided to the subject lot or parcel and have been approved and accepted by
the city and affected government agencies and public utilities.
      (c)   All public streets required for and contained in the development
have been improved with curb, gutter and road base placed, graded, compacted
and approved on entire road surface. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
15.05.902: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
It shall be unlawful for any developer or owner to sell any portion of an
approved development without informing the prospective buyer or builder that
occupancy may not be obtained until all permanent improvements are installed
and approved by the city. A certificate of occupancy may be issued upon
compliance with the following:
   (1)   All water, sewer, storm drain and all other public utilities are
provided to the subject lot or parcel and are approved and accepted by the city
and affected government agencies and public utilities;
   (2)   All public streets required for, and contained in, the development
have been improved with curb, gutter, sidewalk and paving according to city
standards;
   (3)   All improvements and requirements for the development, including, but
not limited to, fire protection, storm drainage, lighting and fencing have been
installed and approved according to city standards;
   (4)   All conditions and requirements of approval are satisfied, including
recording of plats, dedication of property and recording of agreements or
easements; and
   (5)   If any improvements have not been installed because of weather or
otherwise, a security agreement for the delayed improvements must be in place
with the city as required by section
15.05.801 of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-02, 2016)
CHAPTER 6
PHASED SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
Part 1. General Provisions
15.06.101: General
15.06.102: Purpose And Intent
Part 2. Phased Subdivision Master Plan
15.06.201: Application
15.06.202: Review Process
15.06.203: Standards For Review
15.06.204: Termination Of Approval
15.06.205: Preliminary Plan And Final Plat Required
15.06.206: Dedication Of Open Space Required
15.06.207: Development Agreements
15.06.208: Recordation Of Phased Subdivision Master Plan And Development
Agreement
PART 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
15.06.101: GENERAL:
Conventional subdivisions may be completed in phases. Prior to the application
and approval of a preliminary plan and final plat, as required in chapter 4 of
this title, a developer/property owner may submit a phased subdivision master
plan that will encompass the general development parameters for the entire
subdivision. The phased subdivision master plan will establish phases, proposed
uses and general development guidelines for all phases of the subdivision. The
established uses, development parameters and guidelines shall be included in a
development agreement as required in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 2006-02,
2006)
15.06.102: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of the phased subdivision master plan is to allow a
conceptual review and approval of general development parameters prior to
detailed reviews of a subdivision preliminary plan and final plat. The phased
subdivision master plan is intended to establish uses, phases and general
development guidelines for all phases of a phased subdivision. It is the intent
of this process to allow a developer and the city to master plan large scale,
multi- phased developments and proceed with the development approval, as well
as the actual construction, on a phased basis over a period of years. After
approval of the phased subdivision master plan, a preliminary plan and final
plat (as required in chapter 4 of this title) must be approved prior to
development of the subdivision. Required improvements are outlined in chapter 5
of this title. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
PART 2. PHASED SUBDIVISION MASTER PLAN
15.06.201: APPLICATION:
A phased subdivision master plan application shall be submitted, along with
applicable fees, and contain the following:
   (1)   Legal description of property and indication of gross area.
   (2)   Nature of the applicant's interest in the land to be developed.
   (3)   All persons owning or having interest in land proposed for
development, including easements, tenants, licenses, lien holders or other
interests.
   (4)   A generalized location map showing surrounding land use, zoning and
traffic circulation.
   (5)   An analysis of the existing site conditions which includes:
      (a)   Topographic contours with intervals of no more than two feet (2'),
to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the property boundary;
      (b)   Location and extent of major vegetative cover (if any);
      (c)   Location and extent of perennial or intermittent streams or water
ponding areas;
      (d)   Existing drainage and irrigation flows and patterns;
      (e)   Natural features such as rock formations; and
      (f)   Other information that may be relevant to the property.
   (6)   Open space expressed as percentage of total area, as well as in acres.
   (7)   A land use plan at a scale not smaller than one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100'), equivalent zoning categories, all arterial and
collector street circulation elements, pedestrian and/or bicycle circulation,
open spaces and recreational areas.
   (8)   Plans indicating the approximate alignment and sizing of water lines,
sanitary sewers and storm drains, surface drainage, as well as easements for
all utilities, if necessary.
   (9)   Conceptual landscaping plans in accordance with the design guidelines.
   (10)   A traffic analysis report, if deemed necessary by the city and/or
required by the city transportation master plan.
   (11)   Phasing plan indicating the areas to be phased and the sequence of
future development. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.06.202: REVIEW PROCESS:
   (1)   Staff Review And Report: The phased subdivision master plan
application will be reviewed by the zoning administrator for general compliance
with this title, the standard specifications for design and construction,
design guidelines and all applicable ordinances. If the application is not
complete or not in general compliance, the zoning administrator shall notify
the applicant in writing and specify the deficiencies in the application. When
the application is complete and in general compliance, the zoning administrator
shall forward the completed application to the technical review committee,
other city staff and departments, utility board, and affected government
entities and public utilities to obtain comment regarding the application. City
staff and the utility board will review the phased subdivision master plan,
make site visits, discuss engineering issues, check compliance with the general
plan and city ordinances to determine the adequacy of public facilities. The
zoning administrator shall prepare a staff report which shall include all
review comments by the technical review committee, city departments and all
other agencies required to review the application and submittals. The zoning
administrator shall forward the completed application and the staff report to
the planning commission.
   (2)   Planning Commission Public Hearing: Once all application requirements
have been met and the staff report completed, the application will be scheduled
on the planning commission agenda for a public hearing. Notice of the public
hearing shall be sent to all property owners of record in the Washington County
recorder's office within three hundred feet (300') of the property line of the
proposed subdivision. Notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general
circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. The planning
commission shall receive public comment at the public hearing regarding the
proposed phased subdivision master plan.
   (3)   Planning Commission Review: If the planning commission finds that the
proposed plan complies with the requirements of this title, finds that there
are adequate public utilities and services to support the proposed development,
and is satisfied with the preliminary plan of the subdivision, it shall approve
the plan, or approve the plan with conditions. If the planning commission finds
that the proposed plan does not meet the requirements of this title or other
applicable ordinances, it shall deny such plan.
   (4)   City Council Review: Once the planning commission has approved the
phased subdivision master plan, the application will be scheduled on the city
council meeting agenda. If the city council finds that the proposed plan
complies with the requirements of this chapter, finds that there are adequate
public utilities and services to support the proposed development, and is
satisfied with the preliminary plan of the subdivision, it shall approve the
plan, or approve the plan with conditions. If the city council finds that the
proposed plan does not meet the requirements of this title or other applicable
ordinances, it shall deny such plan. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.06.203: STANDARDS FOR REVIEW:
   (1)   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the general plan, zoning
ordinance, this title, design guidelines, standard specifications and any other
applicable ordinances.
   (2)   The proposed water source shall have adequate capacity and a method of
distribution within the subdivision. If applicable, an agreement to provide
water from the water provider and/or evidence of availability of water may be
required.
   (3)   The proposed sewage system must meet state and city standards and
regulations.
   (4)   The proposed methods for fire protection must comply with this title
and other city regulations.
   (5)   The proposed uses for the property must be appropriate to the zoning
district.
   (6)   The layout/design must be responsive to the constraints of topography,
soil types, watercourses, floodplains, visual impacts and preservation of
views.
   (7)   Adequate public services must be available to meet the needs of the
proposed subdivision, including roads, gas, electric, telephone, mail, police
and fire protection, schools and recreation. If, after reviewing the
application, making site visits and examining materials submitted by the
developers, the city staff and the utility board determine that adequate public
improvements are not available and will not be available by the time of final
plat approval, then one of the following alternatives may be elected, at the
discretion of the city council, to assure that adequate public services are
available at the time of occupancy:
      (a)   Allow the developer to voluntarily construct those public
improvements which are necessary to service development, as determined by city
staff and utility board, by entering into an appropriate form of development
agreement which shall include, if applicable, provisions to recoup any expenses
incurred above and beyond those reasonable and necessary for, or related to,
the need created by, or the benefit conferred upon, the proposed development,
and the method and conditions upon which expenses may be recouped. Any
agreement authorized by this subsection must be executed prior to the
construction of the improvements and in compliance with the development
agreement requirements of this title;
      (b)   Require the timing, sequencing and phasing of the proposed
development consistent with the availability of adequate public improvements;
      (c)   Defer preliminary plan and final plat approval and the issuance of
building permits until all necessary public improvements are adequate and
available; or
      (d)   Deny the master plan approval and allow the applicant to reapply
when adequate public improvements are available.
   (8)   The planning commission and city council may request additional
information and/or provide comments, directions and suggestions to the
applicant. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.06.204: TERMINATION OF APPROVAL:
Failure to submit a preliminary plan on the first phase, as approved in the
phased subdivision master plan and development agreement, within one year of
the approval of the phased subdivision master plan shall terminate all
proceedings and render the phased subdivision master plan null and void. (Ord.
2006-02, 2006)
15.06.205: PRELIMINARY PLAN AND FINAL PLAT REQUIRED:
A preliminary plan and final plat application must (as outlined in chapter 4 of
this title) be approved prior to the development of the subdivision. (Ord.
2006-02, 2006)
15.06.206: DEDICATION OF OPEN SPACE REQUIRED:
All open space, including lands designated as trails, easements, buffers,
parks, medians, and any other open space, shall be deeded as part of the phased
subdivision master plan development agreement. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
15.06.207: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS:
Requirements for subdivision development agreements are set forth in Title 16,
Chapter 9 of the Ivins City Code. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 2023)
15.06.208: RECORDATION OF PHASED SUBDIVISION MASTER PLAN AND DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT:
The approved phased subdivision master plan and development agreement shall be
recorded, and shall be included in the subdivision plat records of the
Washington County recorder's office. Recordation by the city shall only take
place after all of the necessary signatures are obtained, all approvals given,
and all applicable bonds and fees have been posted with the zoning
administrator. (Ord. 2006-02, 2006)
TITLE 16
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, DECLARATION OF INTENT AND EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION:
16.01.101: Short Title
16.01.102: Authority
16.01.103: Declaration
16.01.104: Purpose
16.01.105: Applicability
16.01.106: Conflict
16.01.107: Permits And Licenses To Conform
16.01.108: Effective Date
16.01.109: Omissions Not Waiver
16.01.110: Repealer And Effect
16.01.101: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the IVINS CITY ZONING ORDINANCE (hereinafter
"ordinance", "the ordinance", "this ordinance", "zoning ordinance", "Ivins
zoning ordinance", "this title" or "land use ordinance"). This title shall be
codified as title 16 of the Ivins City Municipal Code (hereinafter "this
Code"). (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.01.102: AUTHORITY:
The City Council adopts this title pursuant to the Municipal Land Use,
Development and Management Act, as provided by Utah Code Annotated title 10,
chapter 9a, as amended (hereinafter "the Act") and all other authorities and
provisions of State and Federal statutory and common law, as applicable. This
title is a land use ordinance, as authorized and identified by the Act. (Ord.
2005-13, 2005)
16.01.103: DECLARATION:
This title provides for the establishment of zoning districts, with associated
land use requirements and standards, for the guidance, management and
regulation of land uses, buildings and structures, and other related activities
occurring within the Municipal boundaries of the City. This title shall be
interpreted to be consistent with, and to meet all requirements of the Act.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.01.104: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title shall conform to the purposes stated in the Act, as
amended, namely: to provide for the health, safety, and welfare, and promote
the prosperity, improve the morals, peace and good order, comfort, convenience,
and aesthetics of the City and its present and future inhabitants and
businesses, to protect the tax base, to secure economy in governmental
expenditures, to foster the State's agricultural and other industries, to
protect both urban and nonurban development, to protect and ensure access to
sunlight for solar energy devices, to provide fundamental fairness in land use
regulation, and to protect property values. (Ord. 2017-06, 2017)
16.01.105: APPLICABILITY:
   (1)   Applications determined complete shall be processed, reviewed and
approved or denied, subject to the provisions of this title, and all amendments
thereto, and all other applicable ordinances of the City, in effect at the time
the application is determined to be complete by the Zoning Administrator, as
required by chapter 13 of this title.
   (2)   No building or structure shall be erected, and no existing building or
structure shall be moved, altered or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or
premises be used, designed for, or intended to be used for, any purpose or in
any manner other than as allowed by this title.
   (3)   This title shall apply to all lands located within the Municipal
boundaries of the City, unless exempted by this title or other lawful
exemption.
   (4)   This title shall be held to be the minimum requirements necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City, and
achieve the purposes of this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.01.106: CONFLICT:
This title shall not nullify any laws, ordinances or requirements that are more
restrictive, but shall prevail over any laws, ordinances or requirements that
are less restrictive. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.01.107: PERMITS AND LICENSES TO CONFORM:
All Land Use Authorities, as identified herein, with the authority to issue
approvals, permits or licenses required by this title, shall require that such
approvals, permits or licenses conform to the provisions of this title and
shall not issue any approvals, permits or licenses for uses, buildings or
structures for any purpose in conflict with the provisions of this title. (Ord.
2017-06, 2017)
16.01.108: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This title was adopted by ordinance 2005-13, following its passage by the City
Council on June 2, 2005. As provided by the terms of ordinance 2005-13, this
title shall take effect on July 1, 2005. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.01.109: OMISSIONS NOT WAIVER:
An omission to specify or enumerate in this title those provisions of general
law applicable to all Utah cities shall not be construed to be a waiver of the
benefits of any such provisions. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.01.110: REPEALER AND EFFECT:
Upon its adoption by the City Council and upon its effective date, this title
shall repeal all provisions of the City zoning ordinance existing on the
effective date hereof, and shall henceforth govern and control the use of all
lands lying within the Municipal boundaries of the City.
This title shall be construed to carry out the purposes set forth herein, and
the Act, and to avoid conflict with the laws of the United States of America,
the State of Utah, or any other limitations imposed by law. If any chapter,
section, subsection, provision, sentence or clause of this title is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
determination shall not impair the validity of the remainder of this title,
which shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 2
INTERPRETATION OF REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
16.02.101: Interpretation
16.02.102: Administrative Interpretations
16.02.103: Rules For Interpretation Of Zoning District Boundaries
16.02.101: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying this title, the requirements contained herein are
declared the minimum requirements for the purposes set forth in this title and
the act. The provisions of this title shall be:
   (1)   Liberally construed in favor of the city.
   (2)   Deemed to neither limit nor repeal any other powers granted by the
act, or any other state or federal statutes.
   (3)   Applied and interpreted as follows, except where the context clearly
requires otherwise:
      (a)   The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory. The words "should" and
"may" are permissive.
      (b)   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other
tenses or derivative forms.
      (c)   Words used in the singular shall include the plural; words used in
the plural shall include the singular.
      (d)   Words referencing a gender shall extend and be applied to the other
gender and shall be considered gender neutral.
      (e)   In the event of a conflict between the text of this title and any
maps, illustrations, captions, figures or other material, the text of this
title shall apply and control.
      (f)   The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified
examples, but is intended to provide guidance and to be illustrative only.
      (g)   The word "and" indicates that all connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
      (h)   The word "or" indicates that one or more of the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply.
      (i)   The words "either or" indicate that the connected terms,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.02.102: ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATIONS:
   (1)   Purpose: To promote day to day efficiencies in the administration and
implementation of this title, and where ambiguity, conflicting provisions or
confusion may exist in any provision or requirement of this title, this section
is provided to allow and authorize the city attorney to make interpretations of
this title, as needed, guided by the purposes set forth herein and applied to a
specific circumstance.
   (2)   Authority: The city attorney is authorized to render interpretations
of the text of this title.
   (3)   Initiation: Any person may request an administrative interpretation of
any text provision of this title by presenting an application for an
administrative interpretation.
   (4)   Procedure: An application for an administrative interpretation shall
be considered and processed as provided in this chapter:
      (a)   A complete application shall be submitted to the zoning
administrator.
      (b)   After an application is determined to be complete, the city
attorney shall review the application and make an interpretation in accordance
with the standards set forth in this chapter.
      (c)   After making a decision, the city attorney shall provide a written
copy of the administrative interpretation to the applicant. A written copy of
the administrative interpretation of the city attorney shall also be maintained
in the office of the city recorder.
   (5)   Standards For Making Administrative Interpretations: The city attorney
shall apply the following standards in making an administrative interpretation:
      (a)   The administrative interpretation shall not have the effect of
adding or removing any provision of this title.
      (b)   The city attorney shall not make any interpretation on the location
of any zoning district boundary, such interpretations being provided by section
16.02.103 of this chapter.
      (c)   An administrative interpretation shall be consistent with the
purposes of this title and any previously rendered administrative
interpretations, based on similar facts.
      (d)   An administrative interpretation concerning a use interpretation
shall not allow the establishment of a use that is substantially different or
allow any prohibited use in the zoning district.
      (e)   No use interpretation shall permit the establishment of any use
that would be inconsistent with the purposes of the zoning district in which it
would be located.
   (6)   Effect Of Interpretation: An administrative interpretation shall only
apply to the property for which an interpretation is given. An interpretation
finding a use to be a class I, class II, class III, class IV or class V use
shall not authorize the establishment of the use but may authorize the filing
of land use applications necessary for any approvals, permits or licenses, as
may be required.
   (7)   Appeal: Any person adversely affected by an interpretation of any text
provision of this title, rendered by the city attorney, may appeal that
interpretation by filing a written appeal as provided in chapter 30 of this
title.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2016-06, 2016; Ord. 2024-11, 2024)
16.02.103: RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
In the event of the need to determine the location of the boundary of a zoning
district, the commission shall have the authority and jurisdiction to render a
written determination of the boundary of a zoning district. The commission
shall take into consideration the following criteria in rendering such
determination:
   (1)   The policies and development standards pertaining to such zoning
district.
   (2)   In areas divided into lots, a zoning district boundary shall follow
the boundary of a lot, unless clearly intended to divide a lot for reasons of
topography, landform or other natural or manmade feature.
   (3)   In areas not subdivided into lots, wherever a zoning district is
indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a right of way, the depth of
such strips shall be in accordance with dimensions measured at right angles
from the centerline of the right of way, and the length of frontage shall be in
accordance with dimensions measured from section, quarter section or division
lines, or centerlines of rights of way, unless otherwise indicated.
   (4)   Where a zoning district boundary follows a creek, stream, watercourse,
drainage channel, floodway or other natural or manmade feature, such boundary
shall be deemed to be the centerline of such creek, stream, watercourse,
drainage channel, floodway or other natural or manmade feature, unless clearly
intended to do otherwise.
   (5)   Where a zoning district boundary follows the right of way of any road,
street, trail or other public or private right of way or easement, such
boundary shall be deemed to be the centerline of such road, street, trail or
other public or private right of way or easement, unless clearly intended to do
otherwise. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 3
LAND USE AUTHORITIES AND DECISION MAKING
SECTION:
16.03.101: Land Use Authorities Provided
16.03.102: City Council
16.03.103: Planning Commission
16.03.104: Board Of Adjustment (Rep. by Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.03.105: Sensitive Lands Committee
16.03.106: Zoning Administrator
16.03.107: Technical Review Committee
16.03.108: Support
16.03.109: Public Meetings And Public Hearings
16.03.110: Provision Of Administrative Guidelines
16.03.111: Computation Of Time
16.03.112: Fractional Numbers
16.03.113: Procedural Irregularities
16.03.114: Determination Of Completeness Of Land Use Applications
16.03.115: Continuing Validity Of Land Use Application Approvals
16.03.116: Land Use Authority Compliance With Land Use Ordinances
16.03.117: Land Use Approvals Required To Comply With Land Use Ordinances
16.03.118: Acquiring Property
16.03.119: Exactions
16.03.101: LAND USE AUTHORITIES PROVIDED:
The Land Use Authorities identified by this title shall have responsibilities
for implementing and administering the General Plan and all land use
ordinances, including this title, as allowed by the Act, and provided herein.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.102: CITY COUNCIL:
   (1)   Powers And Duties: For purposes of this title, the City Council shall:
      (a)   As the legislative body of the City, adopt or amend the General
Plan and all elements of the General Plan, including but not limited to a land
use element, a transportation and traffic circulation element, and a moderate
income housing element.
      (b)   As the legislative body of the City, adopt or amend land use
ordinances, including this title. (Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
      (c)   Approve, approve with conditions, or deny all Class V use
applications.
      (d)   Approve, approve with requirements, or deny all special exception
applications, as provided by chapter 28 of this title.
      (e)   Render, or appoint a designee to render, a determination when an
applicant asserts a deprivation of property, or has been subject to a taking of
property without just compensation, or has asserted some other constitutional
invalidity, as provided by chapter 31 of this title.
      (f)   Establish a fee schedule by resolution for all approvals, permits
and licenses required by the land use ordinances, which fee schedule may be
included in the City consolidated fee schedule.
      (g)   Take such other actions authorized by the Act or required by this
title and not expressly delegated to any other Land Use Authority. (Ord. 2014-
05, 2014)
   (2)   Effective Date Of Decisions: All decisions of the City Council, made
under this title, shall take effect on the date of the meeting when the
decision is made, unless a different date is designated in the rules of the
City Council, or a different date is designated by the City Council in
approving any ordinance, resolution or motion.
   (3)   Meeting Minutes: The minutes of all meetings of the City Council shall
be filed in the Office of the City Recorder. All such records shall be
available for public review and access in accordance with the State Government
Records and Access Management Act. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.103: PLANNING COMMISSION:
The Planning Commission (hereinafter the "commission") was heretofore created
and established by the City Council pursuant to the Act.
   (1)   Powers And Duties: The commission shall be an advisory body to the
City Council on legislative matters pertaining to the General Plan and land use
ordinances. The commission shall:
      (a)   Prepare, or cause to be prepared, the general plan, any proposed
plan element, any amendments thereto, and to submit the proposed plan, element
or amendments to the city council.
      (b)   Prepare or cause to be prepared all land use ordinances, including
this title, zoning district maps, official maps, and any amendments thereto,
and to submit such land use ordinances, or amendments thereto to the city
council.
      (c)   Review and recommend approval or denial of all applications for a
general plan amendment and land use ordinance amendment.
      (d)   Review and approve, approve with requirements, or deny all class
III use applications, except those class III use applications proposed on
sensitive lands areas.
      (e)   Review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny all class IV
use applications.
      (f)   Review and recommend approval or denial of all applications for a
class V use application.
      (g)   Review and recommend approval or denial of all special exception
applications.
      (h)   Review and recommend approval or denial of all subdivision
applications to the city council, as authorized by the subdivision ordinance.
      (i)   Determine and render a written determination of the boundary of a
zoning district, as provided by chapter 2 of this title.
      (j)   Adopt bylaws, policies and procedures for the conduct of the duties
and meetings of the commission, for the consideration of applications and for
any other purposes deemed necessary by the commission; provided, that such
bylaws, policies and procedures are approved by the city council before taking
effect.
      (k)   Advise the city council on other matters, as the city council may
direct. (Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
   (2)   Membership, Appointment, Removal, Terms And Vacancies:
      (a)   The commission shall consist of five (5) members.
      (b)   Commission members shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice
and consent of the city council.
      (c)   Commission members may be removed by the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the city council, without cause.
      (d)   The members of the commission shall be residents of the city. No
member of the commission shall be an elected official or employee of the city.
      (e)   Among other reasons, a commission member may be removed if three
(3) consecutive or twenty five percent (25%) of the commission meetings in a
calendar year are missed. If the absence of a commission member is due to an
extended illness or vacation, the commission member is responsible to provide
written notice to the city manager prior to the time the absence will occur. If
such notice is given, these removal requirements do not apply.
      (f)   Members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except
that the city council may fix per diem compensation for members of the
commission, based on necessary and reasonable expenses and on meetings actually
attended. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
      (g)   All members of the commission shall serve at the pleasure of the
mayor and city council for a term of four (4) years. No member shall serve more
than three (3) consecutive terms. Terms shall begin on April 1 of each calendar
year. Members' terms are to be staggered so that not more than two (2) terms
shall expire in any give year. A commission member shall not be automatically
reappointed to a second or third term. (Ord. 2015-01, 2015)
      (h)   At an annual organizational meeting to be held the first regular
meeting in April, and at other times as required, the members of the commission
shall elect one of their members as chair and one of their members as vice
chair. In the absence of the chair, the vice chair shall act as chair and shall
have all powers of the chair. The chair and vice chair shall serve a term of
one year. No member shall serve as chair for more than two (2) consecutive
terms.
      (i)   The chair, or in the chair's absence the vice chair, shall be in
charge of all proceedings before the commission, and shall take such actions as
necessary to preserve order and the integrity of all proceedings before the
commission.
      (j)   Commission vacancies occurring for any reason shall be filled by
the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. Vacancies on the
commission occurring in ways other than through the expiration of terms shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.
      (k)   Members of the commission shall be deemed "volunteers" for the
purposes of city ordinances, rules, regulations and policies concerning
personnel; provided, however, they shall be included in the definition of
"employee" for the purposes of the Utah governmental immunity act.
   (3)   Recording Secretary: The city manager shall assign a recording
secretary to serve the commission. The recording secretary shall keep the
minutes of all proceedings of the commission, which minutes shall be the
official record of all proceedings before the commission, attested to by a
majority vote of the members of the commission. The minutes of all meetings of
the commission shall be filed in the office of the city recorder. All such
records shall be available for public review and access in accordance with the
state government records and access management act.
   (4)   Quorum And Necessary Vote: No meeting of the commission shall be
called to order, nor may any business be transacted, without a quorum
consisting of at least three (3) members of the commission being present. The
chair shall be included for the purpose of establishing a quorum and shall act
as a voting member of the commission. All actions of the commission shall
require the vote of a majority of the total members of the commission. The
commission shall transmit reports of its decisions and recommendations to the
city council. Any member of the commission may also make a concurring or
dissenting report or recommendation to the city council.
   (5)   Effective Date Of Decisions: All decisions of the commission shall
become effective on the date of the meeting when the decision is made unless a
different date is designated in the rules of the commission, or the commission
designates a different date when the decision is made. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
   (6)   Meetings, Hearings And Procedure:
      (a)   The commission shall establish a regular meeting schedule.
      (b)   Special meetings may be requested by a majority vote of the
commission, or by the chair of the commission.
      (c)   When a matter is postponed due to lack of a quorum, the chair shall
reschedule the matter to the next available commission meeting. The recording
secretary shall notify all interested parties and all members of the commission
of the date when the commission will hear the rescheduled matter.
      (d)   Rules of order and procedure governing all public meetings of the
commission shall be as set forth in title 2, chapter 6 of this code. (Ord.
2011-10, 2011)
16.03.104: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.03.105: SENSITIVE LANDS COMMITTEE:
For the purposes of this title, and to promote the proper implementation of the
sensitive lands overlay district (SL), as provided by chapter 8 of this title,
there is hereby created and established the Ivins City sensitive lands
committee (hereinafter the "sensitive lands committee").
   (1)   Powers And Duties: The sensitive lands committee shall have the
following powers and duties:
      (a)   Recommend to the commission and city council amendments and
revisions to the general plan, or any plan element, and to submit the proposed
plan, element or amendments to the commission and city council.
      (b)   Recommend to the commission and city council amendments and
revisions to this title and other land use ordinances, and to submit the
proposed amendments and revisions to the commission and city council.
      (c)   Approve, approve with requirements, or deny the following:
         (i)   All class I use applications proposed on any sensitive lands
areas.
         (ii)   All class II use applications proposed on any sensitive lands
areas.
         (iii)   All class III use applications proposed on any sensitive lands
areas.
      (d)   Recommend to the commission and city council approval, approval
with conditions, or denial of all class IV use and class V use applications
proposed on any sensitive lands areas.
      (e)   Recommend to the commission and city council approval, approval
with conditions, or denial of all subdivision applications proposed on any
sensitive lands areas.
      (f)   Adopt bylaws, policies and procedures for the conduct of the duties
and meetings of the sensitive lands committee, for the consideration of
applications and for any other purposes deemed necessary by the sensitive lands
committee, provided such bylaws, policies and procedures are approved by the
city council before taking effect.
      (g)   Advise the city council on other matters as the city council
directs.
   (2)   Membership, Appointment, Removal, Terms And Vacancies:
      (a)   The sensitive lands committee shall consist of six (6) members. The
sensitive lands committee shall include the zoning administrator, two (2)
residents of the city, and three (3) professional experts with experience in
sensitive lands matters in any of the following fields: civil engineering, city
planning, architecture, landscape architecture and geology.
      (b)   Sensitive lands committee members shall be appointed by the mayor,
with the advice and consent of the city council.
      (c)   Sensitive lands committee members may be removed by the mayor, with
the advice and consent of the city council, without cause.
      (d)   Among other reasons, a sensitive lands committee member may be
removed if three (3) consecutive or twenty five percent (25%) of the committee
meetings in a calendar year are missed. If the absence of a sensitive lands
committee member is due to an extended illness or vacation, the committee
member is responsible to provide written notice to the city manager prior to
the time the absence will occur. If such notice is given, these removal
requirements do not apply.
      (e)   Members of the sensitive lands committee may be compensated, based
upon meetings actually attended and reasonable and necessary expenses, as
determined by the city council. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
      (f)   All members of the sensitive lands committee shall serve at the
pleasure of the mayor and city council for a term of four (4) years. A
sensitive lands committee member shall not be automatically reappointed to a
second or third term. (Ord. 2015-01, 2015)
      (g)   At an annual organizational meeting to be held the first regular
meeting in April, and at other times as required, the members of the sensitive
lands committee shall elect one of their members as chair and one of their
members as vice chair. In the absence of the chair, the vice chair shall act as
chair and shall have all powers of the chair. The chair shall serve a term of
one year. No member shall serve as chair for more than two (2) consecutive
terms.
      (h)   The chair, or in the chair's absence the vice chair, shall be in
charge of all proceedings before the sensitive lands committee, and shall take
such actions as necessary to preserve order and the integrity of all
proceedings before the sensitive lands committee. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
      (i)   Sensitive lands committee vacancies occurring for any reason shall
be filled by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord.
2015-01, 2015)
      (j)   Members of the sensitive lands committee shall be deemed
"volunteers" for the purposes of city ordinances, rules, regulations and
policies concerning personnel; provided, however, they shall be included in the
definition of "employee" for the purposes of the Utah governmental immunity
act.
   (3)   Recording Secretary: The city manager shall assign a recording
secretary to serve the sensitive lands committee. The recording secretary shall
keep the minutes of all proceedings of the sensitive lands committee, which
minutes shall be the official record of all proceedings before the sensitive
lands committee, attested to by a majority vote of at least four (4) members of
the committee. The minutes of all meetings of the sensitive lands committee
shall be filed in the office of the city recorder. All such records shall be
available for public review and access in accordance with the state government
records and access management act.
   (4)   Quorum And Necessary Vote: No meeting of the sensitive lands committee
may be called to order, nor may any business be conducted, without a quorum
consisting of at least four (4) members of the sensitive lands committee being
present. The chair shall be included for the purposes of establishing a quorum
and shall act as a voting member of the sensitive lands committee. All actions
of the sensitive lands committee shall require the concurring vote of at least
four (4) members of the sensitive lands committee.
   (5)   Effective Date Of Decisions: All decisions of the sensitive lands
committee shall become effective on the date of the meeting when the decision
is made unless a different date is designated in the rules of the sensitive
lands committee, or the sensitive lands committee designates a different date
when the decision is made. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
   (6)   Meetings And Procedure:
      (a)   The sensitive lands committee shall establish a regular meeting
schedule.
      (b)   Special meetings may be requested by a majority vote of the
sensitive lands committee, or by the chair of the sensitive lands committee.
      (c)   When a matter is postponed due to lack of a quorum, the chair shall
reschedule the matter to the next available sensitive lands committee meeting.
The recording secretary shall notify all interested parties and all members of
the sensitive lands committee of the date when the rescheduled matter will be
heard by the sensitive lands committee.
      (d)   Rules of order and procedure governing all public meetings of the
sensitive lands committee shall be as set forth in title 2, chapter 6 of this
code. (Ord. 2011-10, 2011)
16.03.106: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
   (1)   Designated: The city manager, with the advice and consent of the mayor
and city council, shall designate a person to carry out the administrative
responsibilities of the land use ordinances, including this title. The person
so designated is referred to herein as the "zoning administrator". It is the
responsibility of the zoning administrator to ensure all procedures and other
provisions of the land use ordinances are consistently and equitably applied.
   (2)   Powers And Duties: The zoning administrator shall:
      (a)   Ensure all procedures and other provisions of the land use
ordinances are consistently and equitably applied.
      (b)   Approve, approve with requirements, or deny the following
applications if such are found to comply with the requirements of all land use
ordinances, adopted building code, and all other applicable local, state and
federal requirements:
         (i)   Class I use applications, except those class I uses proposed on
sensitive lands areas.
         (ii)   Class II use applications, except those class II uses proposed
on sensitive lands areas.
      (c)   Render interpretations of the text of this title, as provided by
section
 16.02.102 of this title.
      (d)   Carry out and complete determinations of application completeness
and fulfill all other duties as provided by section
16.13.106 of this title.
      (e)   Carry out all other functions, duties, tasks and actions, as
identified herein. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.107: TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE:
   (1)   Establishment: A technical review committee (hereinafter the "TRC")
may be established and created by the city manager.
   (2)   Purpose: The purpose of the TRC is to assure that a proposed use,
activity, building or structure is consistent with the general plan and
complies with the requirements of this title, all other land use ordinances,
and all other applicable ordinances and provisions.
   (3)   Membership: The TRC shall consist of persons representing city
departments, and other persons as may be designated by the city manager,
responsible for reviewing and coordinating applications for any land use
application approval, permit or license.
   (4)   Powers And Duties: The TRC shall act under the direction of the city
manager and shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
      (a)   Before a land use authority considers any application, the TRC may
review the application to determine its consistency with the general plan and
compliance with all applicable ordinances.
      (b)   The TRC may provide a report identifying the consistency with the
general plan and compliance with all applicable ordinances for any application
for any approval, permit or license, prior to a decision by a land use
authority.
      (c)   The TRC may present findings for consideration by the land use
authority reviewing and considering any application.
      (d)   The TRC may establish procedures for the preparation and conduct of
TRC meetings, the scheduling of meetings, and the conduct of meetings and field
trips, such procedures being reviewed and approved by the city manager before
taking effect. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.108: SUPPORT:
The officers and staff of the city may provide support and assistance to the
city land use authorities, as required, to effectively implement the general
plan, this title, and all other land use ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.109: PUBLIC MEETINGS AND PUBLIC HEARINGS:
All meetings and hearings of all land use authorities shall comply with the
provisions of the land use ordinances for such meetings and hearings as
provided by chapter 10 of this title, and the requirements of Utah Code
Annotated, as amended, for open and public meetings. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.110: PROVISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDELINES:
The city council and/or city manager may provide guidelines, standards,
reference materials, forms or other documents to assist the public, applicants,
zoning administrator, or other staff in providing applications and interpreting
and administering the general plan, this title, and all other land use
ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.111: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
All times, identified herein, shall be computed using calendar days, except
that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be
excluded and time computed to the next regular business day following the
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. (Ord.
2005-13, 2005)
16.03.112: FRACTIONAL NUMBERS:
In determining compliance with the numerical requirements of this title, any
computation or measurement resulting in a fractional number, except density
calculations, shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. Density
calculations shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.03.113: PROCEDURAL IRREGULARITIES:
   (1)   Validity Of Action: Notwithstanding any provision of this title which
sets forth a procedure for any matter herein, no action, inaction or
recommendation regarding the matter which is the subject of the procedure shall
be void or invalid or set aside by a court due to any error (including, but not
limited to, any irregularity, informality, neglect or omission) which pertains
to a petition, application, notice, decision, finding, record, hearing, report,
recommendation or any other procedural matter whatsoever, unless:
      (a)   The procedure is required by state or federal law; and
      (b)   In an examination of the entire circumstances, including the
evidence of record, the court is of the opinion that the procedural error
complained of was prejudicial to a substantial right of the complainant as
shown by the following:
         (i)   Had the error not occurred, the decision made pursuant to the
procedure would have been different; and
         (ii)   Because of the error, the complainant suffered an injury for
which relief must be given.
   (2)   Presumption Of Validity: The court shall presume that action taken
pursuant to a procedure was done in good faith and shall not presume that an
error is prejudicial or that an injury occurred. The complainant shall have the
burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence to show that an error is
prejudicial or that an injury occurred. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.114: DETERMINATION OF COMPLETENESS OF LAND USE APPLICATIONS:
A land use application is considered submitted and complete when the
application is provided in a form that complies with the requirements of the
applicable land use ordinances and all fees have been paid, as determined by
the zoning administrator, as provided by chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2005-
13, 2005)
16.03.115: CONTINUING VALIDITY OF LAND USE APPLICATION APPROVALS:
   (1)   The continuing validity of an approval of a land use application shall
be conditioned upon the applicant proceeding after approval to implement the
approval with reasonable diligence.
   (2)   The validity of an approval of a land use application shall terminate
one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the approval by the land use
authority, unless an alternative date is specifically provided by the
applicable land use ordinance, or the applicant has proceeded with reasonable
diligence to implement the approval.
   (3)   An approval action by a land use authority approval shall be invalid
and null and void if a use is not conducted, or a building or structure is
established in violation of any requirements of all land use ordinances,
requirements or conditions of approval. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.116: LAND USE AUTHORITY COMPLIANCE WITH LAND USE ORDINANCES:
Each land use authority of the city, as identified herein, shall comply with
the terms and standards of applicable land use ordinances, including this
title, and shall comply with the mandatory provisions of such land use
ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.117: LAND USE APPROVALS REQUIRED TO COMPLY WITH LAND USE ORDINANCES:
The approval of any land use application shall continue to comply with all
requirements, conditions, terms and standards of approval, as required by the
land use authority, and shall continue to comply with the mandatory provisions
of all land use ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.118: ACQUIRING PROPERTY:
   (1)   The city may acquire property through purchase, gift, voluntary
dedication or eminent domain.
   (2)   The city may require the dedication and improvement of a street or
other facility if the street or other facility is found necessary by the city
because of a proposed development. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.03.119: EXACTIONS:
A land use authority may impose an exaction, or exactions, on a land use
application if:
   (1)   An essential link exists between a legitimate governmental interest
and each exaction; and
   (2)   Each exaction is roughly proportionate, both in nature and in extent,
to the impact of the proposed development. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 4
LAND USE ORDINANCE APPLICATIONS AND DECISION STANDARDS
SECTION:
16.04.101: Various Applications Provided
16.04.102: Decision Making Standards
16.04.101: VARIOUS APPLICATIONS PROVIDED:
This title provides for a number of land use applications, including, but not
limited to, General Plan amendment applications, land use ordinance amendment
applications, zoning districts map amendment applications, use applications,
variance applications, special exception applications, various appeals
applications and building permit applications. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.04.102: DECISION MAKING STANDARDS:
The decision making standards set forth in this chapter are provided based on
the distinction between legislative and administrative proceedings. Legislative
proceedings establish new law while administrative proceedings implement a law
already in existence.
   (1)   Legislative Proceedings: The City Council is hereby identified to be
the only Land Use Authority of the City authorized to render a decision on any
legislative matter and subject to a legislative proceeding. The following types
of applications are hereby declared legislative matters and subject to
legislative proceedings:
      (a)   General Plan amendment applications.
      (b)   Land use ordinance amendment applications, including zoning
ordinance and subdivision ordinance amendment applications.
      (c)   Zoning map amendment applications (rezones), including site-
specific rezones.
      (d)   Official map amendment applications.
      (e)   Temporary land use regulations.
      (f)   Combined land use map and zoning map amendments. (Ord. 2017-06,
2017)
   (2)   Legislative Proceedings; Decisions Standards: A decision regarding a
legislative proceeding shall be based on the "reasonably debatable" standard:
      (a)   The City Council shall determine what action, if any, in its
judgment and legislative discretion, is necessary to reasonably promote the
interest and general welfare of the City and its residents.
      (b)   In rendering a decision for a legislative proceeding, the City
Council may consider the following:
         (i)   Reports, information and testimony presented at public hearings
or meetings when the legislative matter was considered; and
         (ii)   The personal knowledge of Council members regarding the various
conditions and activities bearing on the issue, provided those items of
personal knowledge are stated and discussed on the record when the legislative
matter was considered.
      (c)   The public record of the meeting when the legislative matter is
considered shall include why the City Council believes its decision is in the
interest of the general welfare of the City and its residents. (Ord. 2017-02,
2017)
   (3)   Administrative Proceedings: The following types of applications are
hereby declared to be administrative matters and subject to administrative
proceedings:
      (a)   Administrative interpretations.
      (b)   Class I, II, III, IV, and V use applications.
      (c)   Special exception applications.
      (d)   Applications for determinations of a legal noncomplying structure,
noncomplying structure and other nonconformities.
      (e)   Variance applications.
      (f)   Building permit applications.
      (g)   All other applications for any necessary approval, permit or
license required by the provisions of this title, and all other land use
ordinances, and not identified to be a legislative proceeding, as identified by
this chapter.
   (4)   Administrative Proceedings; Decision Standards: All decisions
regarding an administrative proceeding shall be based on the "substantial
evidence" standard, including, as a minimum, the following:
      (a)   A statement of the standards for approval applicable to the
application;
      (b)   A summary of the facts and evidence presented to the Land Use
Authority;
      (c)   A statement of findings of fact or other factors considered,
including the basis upon which such facts were determined and specific
references to applicable standards, as set forth in the land use ordinances, or
other provisions of this Code; and
      (d)   A statement of approval, approval with requirements or conditions,
or denial, as applicable.
   (5)   Findings Of Fact: The Land Use Authority, as applicable, shall
identify and include findings of fact for decisions of administrative matters.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 5
AMENDMENTS TO GENERAL PLAN AND LAND USE ORDINANCES
SECTION:
16.05.101: Effect Of General Plan
16.05.102: Public Uses To Conform To General Plan
16.05.103: Effect Of Official Maps
16.05.104: Amendments To General Plan
16.05.105: Procedures For Amending General Plan
16.05.106: Approval Of General Plan Amendments, Land Use Ordinances, Zoning Map
Or Official Map Amendments
16.05.107: Effect Of General Plan Amendments
16.05.108: Amendments To Land Use Ordinances, Zoning Districts Map And Official
Maps
16.05.109: Procedures For Amending Land Use Ordinances, Zoning Districts Maps
(Except Map Amendments To Establish Planned Development (PD), Subdivision
Enhancement (SE) Or Mixed Use (MU) Overlay Districts) And Official Maps
16.05.110: Procedures For Amending Zoning Districts Map To Establish Planned
Development (PD), Subdivision Enhancement (SE) Or Mixed Use (MU) Overlay
Districts
16.05.111: Criteria For Approval Of Land Use Ordinance, Zoning Districts Map Or
Official Map Amendment (Rep. by Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
16.05.112: Effect Of Approval Of Land Use Ordinance, Zoning Districts Map Or
Official Map Amendment
16.05.113: Temporary Land Use Regulations
16.05.114: When Applicant Entitled To Action, Effect Of Pending Land Use
Ordinance, Zoning Districts Map, Official Map Amendment Or Temporary Land Use
Regulation
16.05.101: EFFECT OF GENERAL PLAN:
   (1)   The General Plan shall be considered an advisory guide for all land
use decisions, the guidance of growth and development occurring in the City,
and the provision of required infrastructure and services provided by the City.
   (2)   No amendment to a land use ordinance, zoning districts maps, or
official map may be recommended by the commission or approved by the City
Council, unless such amendment is found to be consistent with the General Plan.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.05.102: PUBLIC USES TO CONFORM TO GENERAL PLAN:
After the City Council has adopted the General Plan and any amendments thereto,
no street, park or other public way, ground, place or space, no publicly owned
building or structure, and no public utility, whether publicly or privately
owned, may be constructed or authorized until and unless it conforms to the
General Plan, as adopted. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.05.103: EFFECT OF OFFICIAL MAPS:
   (1)   The City may adopt an official map.
   (2)   An official map does not:
      (a)   Require a landowner to dedicate and construct a street as a
condition of development approval, except under circumstances provided in
sections
16.03.118 and
16.03.119 of this title; or
      (b)   Require the City to immediately acquire property it has designated
for eventual public use as a public street.
   (3)   A Land Use Authority may recommend that an applicant consider and
accommodate the location of proposed streets in the planning of a development
proposal in a manner consistent with the requirements of sections
16.03.118 and
16.03.119 of this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.05.104: AMENDMENTS TO GENERAL PLAN:
A proposed amendment to the General Plan may be initiated by any property
owner, any resident, any business owner, the Council, Commission, Sensitive
Lands Committee, Zoning Administrator, or other City staff by filing a General
Plan amendment application. An application for an amendment to the General Plan
shall be filed with the City by presenting a General Plan amendment application
to the Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.05.105: PROCEDURES FOR AMENDING GENERAL PLAN:
The procedures for the review and consideration of a General Plan amendment
application are identified by figure 5-1 as set forth in this chapter.
   (1)   Determination Of Application Completeness: A General Plan amendment
application shall be considered by the Zoning Administrator for a determination
of application completeness, as provided by chapter 13 of this title.
   (2)   Commission Public Hearing Required: Prior to recommending the
adoption, rejection or revision of any General Plan amendment application, the
commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the procedures of
this title and the Act and shall provide a minimum of ten (10) days' notice of
such hearing, as required by the Act and chapter 10 of this title.
   (3)   Commission Recommendation: Following the public hearing, the
commission shall formulate a recommendation on the General Plan amendment
application to the Council.
   (4)   Commission Recommendation Transmitted To Council: After the commission
has reviewed the application and made its recommendation, the commission shall
transmit to the Council a copy of the commission's recommendation and the
meeting minutes, and all other relevant materials of the proceedings before the
commission. Following receipt of a copy of the General Plan amendment
recommendation from the commission, and all other materials, the City Recorder
shall schedule a public hearing with the Council to consider the commission's
recommendation of the General Plan amendment application.
   (5)   Council Public Hearing Required: The Council shall consider the
General Plan amendment application recommendation of the commission at a public
hearing, by providing a minimum of ten (10) days' notice for the required
Council public hearing, as required by chapter 10 of this title.
   (6)   Council Action: Following the public hearing, the Council may approve
the General Plan amendment application, as presented, revise the proposed
amendment and approve the proposed amendment as revised, or reject the proposed
General Plan amendment. If the Council approves the proposed amendment as
submitted, or as revised, the Council shall adopt the General Plan amendment by
ordinance. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.05.106: APPROVAL OF GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS, LAND USE ORDINANCES, ZONING MAP
OR OFFICIAL MAP AMENDMENTS:
As legislative decisions, these decisions follow the decision making standards
set forth in section
16.04.102 of this title. (Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
16.05.107: EFFECT OF GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS:
The approval of a General Plan amendment application shall not authorize the
development of land. After a General Plan amendment application has been
approved by the City Council, no development shall occur until the required
approvals, permits and licenses have been issued consistent with the
requirements of all land use ordinances, and other ordinances, as applicable.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.05.108: AMENDMENTS TO LAND USE ORDINANCES, ZONING DISTRICTS MAP AND OFFICIAL
MAPS:
A proposed amendment to any land use ordinance, land use plan, zoning districts
map, or both, or any other official map may be initiated by any property owner,
any resident, any business owner, the Council, Commission, Sensitive Lands
Committee, Zoning Administrator, or other City staff by filing the appropriate
amendment application with the City Zoning Administrator. (Ord. 2017-06, 2017)
16.05.109: PROCEDURES FOR AMENDING LAND USE ORDINANCES, ZONING DISTRICTS MAPS
(EXCEPT MAP AMENDMENTS TO ESTABLISH PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD), SUBDIVISION
ENHANCEMENT (SE) OR MIXED USE (MU) OVERLAY DISTRICTS) AND OFFICIAL MAPS:
The procedures for the review and consideration of a land use ordinance, zoning
districts map (except zoning map amendments to establish a Planned Development
(PD), Subdivision Enhancement (SE) or Mixed Use (MU) Overlay District) and
official map amendment applications are identified by figure 5-2 as set forth
in this chapter.
   (1)   Determination Of Application Completeness: An application for a land
use ordinance, zoning districts map or official map amendment shall be
considered by the Zoning Administrator for a determination of application
completeness, as provided by chapter 13 of this title.
   (2)   Commission Public Hearing Required: Prior to recommending a land use
ordinance, zoning districts map or official map amendment application to the
Council, the commission shall consider the application at a public hearing by
providing a minimum of ten (10) days' notice of such hearing, as required by
the Act, and chapter 10 of this title.
   (3)   Commission Recommendation: Following the public hearing, the
commission shall formulate a recommendation on the land use ordinance, zoning
districts map or official map amendment application to the Council.
   (4)   Commission Recommendation Transmitted To Council: After the commission
has conducted a public hearing, reviewed the application, and made its
recommendation, the commission shall transmit to the Council a copy of the
commission's recommendation and the meeting minutes, and all other relevant
materials of the proceedings before the commission. Following receipt of a copy
of the land use ordinance, zoning districts map or official map amendment
recommendation from the commission, and all other materials, the City Recorder
shall schedule a public hearing with the Council to consider the commission's
recommendation of the land use ordinance, zoning map or official map amendment
application.
   (5)   Council Public Hearing Required: The Council shall consider the land
use ordinance, zoning districts map or official map amendment recommendations
of the commission at a public hearing by providing a minimum of ten (10) days'
notice for the required Council public hearing, as required by chapter 10 of
this title.
   (6)   Council Action: Following the public hearing, the Council may approve
the land use ordinance, zoning districts map or official map amendment
application, as presented, revise the proposed amendment and approve the
proposed amendment as revised, or deny the proposed application. If the Council
approves the proposed amendment as submitted or as revised, the Council shall
adopt the land use ordinance, zoning districts map or official map amendment by
ordinance. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.05.110: PROCEDURES FOR AMENDING ZONING DISTRICTS MAP TO ESTABLISH PLANNED
DEVELOPMENT (PD), SUBDIVISION ENHANCEMENT (SE) OR MIXED USE (MU) OVERLAY
DISTRICTS:
The procedures for the review and consideration of a zoning districts map
amendment application to establish a Planned Development (PD), Subdivision
Enhancement (SE) or Mixed Use (MU) Overlay District are identified by figure 5-
3 as set forth in this chapter.
   (1)   Determination Of Application Completeness: An application for a zoning
districts map amendment application to establish a Planned Development (PD),
Subdivision Enhancement (SE) or Mixed Use (MU) Overlay District shall be
considered by the Zoning Administrator for a determination of application
completeness, as provided by chapter 13 of this title. A zoning districts map
amendment application to establish a Planned Development (PD), Subdivision
Enhancement (SE) or Mixed Use (MU) Overlay District shall not require an
application fee.
   (2)   Concurrent Subdivision Or Other Development Application And Review
Required: An application to establish a Planned Development (PD), Subdivision
Enhancement (SE) or Mixed Use (MU) Overlay District shall be considered by the
commission and City Council concurrently with a subdivision application or
other applicable land use application.
   (3)   Commission Public Hearing Required: Prior to recommending a zoning
districts map amendment application to establish a Planned Development (PD),
Subdivision Enhancement (SE) or Mixed Use (MU) Overlay District to the City
Council, the commission shall consider the application at a public hearing by
providing a minimum of ten (10) days' notice of such hearing, as required by
the Act and chapter 10 of this title.
   (4)   Commission Recommendation: At the meeting when the public hearing is
held, or a subsequent meeting, the commission shall formulate a recommendation
on the zoning districts map amendment application to establish a Planned
Development (PD), Subdivision Enhancement (SE) or Mixed Use (MU) Overlay
District to the City Council.
   (5)   Commission Recommendation Transmitted To City Council: After the
commission has conducted a public hearing, reviewed the application and made
its recommendation, the commission shall transmit to the City Council a copy of
the commission's recommendation and the meeting minutes, and all other relevant
materials of the proceedings before the commission. Following receipt of a copy
of the zoning districts map amendment recommendation from the commission, and
all other materials, the City Recorder shall schedule the zoning districts map
amendment recommendation of the commission with the City Council for review and
action.
   (6)   City Council Action: Concurrent with the review and consideration of a
subdivision application or other applicable land use application, the City
Council may approve the zoning districts map amendment application, as
presented, revise the proposed amendment and approve the proposed amendment as
revised, or deny the proposed application. If the City Council approves the
proposed amendment as submitted or as revised, the City Council shall adopt the
zoning districts map amendment by ordinance. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.05.111: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL OF LAND USE ORDINANCE, ZONING DISTRICTS MAP OR
OFFICIAL MAP AMENDMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
16.05.112: EFFECT OF APPROVAL OF LAND USE ORDINANCE, ZONING DISTRICTS MAP OR
OFFICIAL MAP AMENDMENT:
The approval of a land use ordinance, zoning districts map or official map
amendment application shall not authorize the development of land. After an
amendment has been approved by the City Council, no development shall occur
until the required approvals, permits and licenses have been issued consistent
with the requirements of all land use ordinances, and other ordinances, as
applicable. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.05.113: TEMPORARY LAND USE REGULATIONS:
As provided by the Act, and consistent with all requirements and procedures, as
contained therein, the City Council may, with or without a public hearing,
enact a temporary land use regulation for any part or all of the area within
the City, if the City Council makes a finding of compelling, countervailing
public interest; or the area is unregulated. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.05.114: WHEN APPLICANT ENTITLED TO ACTION, EFFECT OF PENDING LAND USE
ORDINANCE, ZONING DISTRICTS MAP, OFFICIAL MAP AMENDMENT OR TEMPORARY LAND USE
REGULATION:
   (1)   An applicant is entitled to action on a land use application by the
applicable Land Use Authority if the application conforms to the requirements
of all applicable land use ordinances, including this title, in effect on the
date the Zoning Administrator determines the land use application to be
complete and all fees have been paid unless:
      (a)   The Land Use Authority, on the record, finds a compelling,
countervailing public interest would be jeopardized by approving the
application; or (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
      (b)   In the manner provided by this chapter, and before the application
is submitted, the City has formally initiated proceedings to amend its land use
ordinances, zoning districts map or official maps in a manner that would
prohibit approval of the application as submitted. (Ord. 2017-17, 2017)
      (c)   A temporary land use regulation, affecting the land use
application, has been enacted by the City Council, as provided by section
16.05.113 of this chapter.
   (2)   A Land Use Authority shall process a land use application without
regard to proceedings initiated to amend the land use ordinances, zoning
districts map or official maps if:
      (a)   One hundred eighty (180) days have passed since the proceedings
were initiated; and
      (b)   The proceedings have not resulted in an enactment that prohibits
action on the land use application, as submitted; or
      (c)   One hundred eighty (180) days have passed since the enactment of
the temporary land use regulation. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
   FIGURE 5-1
   GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT APPLICATION PROCEDURES
  General Plan amendment application filed with Zoning Administrator
   General Plan amendment application filed with Zoning Administrator
   Application reviewed by Zoning Administrator for application completeness
   (chapter 13)
 Zoning Administrator/Commission Secretary schedules public hearing with      
  commission, providing a minimum of 10 days notice (chapter 10)
   Commission conducts and closes public hearing on the application
Commission considers application and all relevant information received.
Commission formulates recommendation. Commission approves recommendation and
transmits to Council by motion
City Recorder schedules public hearing with Council on commission
recommendation, providing a minimum of 10 days notice (chapter 10)
   Council conducts and closes public hearing on commission recommendation
Council considers commission recommendation, application, and all relevant
information received. All General Plan amendment applications approved by
Council by ordinance
 
   FIGURE 5-2
   LAND USE ORDINANCE, ZONING DISTRICTS MAP AMENDMENT
   (EXCEPT PD, SE, AND MU APPLICATIONS), AND OFFICIAL MAP
   AMENDMENT APPLICATION PROCEDURES
 Application filed with Zoning Administrator  
 Application filed with Zoning Administrator                                  
   Application reviewed by Zoning Administrator for application completeness
   (chapter 13)
 Zoning Administrator/Commission Secretary schedules public hearing with      
  commission, providing a minimum of 10 days notice (chapter 10)
   Commission conducts and closes public hearing on the application
Commission considers application and all relevant information received.
Commission formulates recommendation. Commission approves recommendation and
transmits to Council by motion
City Recorder schedules public hearing with Council on commission
recommendation, providing a minimum of 10 days notice (chapter 10)
   Council conducts and closes public hearing on commission recommendation
Council considers commission recommendation, application, and all relevant
information received. All land use ordinance, Zoning Districts Map, or Official
Map amendment applications approved by Council by ordinance
 
   FIGURE 5-3
   ZONING DISTRICTS MAP AMENDMENT APPLICATION PROCEDURES TO
   ESTABLISH A PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD), SUBDIVISION
   ENHANCEMENT (SE) OR MIXED USE (MU) OVERLAY DISTRICT
Zoning districts map amendment application filed with Zoning
Administrator, concurrently with subdivision or other applicable
development application
Zoning districts map amendment application filed with Zoning Administrator,
concurrently with subdivision or other applicable development application
   Application reviewed by Zoning Administrator for application completeness
   (chapter 13)
  Zoning Administrator/Commission Secretary schedules public hearing with
 commission, providing a minimum of 10 days' notice                           
  (chapter 10)
   Commission conducts and closes public hearing on the application
At the meeting at which the public hearing is held, or at subsequent meeting(s)
if necessary, the commission considers application concurrently with
subdivision, or other applicable development application, and all other
relevant information received. Commission formulates recommendation. Commission
approves recommendation and transmits to Council by motion
City Recorder schedules commission recommendation for consideration by Council
Council considers commission recommendation concurrently with subdivision, or
other applicable development application, and all relevant information
received. All zoning districts map amendment applications to establish a PD,
SE, or MU Overlay District approved by Council by ordinance
 
   FIGURE 5-4
   COMBINED LAND USE PLAN AND ZONING DISTRICTS MAP
   AMENDMENT APPLICATION PROCEDURES
   (Except PD, SE, And MU Applications)
Application filed with Zoning Administrator
Application filed with Zoning Administrator
 Application reviewed by Zoning Administrator for application completeness   
  (chapter 13)
Zoning Administrator/Commission Secretary schedules public hearing with
commission, providing a minimum of 10 days notice (chapter 10)
    Commission conducts and closes public hearing on the application
Commission considers application and all other relevant information received.
Commission formulates recommendation. Commission approves recommendation and
transmits to Council by motion
City Recorder schedules public hearing with Council on commission
recommendation, providing a minimum of 10 days notice (chapter 10)
 Council conducts and closes public hearing on commission recommendation     
                                                                         
Council considers commission recommendation, application, and all relevant
information received. All land use ordinance, Zoning Districts Map, or
Official Map amendment applications approved by Council by ordinance
 
(Ord. 2017-06, 2017)
CHAPTER 6
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
16.06.101: Zoning By Districts
16.06.102: Zoning Districts Purpose
16.06.101: ZONING BY DISTRICTS:
The zoning districts map is incorporated herein by reference and identifies the
number, shape, location, and area of each zoning district provided. All uses,
activities, buildings and structures, and all required approvals, permits, and
licenses shall comply with the provisions, standards, and requirements of the
applicable zoning district. As provided by the Act, neither the size of a
zoning district nor the number of landowners within the zoning district may be
used as evidence of the illegality of a zoning district or the invalidity of
any decision of a Land Use Authority.
To achieve the purposes of this title, the following zoning districts are
provided: (Ord. 2017-06, 2017)
   (1)   Residential Agriculture Districts:
      (a)   Residential Agriculture (RA-5);
      (b)   Residential Agriculture (RA-1). (Ord. 2016-16, 2016)
   (2)   Residential Estates Districts:
      (a)   Residential Estates (RE-43.0);
      (b)   Residential Estates (RE-37.0);
      (c)   Residential Estates (RE-25.0);
      (d)   Residential Estates (RE-20.0);
      (e)   Residential Estates (RE-17.5);
      (f)   Residential Estates (RE-15.0);
      (g)   Residential Estates (RE-12.5). (Ord. 2017-06, 2017)
   (3)   Single-Family Residential Districts:
      (a)   Single-Family (R-1-10);
      (b)   Single-Family (R-1-7.5);
      (c)   Single-Family (R-1-5). (Ord. 2016-16, 2016)
   (4)   Multiple Residential Districts:
      (a)   Twinhome (R-2-10);
      (b)   Townhouse;
      (c)   Multiple Residential (R-M). (Ord. 2017-06, 2017)
   (5)   Commercial Districts:
      (a)   Neighborhood Commercial (CN);
      (b)   Community Commercial (C-1);
      (c)   Resort Commercial (RC);
      (d)   Resort Mixed Use (RMU);
      (e)   Commercial Professional and Research (CPR);
      (f)   Commercial With Light Manufacturing (CLM).
   (6)   Industrial District:
      (a)   Industrial (I).
   (7)   Special Purpose Districts:
      (a)   Open Space and Habitat Preservation (OS);
      (b)   Drinking Water Source Protection Overlay (SP);
      (c)   Sensitive Lands Overlay (SL);
      (d)   Planned Development Overlay (PD);
      (e)   Subdivision Enhancement Overlay (SE);
      (f)   Mixed Use Development Overlay (MU);
      (g)   Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay (SLA);
      (h)   Short Term Rental Overlay (STRO);
      (i)   Historic Township Overlay (HO). (Ord. 2016-16, 2016)
16.06.102: ZONING DISTRICTS PURPOSE:
The zoning districts of the City are provided to achieve the purposes of the
General Plan, the purposes of all land use ordinances, including this title,
and the purposes of the Act. (Ord. 2017-06, 2017)
   (1)   Residential Agriculture Districts: The Residential Agriculture
Districts (RA-5 and RA-1) are provided to allow low density residential uses
with the opportunity for the keeping of domestic livestock and the operation
and maintenance of small farms and hobby farms. The primary land uses allowed
are small farms, single-family dwellings, and associated and compatible
incidental or accessory uses. (Ord. 2016-16, 2016)
   (2)   Residential Estates Districts: The Residential Estates Districts (RE-
43.0, RE-37.0, RE-25.0, RE-20.0, RE-17.5, RE-15.0, and RE-12.5) are provided
for low density and medium density residential estates neighborhoods with a
quality of openness. These districts are intended to promote, preserve, and
protect single-family residential development. The principal land use allowed
is single-family dwellings and incidental and accessory uses provided in
recognition and sensitivity to the physical environment of the district. (Ord.
2017-06, 2017)
   (3)   Single-Family Residential Districts: The Single-Family Residential
Districts (R-1-10, R-1-7.5, R-1-5) are provided to maintain and protect medium
density and high density single- family residential areas for single-family
residential dwellings. (Ord. 2016-16, 2016)
   (4)   Multiple Residential Districts: The Multiple Residential Districts (R-
M, Townhouse and R-2-10) are provided to allow high density and multiple-family
residential uses. These districts allow the development of twinhomes,
townhouses, apartments and other high density residential dwellings with
provisions of adequate light, air, open space, and landscaped areas. The
principal land use is multiple-family residential uses and incidental or
accessory uses. (Ord. 2017-06, 2017)
   (5)   Commercial Districts: The Neighborhood Commercial (CN), Community
Commercial (C-1), Resort Commercial (RC), Recreational Vehicle Resort (RV
Resort), Resort Mixed Use (RMU), and Commercial Professional and Research (CPR)
Districts are provided to allow a variety of commercial uses and intensity of
uses, with differing development standards that provide a diversity of
commercial uses to meet the needs of City residents and visitors. It is a
General Plan goal of Ivins City to become a destination and resort community,
sensitive to the high quality of the surrounding desert environment, landscape,
and views. The commercial districts provided are designed to provide locations
for commercial uses with the establishment of uses sensitive to the goals of
the City. All commercial uses are required to enhance and add to the character
of the City by providing site and building features sufficient to achieve the
goals of the General Plan and this title.
   (6)   Commercial With Light Manufacturing District: The Commercial With
Light Manufacturing District (CLM) is provided to recognize and provide areas
of the City used for light industrial uses. All uses provided shall be clean,
light manufacturing or industrial activities that do not create any nuisances
to adjoining properties, complement the character of the City, and promote the
goals of a destination resort community. The Commercial With Light
Manufacturing District will only be established to provide clean industrial and
manufacturing uses, sufficient to meet the needs of residents of the City.
   (7)   Special Purpose Districts: The Special Purpose Districts of Open Space
and Habitat Preservation (OS), Drinking Water Source Protection Overlay (SP),
Sensitive Lands Overlay (SL), Planned Development Overlay (PD), Subdivision
Enhancement Overlay (SE), Mixed Use Development Overlay (MU), Subdivision Lot
Averaging Overlay (SLA), Short Term Rental Overlay (STRO), and Historic
Township Overlay (HO) are provided as stand alone or overlay zoning districts
to meet specific needs and goals of the City as follows:
      (a)   Open Space And Habitat Preservation (OS): This district is provided
to preserve and protect areas of significant natural resources and open spaces,
such as areas of native vegetation, rock outcrops, and views. Additionally,
areas identified by Federal or State wildlife agencies required to protect and
preserve the habitats of endangered or threatened wildlife species, and to
recognize the economic value and benefits of open space and undisturbed and
undeveloped areas will be included in this district.
      (b)   Drinking Water Source Protection Overlay District (SP): The purpose
of the Drinking Water Source Protection District is to ensure the continued
supply and safety of the culinary water supply of Ivins City. The Drinking
Water Source Protection Overlay District shall be applied to areas surrounding
the Ivins City 400 East well, an invaluable source of culinary water for the
City.
      (c)   Sensitive Lands Overlay District (SL): The purpose of the Sensitive
Lands Overlay District is to provide development opportunities on lands that
possess naturally occurring physical or environmental constraints, while
recognizing the environmental limitations and development sensitivity of these
areas. Lands which are included in the Sensitive Lands Overlay District include
lands subject to flooding and wetlands, areas that possess a natural slope of
eight percent (8%) or greater, habitat areas of threatened or endangered
species, and areas of lava flow(s) and rock outcroppings. (Ord. 2016-16, 2016)
      (d)   Planned Development Overlay (PD): The Planned Development District
is provided as an overlay zoning district to allow residential development
opportunities with a greater degree of flexibility than may be allowed by the
underlying RA-5, RA-1, RE-43.0, RE-37.0, or RE-25.0 District. The PD District
requires creativity and uniqueness in the proposed development with recognition
of the environmental and community values existing on the development site. The
PD District also promotes the efficient use of all land resources and requires
the provision of development and community amenities, with the preservation of
the natural and scenic qualities of the development site. (Ord. 2016-16, 2016;
amd. Ord. 2017-17, 2017)
      (e)   Subdivision Enhancement Overlay (SE): The Subdivision Enhancement
Overlay District is provided as an overlay zoning district to encourage and
reward subdivisions located in the RE-20.0, RE-17.5, RE-15.0, RE-12.5, R-1-10,
and R-1-7.5 Zoning Districts for the provision of subdivision and community
features not typically required by the subdivision requirements of the City.
These features may include street enhancement and improvement dedications,
subdivision landscaping, buffering, and compatibility features, and amenities.
The Subdivision Enhancement Overlay District (SE) is provided by the City as an
"overlay zone" to encourage the provision of desirable and attractive
Residential Estates (RE-20.0, RE-17.5, RE-15.0, and RE-12.5) and Single-Family
Residential (R-1-10 and R-1-7.5) subdivision areas.
      (f)   Mixed Use Development Overlay District (MU): The purpose of the
Mixed Use District is to provide opportunities to create land use patterns and
layouts that provide for a complementary and compatible mix of uses and a
diversity of dwelling unit types. The Mixed Use Overlay District allows a
combination of compatible residential and nonresidential uses, with necessary
supporting uses, consistent with a convenient and pedestrian friendly
development layout and a destination resort community. It is the purpose of the
MU District to allow flexibility and creativity in the combination and
arrangement of uses while promoting efficiencies in the delivery of required
infrastructure and services.
      (g)   Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA): The Subdivision
Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA) is provided by the City as an "overlay
district" to provide the option for residential subdivision layout based upon
average lot size rather than the strict minimum lot size requirements of the
underlying district. The Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA) does
not establish any allowed uses or density for the subject property. Rather, the
identification of the allowed uses and allowed density (or base density) is
provided by the underlying zoning.
      (h)   Short Term Rental Overlay District (STRO): The purpose of this zone
is to designate areas in the community where rental of residential units on an
overnight or short term basis is desirable and in the best interests of the
community, and to aid the development of housing in those areas, particularly
by owners who reside elsewhere and wish to rent their units when not in use.
"Short term" shall be defined to mean a period of thirty (30) days or less.
      (i)   Historic Township Overlay District (HO): The purpose of this
district is to minimize flag lots and to encourage infill and redevelopment
within the Historic Township. (Ord. 2016-16, 2016)
CHAPTER 7
SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
Part 1. Open Space And Habitat Preservation District (OS)
16.07.101: Purpose
16.07.102: Applicability
16.07.103: Table Of Uses
16.07.104: Table Of Development Standards
Part 2. Drinking Water Source Protection Overlay District (SP)
16.07.201: Purpose
16.07.202: Applicability
16.07.203: Drinking Water Source Protection Overlay District Boundaries
16.07.204: Prohibited Uses; Drinking Water Source Protection Overlay Zone 1
(SP-1) And Drinking Water Source Protection Overlay Zone 2 (SP-2)
16.07.205: Prohibited Uses; Drinking Water Source Protection Overlay Zone 3
(SP-3) And Drinking Water Source Protection Overlay Zone 4 (SP-4)
16.07.206: Amendment Of Drinking Water Source Protection Overlay District
Boundaries
Part 3. Sensitive Lands Overlay District (SL)
16.07.301: Purpose And Requirements
16.07.302: Applicability
Part 4. Planned Development Overlay District (PD)
16.07.401: Purpose
16.07.402: Application Requirements
16.07.403: Approval And Designation
16.07.404: Zoning Districts Allowed
16.07.405: Approval Criteria
16.07.406: Approval Of Subdivision Applications And Other Applications Located
In Planned Development Overlay District
16.07.407: Base Density
16.07.408: Planned Development Layout Plan And/Or Development Agreement May Be
Required
16.07.409: Required Minimum Open Space
16.07.410: Density Incentives
16.07.411: Provision Of Additional Open Space
16.07.412: Improvements And Enhancements To Open Space Areas
16.07.413: Consistency In Design Elements
16.07.414: Lot Standards
16.07.415: Building Standards
16.07.416: Yard Regulations
16.07.417: Open Space Use Regulations
16.07.418: Open Space Standards
16.07.419: Permanent Protection Of Open Space
16.07.420: Ownership Of Open Space
16.07.421: Maintenance Of Open Space
Part 5. Subdivision Enhancement Overlay District (SE)
16.07.501: Purpose
16.07.502: Application Requirements
16.07.503: Approval And Designation
16.07.504: Zoning Districts Allowed
16.07.505: Approval Criteria
16.07.506: Approval Of Subdivision Applications And Other Applications Located
In Subdivision Enhancement Overlay District
16.07.507: Base Density
16.07.508: Subdivision Enhancement Plan And/Or Development Agreement May Be
Required
16.07.509: Required Minimum Open Space
16.07.510: Density Incentives
16.07.511: Provision Of Additional Open Space
16.07.512: Improvements And Enhancements To Open Space Areas
16.07.513: Consistency In Design Elements
16.07.514: Convenience In Layout, Variety Of Lot Sizes And Unique Subdivision
Features
16.07.515: Lot Standards
16.07.516: Building Standards
16.07.517: Yard Regulations
16.07.518: Open Space Standards, Use, Permanent Protection, Ownership And
Maintenance Regulations
Part 6. Mixed Use Overlay District (MU)
16.07.601: Purpose And Requirements
16.07.602: Application Requirements
Part 7. Short Term Overlay District
16.07.701: Purpose
16.07.702: Application Requirements
16.07.703: Approval And Designation
16.07.704: Zoning Districts Allowed
16.07.705: Approval Criteria
16.07.706: Approval Of Subdivision Applications And Other Applications Located
In Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District
16.07.707: Lot Averaging Formula
16.07.708: Minimum Lot Size Requirements
16.07.709: Development/Lot Standards
Part 8. Short Term Rental Overlay District (STRO)
16.07.801: Purpose
16.07.802: Application Requirements
16.07.803: Approval And Designation
16.07.804: Zoning Districts Allowed
16.07.805: Short Term Rental Project Plan Required
16.07.806: Approval Criteria
16.07.807: Approval Of Subdivision Applications And Other Applications Located
In Short Term Rental Overlay District
16.07.808: Base Density
16.07.809: Required Minimum Open Space
16.07.810: Density Incentives
16.07.811: Provision Of Additional Open Space
16.07.812: Improvements And Enhancements To Open Space Areas
16.07.813: Consistency In Design Elements
16.07.814: Convenience In Layout, Variety Of Lot Sizes And Unique Subdivision
Features
16.07.815: Lot Standards
16.07.816: Building Standards
16.07.817: Yard Regulations
16.07.818: Open Space Standards, Use, Permanent Protection, Ownership And
Maintenance Regulations
Part 9. Historic Township Overlay District (HO)
16.07.901: Historic Township Defined
16.07.902: Purpose
16.07.903: Streets And Private Accesses
16.07.904: Frontage, Lot Width, Lot Sizes, And Setbacks
16.07.905: Historic Township City Block Defined
16.07.906: Setbacks For Public Buildings Within The Historic Township City
Block
16.07.907: Height Limits For Public Buildings Within The Historic Township City
Block
16.07.908: Public Buildings Required To Go Through Permitting Processes
PART 1. OPEN SPACE AND HABITAT PRESERVATION DISTRICT (OS)
16.07.101: PURPOSE:
The open space and habitat preservation district (OS) is provided by the city
to:
   (1)   Preserve areas of significant natural resources and open spaces, such
as areas of native vegetation, rock outcrops, lava fields and views.
   (2)   Preserve wildlife habitat areas.
   (3)   Provide a mechanism to promote the economic value and benefits of open
space areas to the city and the accompanying values and amenities of views and
natural areas.
   (4)   Provide a mechanism for the long term protection of environmentally
sensitive areas.
   (5)   Provide a mechanism for property owners to designate and restrict the
use of their property for open space uses.
   (6)   Provide areas of open spaces required to protect the public health,
welfare and safety. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.102: APPLICABILITY:
The open space and habitat preservation district (OS) is a stand alone special
purpose district that may be applied by the city council, following the receipt
of a commission recommendation, to lands owned by the city, or other local,
state or federal government agencies for the purpose of the district. The open
space and habitat preservation district (OS) may also be applied to privately
owned land for the purpose of keeping the land as open space, with the written
consent of the property owner. All land areas included within the open space
and habitat preservation district (OS) are identified on the city zoning
districts map and the requirements of the district shall automatically apply to
all such lands without any further action by the commission or city council.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.103: TABLE OF USES:
The special purpose districts table of uses (table 7-1 in this chapter)
identifies the uses allowed within the open space and habitat preservation
district (OS). (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.104: TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The special purpose districts table of development standards (table 7-2 in this
chapter) identifies the requirements for the establishment of any use allowed
within the open space and habitat preservation district (OS). (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
PART 2. DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT (SP)
16.07.201: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the drinking water source protection overlay district (SP) is to
achieve the purposes of all land use ordinances, to protect the quality of the
city culinary water system, and to achieve the purposes of the state drinking
water source protection rule, R-309, as amended. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.202: APPLICABILITY:
The drinking water source protection overlay district is an "overlay district",
the boundaries of which are identified on the city drinking water source
protection map. The drinking water source protection overlay district (SP) is
divided into four (4) source protection zones, the locations of which are also
identified on the drinking water source protection map. All land areas included
within the drinking water source protection overlay district (SP) are
identified on the city drinking water source protection map and the
requirements of the district shall automatically apply to all such lands
without any further action by the commission or city council. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.07.203: DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The drinking water source protection overlay district is identified as follows:
   (1)   Drinking water source protection overlay zone 1 (SP-1) applies to all
lands located within a one hundred foot (100') radius of the city 400 east
well.
   (2)   Drinking water source protection overlay zone 2 (SP-2) applies to all
lands within a two hundred fifty (250) day ground water time of travel to the
city 400 east well, or the boundary of the aquifer that supplies water to the
well.
   (3)   Drinking water source protection overlay zone 3 (SP-3) applies to all
lands within a three (3) year ground water time of travel to the 400 east well,
or the boundary of the aquifer that supplies ground water to the well.
   (4)   Drinking water source protection overlay zone 4 (SP-4) is the area
within a fifteen (15) year ground water time of travel to the 400 east
wellhead, or the boundary of the aquifer that supplies water to the ground
water source. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.204: PROHIBITED USES; DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE 1
(SP-1) AND DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE 2 (SP-2):
Unless design standards are approved by the state department of environmental
quality to control a potential contamination and prevent discharges to the
ground water, and the proposed use meets all other requirements of the land use
ordinances, no approval, license or permit shall be issued for any use proposed
to be located within drinking water source protection overlay zone 1 or
drinking water source protection overlay zone 2, and determined to be:
   (1)   A potential contaminations source; or
   (2)   A pollution source. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.205: PROHIBITED USES; DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE 3
(SP-3) AND DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE 4 (SP-4):
Unless design standards are approved by the state department of environmental
quality to control a potential contamination and prevent discharges to the
ground water, and the proposed use meets all other requirements of the land use
ordinances, no approval, license or permit shall be issued for any use proposed
to be located within drinking water source protection overlay zone 3 or
drinking water source protection overlay zone 4 and determined to be a
potential contaminations source. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.206: AMENDMENT OF DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
BOUNDARIES:
The boundary of a drinking water source protection overlay district may be
amended by the city council, following a commission recommendation, if it can
be shown that a new boundary can accomplish all the purposes of the land use
ordinances, as follows:
   (1)   An applicant for a drinking water source protection overlay zone
boundary amendment presents all information and materials required for a zoning
districts map amendment application, and further provides information and
materials sufficient to identify the reasons for a drinking water source
protection overlay zone boundary amendment. The information and materials
provided shall include a hydrogeologic investigation, meeting the requirements
of the state department of environmental quality.
   (2)   Following the submission to the zoning administrator of a zoning
districts map amendment application, and other information and materials
sufficient to identify the reasons for a drinking water source protection
overlay zone boundary amendment, and hydrogeologic investigation, meeting the
requirements of the state department of environmental quality, the zoning
administrator shall comply with all procedures and requirements for a zoning
districts map amendment application, as provided by chapter 5 of this title.
   (3)   Prior to the commission providing a recommendation to the city council
on the proposed drinking water source protection overlay zone boundary
amendment, and prior to the city council taking any action on the proposed
drinking water source protection overlay zone boundary amendment, information
and other materials shall be received from the state department of
environmental quality identifying that the hydrogeologic investigation is
protective and meets the requirements of a delineation report according to the
state drinking water source protection rule, R309-600, as amended.
   (4)   Following the completion of all procedures for a zoning districts map
amendment application, as provided by chapter 5 of this title, and with a
finding by the city council that the purposes of the land use ordinances can be
secured and the amended drinking water source protection overlay zone boundary
meets the requirements of the state department of environmental quality, as
applicable, a drinking water source protection overlay zone boundary amendment
application may be approved, or approved with conditions. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
PART 3. SENSITIVE LANDS OVERLAY DISTRICT (SL)
16.07.301: PURPOSE AND REQUIREMENTS:
The purposes and all other requirements and provisions applicable to the
sensitive lands overlay district (SL) are more fully provided by chapter 8 of
this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.302: APPLICABILITY:
The sensitive lands overlay district (SL) is an "overlay district", the
boundaries of which are identified on the city sensitive lands map. All lands
identified as being located within the sensitive lands overlay district (SL)
are identified on the city sensitive lands map and the requirements of the
district shall automatically apply to all such lands without any further action
by the commission or city council. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
PART 4. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (PD)
16.07.401: PURPOSE:
The planned development overlay district (PD) is provided by the city as an
"overlay district" to provide an alternative development and subdivision option
that allows some flexibility in the development requirements of the underlying
district. The planned development overlay district (PD) does not establish, by
itself, any use or development potential for the subject property and does not
establish allowed density. Rather, the identification of allowed uses, and
allowed density (or base density) is established by the underlying zoning
district.
The planned development overlay district (PD) allows for cluster subdivisions
and requires creative and efficient subdivision designs that provide areas of
open space, and other desirable subdivision design features. The district
provides a mechanism to promote the economic values and benefits of open space
areas to the city and the accompanying values and amenities of views and
natural areas. The planned development overlay district (PD) is provided to
promote efficiencies in the delivery of required infrastructure, facilities and
services, and reductions in initial subdivision development costs and long term
maintenance costs.
All subdivisions located within a planned development overlay district (PD)
shall require a subdivision layout that achieves the following objectives:
   (1)   Protection of scenic, historic and sensitive lands, including areas
containing features such as steep slopes, rock outcroppings, lava fields,
wildlife habitat, floodplains, wetlands, or unique or other natural features.
   (2)   Provides a subdivision design that respects the topography of the site
and encourages efficiencies in the delivery of infrastructure, facilities and
services, including reductions in the length of streets and roads, subdivision
site disturbance, utility runs and the amount of required paving and hard
surfacing.
   (3)   Provides reductions in the potential for erosion and sedimentation by
the retention of existing vegetation, and the minimization of disturbed areas.
   (4)   Provides usable and linked open space areas, including public access,
recreation areas and trails.
   (5)   Creates neighborhoods with direct visual or recreational access to
open space areas.
   (6)   Preserves views. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.402: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements for a zoning districts map amendment
application, an application for a zoning districts map amendment to establish a
planned development overlay district (PD) shall provide:
Identification of all sensitive lands areas. A sensitive lands determination
and inventory shall be provided, if applicable, consistent with the
requirements of chapter 8 of this title, which identifies all sensitive lands
areas that may be located within the property boundaries proposed for the
establishment of a planned development overlay district (PD). (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.07.403: APPROVAL AND DESIGNATION:
As an overlay district, the identification of the allowed uses, development
requirements and standards, and all other applicable requirements are
determined and controlled by the underlying zoning district, or "base zone",
unless such standards are modified to the extent provided by the planned
development overlay district (PD).
The application of the planned development overlay district (PD) to any lands
within the city shall require the approval of a zoning districts map amendment
application, as provided by chapter 5 of this title, concurrent with the
approval of a subdivision application. If approved, and as an example only, a
zoning districts map amendment application to allow a planned development
overlay district (PD) for an area located within an existing residential
estates RE-25.0 district, would be identified on the zoning districts map as
RE-25.0 (PD), identifying the residential estates RE-25.0 District as the
underlying district with a Planned Development Overlay District, and (PD) as
the "overlay" district. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.404: ZONING DISTRICTS ALLOWED:
A Planned Development Overlay District (PD) shall only be applied to property
located within a Residential Agricultural RA-5 or RA-1 District, or Residential
Estates RE-43.0, RE-37.0, or RE-25.0 District. (Ord. 2017-06, 2017)
16.07.405: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
A zoning districts map amendment application to establish a Planned Development
Overlay District (PD) may be approved by the City Council, following the
receipt of a commission recommendation, and following the completion of all
requirements for a zoning districts map amendment application, as required by
chapter 5 of this title, concurrent with approval of a subdivision application.
The City Council, in approving a zoning districts map amendment application,
and the commission in formulating a recommendation, shall find that the Planned
Development Overlay District (PD):
   (1)   Is consistent, and does not conflict, with any policy of the General
Plan.
   (2)   Meets the purposes of this chapter.
   (3)   Provides a better land use pattern and subdivision design with
increased amenities than would be likely if the property were developed without
the establishment of a Planned Development Overlay District.
   (4)   Promotes economies in the provision of infrastructure, facilities and
services and promotes efficiencies in the long term maintenance of open space
areas and amenities.
   (5)   Meets all requirements of chapter 5 of this title for the approval of
a zoning districts map amendment application. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.406: APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS AND OTHER APPLICATIONS LOCATED
IN PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT:
Applications for subdivision approval or any other application for any
approval, permit or license required by all land use ordinances for lands
located in a Planned Development Overlay District (PD) shall be submitted and
reviewed in accordance with the requirements and procedures of all land use
ordinances, as applicable. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.407: BASE DENSITY:
The allowed base density for any proposed subdivision located in a Planned
Development Overlay District (PD) shall be determined by dividing the total
area of the subdivision site, less twenty percent (20%) of the total site area
required for street rights-of-way, utility easements and other encumbrances, by
the minimum lot size requirement of the base zoning district in which the
property is located, excluding any areas proposed to be used for schools,
churches, public facilities, or any other similar uses. (See appendix B of this
title for an example of a calculation of base density in the Planned
Development Overlay District.) (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.408: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT LAYOUT PLAN AND/OR DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT MAY BE
REQUIRED:
A planned development project plan ("project plan") shall be presented to the
commission for recommendation, and approval by the City Council, concurrent
with and as part of the application for a zoning districts map amendment
application to establish a Planned Development Overlay District (PD). The
project plan must achieve, and must identify techniques to provide uniform and
compatible site and building standards when the project area is completely
built out. The planned development project plan must demonstrate compliance
with the requirements of this chapter and all other requirements of all land
use ordinances, as applicable.
The planned development project plan may be required to be accompanied by, or
included within, the provisions of a development agreement, when deemed
necessary by the City Council. The planned development project plan shall
include all property proposed for a Planned Development Overlay District (PD)
and shall show all phases of the development (including any phasing plans).
Once approved by the City Council, the project plan shall be controlling for
all required future approvals, permits and licenses, including, but not limited
to, subdivision and use applications, and any other requirements of all land
use ordinances, as applicable. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.409: REQUIRED MINIMUM OPEN SPACE:
Any subdivision development located within an area identified as a Planned
Development Overlay District (PD) shall provide a minimum of fifteen percent
(15%) of the total area of the development site as open space, provided in
accordance with the open space standards, maintenance and dedication
requirements set forth in sections
16.07.417 through
16.07.421 of this title. Such required open space may include areas such as
streams, stream corridors, watercourses, floodplains, wetlands, geological
hazards, rock outcroppings, wildlife habitat areas, slopes and historic and
cultural features. Open space areas shall not include areas within any lot,
road, street or right of way. For purposes of all land use ordinances, open
space areas shall not include any lands used for schools, churches, or any
other similar uses. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.410: DENSITY INCENTIVES:
Density incentives may be granted by the city council, with the receipt of a
commission recommendation, for a subdivision located within a planned
development overlay district (PD) for the provision of additional open space,
or for the provision of additional subdivision features as more particularly
set forth by sections
16.07.411 through 16.07.413 of this chapter. Such density incentives shall be
calculated from the base density as determined in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. In no event shall the maximum density incentives
for any subdivision located in planned development overlay district (PD) exceed
thirty percent (30%) of the base density, as provided by sections
16.07.411 through
16.07.413 of this chapter. (See appendix B of this title for an example of a
calculation of density incentives in the planned development overlay district.)
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.411: PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL OPEN SPACE:
A density incentive for the provision of open space areas, in addition to the
required minimum fifteen percent (15%) of the subdivision site, shall be
provided as follows:
Open Space Area Being Provided As     Maximum Density Incentive (Percentage Of
Percentage Of Total Subdivision Area  Allowed Base Density)
Open Space Area Being Provided As      Maximum Density Incentive (Percentage Of
Percentage Of Total Subdivision Area   Allowed Base Density)
                                      
16                                    1
17                                    2
18                                    3
19                                    4
20                                    5
21                                    6
22                                    7
23                                    8
24                                    9
25                                    10
26                                    11
27                                    12
28                                    13
29                                    14
30                                    15
31                                    16
32                                    17
33                                    18
34                                    19
35 or greater                         20
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.412: IMPROVEMENTS AND ENHANCEMENTS TO OPEN SPACE AREAS:
A subdivision located within a planned development overlay district (PD) and
providing techniques and actions for the long term protection and enjoyment of
open space areas, improvements to facilitate public access and use, areas
voluntarily provided for streetscape treatments and enhancements for the
community benefit, and wider than typically required trails and walkways, or
other improvements or enhancements, may receive up to a five percent (5%)
density incentive, as recommended by the commission, and approved by the city
council. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.413: CONSISTENCY IN DESIGN ELEMENTS:
Subdivisions located within a planned development overlay district (PD) which
provide and incorporate a consistent and overall subdivision design theme, such
as unified architectural building styles, consistency in building materials,
colors, height, type and quality, or provide other subdivision design features
and amenities, designed to add long term attractiveness and quality to the
subdivision, and required by the commission, and required and approved by the
city council, may receive up to a five percent (5%) density incentive. To
receive a density incentive for design elements, the subdivision drawings and
covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be reviewed and accepted
by the commission and city council as including sufficient guarantees to
provide the subdivision features and building design elements. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.07.414: LOT STANDARDS:
   (1)   Lot Area: In order to provide for creativity and flexibility in
subdivision design and to meet the purposes of this chapter, lots within a
planned development overlay district (PD) may be smaller than the minimum size
required by the underlying zone, as recommended by the commission, and approved
by the city council.
   (2)   Lot Width And Frontage: The minimum lot width and lot frontage of lots
located in a planned development overlay district (PD) may be less than
required by the underlying zone, as recommended by the commission, and approved
by the city council.
   (3)   Other Lot Standards: All other lot standards, except lot area, width
and frontage, shall be met, as required by the underlying zone. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.07.415: BUILDING STANDARDS:
All requirements for primary and accessory buildings, as provided by the
underlying zone, shall be met, including building height. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.416: YARD REGULATIONS:
The design of subdivisions located in a planned development overlay district
(PD) may consider variations in the siting and orientation of buildings and
structures, but shall comply with the following minimum setback standards.
Exceptions to these minimum setback requirements may be recommended by the
commission, and approved by the city council, during the subdivision
application approval processes when determined appropriate.
   (1)   Front Yard Setback: The minimum front yard setback for primary
buildings shall be twenty feet (20').
   (2)   Rear Yard Setback: The minimum rear yard setback for primary buildings
shall be fifteen feet (15').
   (3)   Side Yard Setback: The minimum side yard setback for primary buildings
shall be ten feet (10').
   (4)   Side Yard Corner Setback: The minimum side yard corner setback for
primary buildings shall be twenty feet (20').
   (5)   Accessory Buildings: The minimum yard requirements for accessory
buildings and structures, including all setback requirements, shall be as
required by the underlying zone. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.417: OPEN SPACE USE REGULATIONS:
   (1)   Open Space; Allowed Uses: The following uses are allowed in open space
areas approved as part of a planned development overlay district (PD)
subdivision:
      (a)   Conservation of land in its natural state.
      (b)   Agricultural uses.
      (c)   Passive open space uses such as sensitive area protection, wildlife
habitat and view protection.
      (d)   Active noncommercial recreation uses, such as playing fields,
playgrounds and trails.
      (e)   Storm water detention areas designed, landscaped and available as
an open space use.
      (f)   Underground utility easements, facilities and rights of way for
drainage, access, sewer or water lines, or other public purposes.
      (g)   Aboveground utility and street rights of way may traverse open
space land if approved as part of the subdivision approval.
      (h)   Fencing, when deemed necessary and appropriate for the particular
use, purpose and/or location of the open space area.
   (2)   Open Space; Prohibited Uses: The following uses are determined to be
prohibited uses in all planned development overlay district (PD) open space
areas:
      (a)   Any residential, commercial or industrial activity.
      (b)   Any development, construction or location of any manmade
modification or improvements such as buildings, structures, roads, parking lots
or other improvements, except as approved by the city in conjunction with an
allowed use.
      (c)   Any filling, dredging, excavating, mining, drilling or exploration
for and extraction of oil, gas, minerals or other resources from the property.
      (d)   Any dumping or storing of trash, garbage or junk.
      (e)   Burning of any materials, except as necessary for agricultural,
drainage and fire protection purposes.
      (f)   The use of motor vehicles, including all-terrain vehicles,
motorcycles and other recreational vehicles, except as may be necessary to
maintain and operate the property and/or utility facilities within the property
or to conduct allowed uses on the property such as agricultural uses.
      (g)   Hunting or trapping for any purpose other than predatory or problem
animal control.
      (h)   Advertising of any kind or nature and/or any signs; provided,
directory signs may be displayed describing the easement and prohibited or
allowed uses.
      (i)   Removal of any vegetation, except as necessary for fire protection,
thinning, elimination of diseased growth, control of nonnative plant species,
restoration of native species, maintenance of landscaped areas, and similar
protective measures, or those activities relating to allowed agricultural uses.
      (j)   The change, disturbance, alteration or impairment of significant
natural ecological features and values of the property or destruction of other
significant conservation interests on the property.
      (k)   Changing the topography of the property by excavation, cutting,
filling, dumping, dredging spoils, landfill or other materials, except as
necessary to conduct allowed uses.
      (l)   All other uses and practices not identified as an allowed use.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.418: OPEN SPACE STANDARDS:
Open space areas located in a planned development overlay district (PD) shall
meet the following standards:
   (1)   Contiguous Land: Open space areas shall be contiguous to provide for
large and integrated open spaces within the subdivision. Noncontiguous parcels
of open space may be recommended by the commission, and approved by the city
council, upon a finding that such exception is necessary and/or desirable based
upon consideration of the size of the project, the size of the open space
areas, the types of features and resources included within the open spaces, and
other relevant considerations. Long thin strips of open space (less than 100
feet wide) are prohibited, unless recommended by the commission, and approved
by the city council.
   (2)   Open Space Connections: Open space areas shall be designed as a part
of a larger continuous and integrated open space system to ensure that an
interconnected network of open space areas will be provided.
   (3)   Maintenance And Emergency Access: Sufficient access shall be provided
to ensure necessary maintenance and emergency access to all open space areas in
a planned development overlay district (PD). (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.419: PERMANENT PROTECTION OF OPEN SPACE:
   (1)   Conservation Easement: All open space areas shall be permanently
restricted from future development by a conservation easement, or other method
of protection and preservation as recommended by the commission, and approved
by the city council. All conservation easements, or other acceptable method of
protection and preservation of open space, shall be recommended by the
commission, and approved by the city council prior to, or concurrent with, the
recording of the final plat for the subdivision located in a planned
development overlay district (PD).
   (2)   Terms And Conditions: All conservation easements, or other acceptable
method of protection and preservation of the open space areas, shall comply
with the Utah conservation easement act, as set forth in Utah Code Annotated
section 57-18-1 et seq., as amended, and shall be in substantially the same
form as the standard conservation easement form provided by the city,
including, at a minimum, the following terms and/or conditions:
      (a)   Legal description of the easement.
      (b)   Description of the current use and condition of the property.
      (c)   Permanent duration of the easement.
      (d)   Allowed uses.
      (e)   Prohibited uses.
      (f)   Maintenance responsibilities and duties.
      (g)   Enforcement rights and procedures.
   (3)   Grantee: Unless otherwise recommended by the commission, and approved
by the city council, the grantee of a conservation easement shall consist of
one of the following acceptable entities which entity shall be qualified to
maintain and enforce such conservation easement: land trust, conservation
organization or governmental entity. The city may, but shall not be required
to, accept, as grantee, a conservation easement, provided there is no cost of
acquisition to the city for the easement and sufficient access to and
maintenance responsibilities regarding the open space lands are provided. (Ord.
2005-13, 2005)
16.07.420: OWNERSHIP OF OPEN SPACE:
Unless otherwise recommended by the commission, and approved by the city
council, and subject to the provisions set forth in this chapter, the
underlying fee ownership of the open space land shall remain in single
ownership and may be owned and maintained by one of the following entities:
homeowners' association, land trust, conservation organization, governmental
entity or private individual. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.421: MAINTENANCE OF OPEN SPACE:
   (1)   Costs: Unless otherwise agreed to by the city, the cost and
responsibility of maintaining open space areas shall be borne by the owner of
the underlying fee of the open space land.
   (2)   Plan: The proposed owner of the open space area shall submit an open
space maintenance plan providing for, and addressing the means for, permanent
maintenance of the open space area at the time of subdivision application. The
open space maintenance plan shall provide the following:
      (a)   Proposed open space ownership.
      (b)   Establish regular and periodic operation and maintenance
responsibilities for the various kinds of open space, as necessary.
      (c)   Estimate staffing needs, insurance requirements, associated costs,
and define the means for funding the maintenance of the open space land and
operation of any common facilities on an ongoing basis.
      (d)   At the city's sole discretion, and as recommended by the
commission, and approved by the city council, the applicant may be required to
escrow sufficient funds for the costs associated with the maintenance of open
space areas.
   (3)   Approval: The open space maintenance plan shall be recommended by the
commission, and approved by the city council, prior to, or concurrent with,
subdivision application approval. The open space maintenance plan shall be
recorded against the property and shall include provisions for the city's
corrective action rights. Any changes or amendments to the open space
maintenance plan shall be recommended by the commission, and approved by the
city council.
   (4)   Failure To Maintain: In the event the owner of open space land or any
successor organization thereto, fails to maintain all or any portion thereof in
reasonable order and condition, the city may assume responsibility, as a right
but not an obligation, for maintenance, in which case any escrow funds may be
forfeited and any approvals, permits or licenses may be revoked or suspended.
   (5)   Corrective Action: The city may enter the property and take corrective
action, including extended maintenance. The costs of such corrective action may
be charged to the property owner and may include administrative costs and
penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on said properties. Notice of such
lien shall be filed by the city attorney in the office of the Washington County
recorder. The open space maintenance plan and all other documents creating or
establishing any association or conservation organization for the property
shall reference the city's corrective action authority as set forth herein and
shall be recorded against the property. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
PART 5. SUBDIVISION ENHANCEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (SE)
16.07.501: PURPOSE:
The subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE) is provided by the city as an
"overlay district" to encourage the development of desirable and attractive
residential subdivision areas that provide subdivision and community features
not typically required by the land use ordinances of the city, including the
subdivision ordinance. The district also allows flexibility in the development
requirements of the underlying district. The subdivision enhancement overlay
district (SE) does not establish any allowed uses or density for the subject
property. Rather, the identification of the allowed uses and allowed density
(or base density) is provided by the underlying zoning district.
The subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE) encourages creative and
efficient subdivision designs and the voluntary provision of subdivision and
community benefit features, including areas of open space, streetscape
enhancements and other desirable subdivision and community design features. All
subdivisions located within a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE)
shall require a layout that achieves the following objectives:
   (1)   The voluntary provision of streetscape enhancements and improvements
by the developer, including, but not limited to, the dedication and improvement
of wider street rights of way than typically required by the city, with
associated street landscaping, street tree plantings, street medians,
pedestrian and biking facilities, and other streetscape enhancements, buffering
and screening treatments.
   (2)   The voluntary provision of park and open space areas and associated
improvements, including the preservation of natural features located on the
development site and other open space and park areas with associated
improvements, including pedestrian trails, children's play equipment, benches,
drinking fountains and landscaping improvements for the benefit of subdivision
and community residents.
   (3)   Provides subdivision design and enhancement features, including unique
and visually attractive entryways, subdivision and community landscape
treatments, public art pieces, and consistent architectural features and
building design themes.
   (4)   Provides convenience in layout and a variety of lot sizes. (Ord. 2005-
13, 2005)
16.07.502: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements for a zoning districts map amendment, as
provided by chapter 5 of this title, an application for a zoning districts map
amendment to establish a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE) shall
provide:
Identification of all sensitive lands areas. A sensitive lands determination
and inventory shall be provided, if applicable, consistent with the
requirements of chapter 8 of this title, which identifies all sensitive lands
areas that may be located within the property boundaries proposed for the
establishment of a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE). (Ord. 2005-
13, 2005)
16.07.503: APPROVAL AND DESIGNATION:
As an overlay district, the identification of the allowed uses, development
requirements and standards, and all other applicable requirements, are
determined and controlled by the underlying zoning district, or "base zone",
unless such standards are modified to the extent provided by the subdivision
enhancement overlay district (SE).
The application of the subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE) to any
areas proposed to be subdivided for residential uses shall require the approval
of a zoning districts map amendment application, as provided by chapter 5 of
this title, concurrent with the approval of a subdivision application. If
approved, and as an example only, a zoning districts map amendment application
to allow a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE) for an area located
within an existing residential R-1-10 district, would be identified on the
zoning districts map as R-1-10(SE), identifying the residential R-1-10 district
as the underlying district with a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE)
as the "overlay" district. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.504: ZONING DISTRICTS ALLOWED:
A subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE) shall only be applied to
property located within the residential estates RE-20.0, RE-17.5, RE-15.0 and
RE-12.5 districts and the single-family residential R-1-10 and R-1-7.5
districts. (Ord. 2009-09, 2009)
16.07.505: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
A zoning districts map amendment application to establish a subdivision
enhancement overlay district (SE) may be approved by the city council,
following the receipt of a commission recommendation, concurrent with the
approval of a subdivision application, and following the completion of all
requirements for a zoning districts map amendment application, as required by
chapter 5 of this title. The city council in approving a zoning districts map
amendment application, and the commission in formulating a recommendation,
shall find that the subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE):
   (1)   Is consistent, and does not conflict, with any policy of the general
plan.
   (2)   Meets the purposes of this chapter.
   (3)   Provides a subdivision design with increased amenities and features
than typically provided, or required.
   (4)   Proposes the voluntary provision of features, enhancements or
improvements which may include, the dedication and improvement of wider street
rights of way than typically required, with associated street enhancements,
including, but not limited to, landscaping, street tree plantings, street
medians, pedestrian and biking facilities, and buffering and screening
treatments.
   (5)   Proposes the voluntary provision of park and open space areas and
associated improvements.
   (6)   Provides subdivision design and enhancement features, which may
include unique and visually attractive entryways, subdivision and community
landscape treatments, public art pieces, and consistent architectural features
and building design themes.
   (7)   Provides convenience in layout and a variety of lot sizes.
   (8)   Proposes the voluntary dedication of other desirable community design
features.
   (9)   Meets all requirements of chapter 5 of this title, for the approval of
a zoning districts map amendment application. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.506: APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS AND OTHER APPLICATIONS LOCATED
IN SUBDIVISION ENHANCEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT:
Applications for subdivision approval or any other application for any
approval, permit or license required by all land use ordinances for lands
located in a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE) shall be submitted
and reviewed in accordance with the requirements and procedures of all land use
ordinances, as applicable. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.507: BASE DENSITY:
The allowed base density for any proposed subdivision located in a subdivision
enhancement overlay district (SE) shall be determined by dividing the total
area of the subdivision site, less twenty percent (20%) of the total site area
required for street rights of way, utility easements and other encumbrances, by
the minimum lot size requirement of the base zoning district in which the
property is located, and excluding any areas proposed to be used for schools,
churches, public facilities or any other similar uses. (See appendix B of this
title for an example of a calculation of base density in the subdivision
enhancement overlay district.) (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.508: SUBDIVISION ENHANCEMENT PLAN AND/OR DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT MAY BE
REQUIRED:
A subdivision enhancement project plan ("project plan") shall be presented to
the commission for recommendation, and approval by the city council, as part of
the application for a zoning districts map amendment application to establish a
subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE). The project plan must achieve,
and must identify the subdivision enhancement features being provided for the
benefit of the subdivision and community residents that are typically not
required by the city. The subdivision enhancement project plan must demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other requirements of all
land use ordinances, as applicable.
The subdivision enhancement project plan may be required to be accompanied by,
or included within the provisions of a development agreement, when deemed
necessary by the city council. Once approved by the city council, the project
plan shall be controlling for all required future approvals, permits and
licenses, including, but not limited to, subdivision and use applications, and
other requirements of all land use ordinances, as applicable. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.07.509: REQUIRED MINIMUM OPEN SPACE:
Any subdivision development located within an area identified as a subdivision
enhancement overlay district (SE) shall provide a minimum of ten percent (10%)
of the total area of the development site as improved open space, provided in
accordance with the open space standards, maintenance and dedication
requirements set forth by section
16.07.104 of this chapter. Such required open space may include areas of
natural beauty or amenity, active park areas, and areas voluntarily being
provided for streetscape treatments and enhancements for the community benefit
and wider than typically required or provided. Improved open space areas shall
not include areas within any lot, or internal subdivision street right of way.
Open space areas shall not include lands used for schools, churches, or any
other similar uses. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.510: DENSITY INCENTIVES:
Density incentives may be granted by the city council, with the receipt of a
commission recommendation, for a subdivision located within a subdivision
enhancement overlay district (SE) for the provision of additional improved open
space, or for the provision of additional subdivision features as more
particularly set forth by sections
16.07.511 through
 16.07.514 of this chapter. Such density incentives shall be calculated from
the base density as determined in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. In no event shall the maximum density incentives for any subdivision
located in a subdivision enhancement overlay district exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of the base density, as provided by sections
16.07.511,
16.07.513 and
16.07.514 of this chapter. (See appendix B of this title for an example of a
calculation of density incentives in the subdivision enhancement overlay
district.) (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.511: PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL OPEN SPACE:
A density incentive for the provision of open space areas, in addition to the
required minimum ten percent (10%) of the subdivision site, shall be provided
as follows:
Improved Open Space Area  Maximum Density Incentive
Being Provided As A       (Percentage Of
Percentage Of The Total   Allowed Base Density)
Subdivision Site
Improved Open Space Area   Maximum Density Incentive
Being Provided As A        (Percentage Of
Percentage Of The Total    Allowed Base Density)
Subdivision Site
                          
   10                        0.0
   11                        1.0
   12                        2.0
   13                        3.0
   14                        4.0
   15                        5.0
   16                        6.0
   17                        7.0
   18                        8.0
   19                        9.0
   20+                       10.0
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.512: IMPROVEMENTS AND ENHANCEMENTS TO OPEN SPACE AREAS:
For a subdivision to qualify for a subdivision enhancement overlay district
(SE), and to qualify for any density incentives that may be provided, the
subdivision shall provide improvements and features to the open space area for
the benefit of both subdivision and community residents. These open space
improvements may include improvements to facilitate public access and use, park
equipment, trails and walkways, public art features, streetscape landscaping
and buffering treatments or other improvements and enhancements as recommended
by the commission, and approved by the city council. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.513: CONSISTENCY IN DESIGN ELEMENTS:
Subdivisions located within a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE)
that provide and incorporate a consistent and overall subdivision design theme,
such as unified architectural building styles, consistency in building
materials, colors, height, type and quality, or provide other subdivision
design features and amenities, designed to add long term attractiveness and
quality to the subdivision, and recommended by the commission, and approved by
the city council, may receive up to a five percent (5%) density incentive. To
receive a density incentive for design elements, the subdivision drawings and
covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be reviewed and accepted
by the commission and city council as including sufficient guarantees to
provide the subdivision features and building design elements. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.07.514: CONVENIENCE IN LAYOUT, VARIETY OF LOT SIZES AND UNIQUE SUBDIVISION
FEATURES:
Subdivisions located within a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE)
that provide creative, or extraordinary design layout, including variations in
lot sizes, and incorporate unique features and amenities for the benefit of
subdivision and community residents, not typically required or provided in
other subdivisions, and recommended by the commission, and approved by the city
council, may receive up to a ten percent (10%) density incentive. To receive a
density incentive for creative or extraordinary subdivision design, unique
features and amenities, the subdivision drawings and covenants, conditions and
restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be reviewed and accepted by the commission and city
council as including sufficient guarantees to provide the variety of lot sizes
and unique subdivision features. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.515: LOT STANDARDS:
   (1)   Lot Area: In order to provide for creativity and flexibility in
subdivision design and to meet the purposes of this chapter, lots located
within a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE) may be smaller than the
minimum size required by the underlying zone, as recommended by the commission,
and approved by the city council.
   (2)   Lot Width And Frontage: The minimum lot width and lot frontage of lots
located in a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE) may be less than
required by the underlying zone, as recommended by the commission, and approved
by the city council.
   (3)   Other Lot Standards: All other lot standards, except lot area, width
and frontage, shall be met, as required by the underlying zone. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.07.516: BUILDING STANDARDS:
All requirements for primary and accessory buildings, as provided by the
underlying zone, shall be met, including building height. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.517: YARD REGULATIONS:
The design of subdivisions located in a subdivision enhancement overlay
district (SE) may consider variations in the siting and orientation of
buildings and structures, but shall comply with the following minimum setback
standards. Exceptions to these minimum setback requirements may be recommended
by the commission and approved by the city council during the subdivision
application approval processes when determined appropriate.
   (1)   Front Yard Setback: The minimum front yard setback for primary
buildings shall be twenty feet (20').
   (2)   Rear Yard Setback: The minimum rear yard setback for primary buildings
shall be fifteen feet (15').
   (3)   Side Yard Setback: The minimum side yard setback for lots located in a
subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE) may be less than required by the
underlying zone, as recommended by the commission, and approved by the city
council.
   (4)   Side Yard Corner Setback: The minimum side yard setback for lots
located in a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE) may be less than
required by the underlying zone, as recommended by the commission, and approved
by the city council.
   (5)   Accessory Buildings: The minimum yard requirements for accessory
buildings and structures, including all setback requirements, shall be as
required by the underlying district. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.518: OPEN SPACE STANDARDS, USE, PERMANENT PROTECTION, OWNERSHIP AND
MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS:
All matters relating to open space areas being provided with a subdivision
located in a subdivision enhancement overlay district (SE), including
development standards, allowed uses, permanent protections, ownership and
maintenance shall be controlled by the requirements and provisions of sections
16.07.417 through
16.07.421 of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
PART 6. MIXED USE OVERLAY DISTRICT (MU)
16.07.601: PURPOSE AND REQUIREMENTS:
The purposes and all other requirements and provisions applicable to the mixed
use overlay district (MU) are more fully provided by chapter 8 of this title.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.07.602: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements for a zoning districts map amendment, as
provided by chapter 5 of this title, an application for a zoning districts map
amendment to establish a mixed use overlay district (MU) shall provide:
   (1)   Identification Of Sensitive Lands Areas: A sensitive lands
determination and inventory shall be provided, if applicable, consistent with
the requirements of chapter 8 of this title, which identifies all sensitive
lands areas that may be located within the property boundaries proposed for the
establishment of a mixed use overlay district (MU). (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
   TABLE 7-1
   SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS
   TABLE OF USES
A use that is not identified in the table of uses is hereby determined as a
prohibited use within the city.
   Distri   Allowed Uses
            Class II And Class III Uses Class IV And Class V Uses Class I Uses
                               Allowed Uses
   District              Class II And Class Class IV And Class  Class I Uses
                            III Uses           V Uses
                                               1. Storm water
                                               detention areas
Open space and habitat      1. Land in its     designed,
preservation (OS)           natural state or   landscaped and      Not allowed.
                            agricultural uses. available for use
                                              as an open space
                            2. Passive open    use.
                            2. Underground
                            utility easements,
                            facilities and
                            rights of way for                       
                            drainage, access,
                            sewer or water
                            lines, or other
                            public purposes.
                                               3. Aboveground
                                               utility and street
                                               rights of way may
                                               traverse open space
                                              land if approved as  
                                               part of the
                                               subdivision
                                               approval as allowed
                                               by ordinance.
                                               4. Fencing, when
                                               deemed necessary
                                               for the particular
                                              use, condition,      
                                               purpose and/or
                                               location of the
                                               open space area.
                            As allowed by the base district, except as provided
                            below, and in compliance with all design standards
                            approved by the Utah department of environmental
                            quality to control a potential contamination and
                            prevent discharges to the groundwater, and the
Source protection SP-1      proposed use meets all other requirements of this
overlay (SP)                title. No approval, license or permit shall be
                            issued for any use determined to be:
                             
                            1. A potential contaminations source; or
                             
                            2. A pollution source.
                            As allowed by the base district, except as provided
                            below, and in compliance with all design standards
                            approved by the Utah department of environmental
                            quality to control a potential contamination and
                            prevent discharges to the ground water, and the
                 SP-2      proposed use meets all other requirements of this
                            title. No approval, license or permit shall be
                            issued for any use determined to be:
                             
                            1. A potential contaminations source; or
                             
                            2. A pollution source.
                            As allowed by the base district, except as provided
                            below, and in compliance with all design standards
                            approved by the Utah department of environmental
                            quality to control a potential contamination and
                 SP-3      prevent discharges to the ground water, and the
                            proposed use meets all other requirements of this
                            title. No approval, license or permit shall be
                            issued for any use determined to be:
                             
                            1. A potential contaminations source.
                            As allowed by the base district, except as provided
                            below, and in compliance with all design standards
                            approved by the Utah department of environmental
                            quality to control a potential contamination and
                 SP-4      prevent discharges to the groundwater, and the
                            proposed use meets all other requirements of this
                            title. No approval, license or permit shall be
                            issued for any use determined to be:
                             
                            1. A potential contaminations source.
Sensitive lands overlay     As allowed by the base district.
(SL)
Planned development overlay As allowed by the base district.
(PD)
Subdivision enhancement     As allowed by the base district.
overlay (SE)
Mixed use overlay (MU)      As allowed by the 2 districts included in the mixed
                            use overlay district.
Subdivision lot averaging   As allowed by the base district.
overlay (SLA)
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
   TABLE 7-2
   SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS
   TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PRIMARY BUILDINGS
 
            District
            Open Space   Source     Sensitive Planned     Subdivision Mixed    Subdivision
Development And Habitat  Protection Lands     Development Enhancement Use      Lot
Standard    Preservation Overlay    Overlay   Overlay     Overlay     Overlay  Averaging
            (OS)         (SP)       (SL)      (PD)        (SE)        (MU)     Overlay
                                                                               (SLA)
            Not
Lot         applicable -
required    no primary   As required by the base district
            buildings
            allowed
            Not
            applicable -
Utilities   no primary   As required by the base district
            buildings
            allowed
                                    As                                As
                         As         required                          required
Minimum lot As required  required   by        As required As required by       As required
size        by council   by the     chapter 8 by council  by council  chapter  by this
                         base       of this                           8 of     chapter
                         district   title                             this
                                                                      title
            Not
Maximum     applicable -
building    no primary   As required by chapter 11 of this title
height      buildings
            allowed
 
(Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
PART 7. SUBDIVISION LOT AVERAGING OVERLAY DISTRICT (SLA)
16.07.701: PURPOSE:
The Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA) is provided by the City as
an "overlay district" to provide the option for residential subdivision layout
based upon average lot size rather than the strict minimum lot size
requirements of the underlying district. The Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay
District (SLA) does not establish any allowed uses or density for the subject
property. Rather, the identification of the allowed uses and allowed density
(or base density) is provided by the underlying zoning district. The
Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA) allows for flexibility and
creativity in subdivision design and encourages nontraditional/non-cookie
cutter subdivision layouts. The Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District
(SLA) meets the intent of the underlying base zone by requiring an average lot
size equal to or greater than the base zone minimum lot size. (Ord. 2013-04,
2013)
16.07.702: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements for a zoning districts map amendment, as
provided by chapter 5 of this title, an application for a zoning districts map
amendment to establish a Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA) shall
provide identification of all sensitive lands areas. A sensitive lands
determination and inventory shall be provided, if applicable, consistent with
the requirements of chapter 8 of this title, which identifies all sensitive
lands areas that may be located within the property boundaries proposed for the
establishment of a Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA). (Ord.
2013-04, 2013)
16.07.703: APPROVAL AND DESIGNATION:
As an overlay district, the identification of the allowed uses, development
requirements and standards, and all other applicable requirements, are
determined and controlled by the underlying zoning district, or "base zone".
The application of the Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA) to any
areas proposed to be subdivided for residential uses shall require the approval
of a zoning districts map amendment application, as provided by chapter 5 of
this title, concurrent with the approval of a subdivision application. If
approved, and as an example only, a zoning districts map amendment application
to allow a Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA) for an area located
within an existing Residential R-1-10 District, would be identified on the
zoning districts map as R-1-10 (SLA), identifying the Residential R-1-10
District as the underlying district with a Subdivision Enhancement Overlay
District (SLA) as the "overlay" district. (Ord. 2013-04, 2013)
16.07.704: ZONING DISTRICTS ALLOWED:
A Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA) shall only be applied to
property located within the Residential Estates RE-43.0, RE-37.0, RE-25.0, RE-
20.0, RE-17.5, RE-15.0 and RE-12.5 Districts and the Single-Family Residential
R-1-10 District. (Ord. 2013-04, 2013; amd. Ord. 2017-17, 2017)
16.07.705: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
A zoning districts map amendment application to establish a Subdivision Lot
Averaging Overlay District (SLA) may be approved by the City Council, following
the receipt of a commission recommendation, concurrent with the approval of a
subdivision application, and following the completion of all requirements for a
zoning districts map amendment application, as required by chapter 5 of this
title. The City Council in approving a zoning districts map amendment
application, and the commission in formulating a recommendation, shall find
that the Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA):
   (1)   Is consistent, and does not conflict, with any policy of the General
Plan;
   (2)   Meets the purposes of this chapter; and
   (3)   Meets all requirements of chapter 5 of this title, for the approval of
a zoning districts map amendment application. (Ord. 2013-04, 2013)
16.07.706: APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS AND OTHER APPLICATIONS LOCATED
IN SUBDIVISION LOT AVERAGING OVERLAY DISTRICT:
Applications for subdivision approval or any other application for any
approval, permit or license required by all land use ordinances for lands
located in a Subdivision Lot Averaging Overlay District (SLA) shall be
submitted and reviewed in accordance with the requirements and procedures of
all land use ordinances, as applicable. (Ord. 2013-04, 2013)
16.07.707: LOT AVERAGING FORMULA:
The total combined square footage of all lots divided by the total number of
lots shall be equal to or greater than the base zone minimum lot size. (Ord.
2013-04, 2013)
16.07.708: MINIMUM LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS:
A maximum of twenty five percent (25%) of the total lots may be less than
minimum allowed lot size of the base zone. No lot shall be less than seventy
five percent (75%) of the minimum lot size of the base zone. (Ord. 2013-04,
2013)
16.07.709: DEVELOPMENT/LOT STANDARDS:
All lots within the subdivision lot averaging overlay district (SLA) shall
comply with the development/lot standards of the underlying zone found in
sections
16.33.103, table 33-3 and 16.33.104, table 33-4 of this title. (Ord. 2013-04,
2013)
PART 8. SHORT TERM OVERLAY DISTRICT
16.07.801: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone was to designate areas in the community where rental
of residential units on an overnight or short term basis were believed to be,
at that time, in the best interests of the community, and to aid the
development of housing in those areas, particularly by owners who reside
elsewhere and wish to rent their units when not in use. "Short term" shall be
defined to mean a period of thirty (30) days or less.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.802: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
The short term rental overlay district (STRO) is only permitted in those areas
already approved and vested through their compliance with Ordinance 2015-04. No
further applications for a short term rental district (STRO) will be accepted
or approved in a residential zone.
In addition to the requirements for a zoning districts map amendment, as
provided by chapter 5 of this title, an application for a zoning districts map
amendment to establish a short term rental overlay district (STRO) shall
provide
   Identification of all sensitive lands areas. A sensitive lands determination
and inventory shall be provided, if applicable, consistent with the
requirements of chapter 8 of this title, which identifies all sensitive lands
areas that may be located within the property boundaries proposed for the
establishment of a short term rental overlay district (STRO).
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.803: APPROVAL AND DESIGNATION:
As an overlay district, the identification of the allowed uses, development
requirements and standards, and all other applicable requirements, are
determined and controlled by the underlying zoning district, or "base zone",
unless such standards were modified to the extent provided by the short term
rental overlay district (STRO)set forth in Ordinance 2015-04.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.804: ZONING DISTRICTS ALLOWED:
A short term rental overlay district (STRO) previously approved and vested in a
residential zone, shall be identified on the Land Use Plan as "Recreational
Resort - STRO" and on the Zoning Map by "STRO" near the underlying zoning
designation.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.805: SHORT TERM RENTAL PROJECT PLAN REQUIRED:
A short term rental project plan ("project plan") was required to be presented
to the commission for recommendation, and approved by the city council, as part
of the application for a zoning districts map amendment to establish a short
term rental overlay district (STRO). The project plan must achieve, and must
have identified techniques to provide, a short term rental development with
uniform and compatible site and building standards when the project area is
completely built out. The project plan was required to also demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, all provisions of this title,
and all other land use ordinances, as applicable.
The project plan may have been required to be accompanied by a development
agreement. Regardless of the size and ownership of lands proposed to be
included within a short term rental development overlay district (STRO), all
subdivisions are now required to have a development agreement prior to
receiving final plat approval. The required project plan shall include
amenities and elements to create, or complement a short term rental area.
The project plan and development agreement shall include all property proposed
for a short term rental development overlay district (STRO) and shall show all
phases of the development (including any phasing plans). Once approved by the
city council, the project plan and development agreement shall be controlling
for all required future approvals, permits and licenses, including, but not
limited to, subdivision and use applications, and any additional procedural
requirements set forth in this chapter, this title and all other land use
ordinances, as applicable.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.806: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
A zoning districts map amendment application to establish a short term rental
overlay district (STRO) must have been approved by the city council, following
the receipt of a commission recommendation, concurrent with the approval of any
required use application, and following the completion of all requirements for
a zoning districts map amendment application, as required by chapter 5 of this
title. The city council in approving a zoning districts map amendment
application and conditional use permit application, must have findings that the
short term rental overlay district (STRO) project plan and conditional use
permit application complied with the following minimum conditions:
   (1)   (a)    Is located on parcels of not less than five (5) contiguous
acres.
      (b)   All approved short term residential properties are managed by
either an onsite Property Manager or an offsite property manager which is
located within twenty (20) minutes (commute time) of the development. The
Property Manager shall be the 'Responsible Party' for the entire development
and shall provide information on current occupants to police, emergency, or
city personnel as needed. The Property Manager shall be available twenty-four
(24) hours a day and shall respond to complaints and concerns within one (1)
hour of any phone call. The Property Manager shall maintain a Utah sales tax
license, and shall collect and submit to the State Tax Commission the required
transient room tax for all short-term residential rental units.
      (c)   All short term rental associated amenities, parking areas, garbage
collection areas are located on the interior of the development, with at least
at one row of short term rental units forming a buffer on all project
boundaries. Landscaped Open Space may be used in lieu of short term rental
units when it provides equivalent buffer distance.
      (d)   If less than an entire project is requested, the City Council may
approve a certain number of units that may be used for short term rental.
      (e)   Off street parking is available for RV/boat parking. On-street
parking of such vehicles is not allowed, except for temporary loading and
unloading not to exceed six (6) hours.
      (f)   One (1) or more garbage collection bins are located on site in
addition to garbage cans for individual units.
      (g)   All short term residential rental properties must have a six foot
(6') colored masonry wall on all perimeter property lines, unless prohibited by
a geographic reason where the wall may be located in a location approved by the
City Council.
      (h)   The recorded plat, CC&R's and all sales literature clearly state
that the project, or any approved part thereof, is approved for short term
rental purposes.
      (i)   All units, open spaces, recreational amenities within short term
residential rental developments must be completely landscaped. The property
manager is responsible for landscape maintenance.
      (j)   The Land Use Plan and Zoning District map must designate where
short term residential property has been approved.
      (k)   All short term rental residential properties must provide parking
as follows. Detached Single Family Units -a two car garage with two (2) parking
spaces on drive way fronting garage. Multi Attached Units including
Condominiums, Townhomes, and Apartments, must provide one parking space for one
bedroom units, two (2) parking spaces for two (2) or more bedroom units and one
quarter (0.25) spaces per unit for guest parking. One covered parking space
must be provided for each unit. Driveways fronting garages shall be twenty feet
(20') in length from the back of curb or back of sidewalk where sidewalk is
present. Driveways width must be a minimum of sixteen feet (16') feet. Single
family detached homes with a two (2) car garage and driveway meets the parking
requirements with no additional guest parking required.
      (l)   On-street parking within the project may be used to meet the
parking requirement for a “self-contained” project. Self-contained means that
all units in the project are designated for short term rental.
      (m)   Tandem parking in driveways may be used to meet the parking
requirement for a "self-contained" project.
      (n)   The parking of any vehicles, recreational vehicles, trailers, etc.
on public streets which front the short term rental project is strictly
prohibited.
      (o)   The project contains recreation facilities consistent with the size
of the project. Recreation facilities include, pickle ball courts, clubhouse
and swimming pool, parks with playgrounds and picnic areas, tennis courts, etc.
The minimum area reserved for recreation facilities must be at least two
hundred (200) square feet per short term rental unit.
      (p)   Short term rental of residential properties are not permitted in
existing subdivisions or projects.
      (q)   Short term rental of residential properties met all other standard
requirements of the base Zoning District.
      (r)   Subdivisions/Projects having Residential Dwellings Units which are
approved for short term rental must be accompanied by, or included with the
provisions of, a development agreement.
      (s)   Short term rentals located within the RM (Multiple Residential
District) must comply with chapter 18 - Multi Family Design Residential Design
Guidelines and standards.
      (t)   Short term rentals located in single family residential zones must
comply with chapter 19 - Site Plan and Building Design Requirements.
   (2)   Short Rental Business Licensing
      (a)   An annual Short Term Rental Business license is required by Ivins
City.
      (b)   The licensee for rentals must be both the local representative and
the owner. The local representative shall be deemed the responsible party.
      (c)   All new and renewal applications must contain the property
manager's name, a sales tax collection and accounting number, the street
address of each unit, the name and address of a local responsible party who is
available by telephone twenty four (24) hours per day.
   (3)   Penalties, Violations, and Revocation
      (a)   The owner and onsite manager of short term rentals are responsible
for regulating the occupancy of the unit and any nuisances created by the
occupants including noise, illegal conduct, failure to use off-street parking,
or any other abuse, which violates any law regarding use or occupancy of the
premises, including failure to collect and deposit sales tax, shall be grounds
for revocation of rental business license, and subject to civil and criminal
penalties for violation of City Codes and other legal or equitable remedy
available to the City.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.807: APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION APPLICATIONS AND OTHER APPLICATIONS LOCATED
IN SHORT TERM RENTAL OVERLAY DISTRICT:
Applications for subdivision approval or any other application for any
approval, permit or license required by all land use ordinances for lands
located in a short term rental overlay district (STRO) shall be submitted and
reviewed in accordance with the requirements and procedures of all land use
ordinances, as applicable.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.808: BASE DENSITY:
The allowed base density for any proposed subdivision/project located in a
single family and two family zones with a short term rental overlay district
(STRO) shall be determined by dividing the total area of the subdivision site,
less twenty percent (20%) of the total site area required for street rights of
way, utility easements and other encumbrances, by the minimum lot size
requirement of the base zoning district in which the property is located, and
excluding any areas proposed to be used for schools, churches, public
facilities or any other similar uses. (See appendix B of this title for an
example of a calculation of base density in the subdivision enhancement overlay
district.)
For subdivisions/projects located in a multi-family zone with a short term
rental overlay district (STRO) see Chapter 18 Multi-Family Design Guidelines
and Standards.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.809: REQUIRED MINIMUM OPEN SPACE:
Any proposed subdivision located in single family and two family zones located
within an area identified as a short term rental overlay district (STRO) shall
provide a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total area of the development
site as improved open space, provided in accordance with the open space
standards, maintenance and dedication requirements set forth by section
16.07.104 of this chapter. Such required open space may include areas of
natural beauty or amenity, active park areas, and areas voluntarily being
provided for streetscape treatments and enhancements for the community benefit
and wider than typically required or provided. Improved open space areas shall
not include areas within any lot, or internal subdivision street right of way.
Open space areas shall not include lands used for schools, churches, or any
other similar uses.
For subdivisions located in a multi-family zone with a short term rental
overlay district (STRO) see Chapter 18 Multi-Family Design Guidelines and
Standards.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.810: DENSITY INCENTIVES:
Density incentives may be granted by the city council, with the receipt of a
commission recommendation, for a subdivision located in single family and two
family zones located within an area identified as a short term rental overlay
district (STRO) for the provision of additional improved open space, or for the
provision of additional subdivision features as more particularly set forth by
sections
16.07.511 through
16.07.514 of this chapter. Such density incentives shall be calculated from the
base density as determined in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
In no event shall the maximum density incentives for any subdivision located in
a short term rental overlay district exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
base density, as provided by sections
16.07.511,
16.07.513 and
16.07.514 of this chapter. (See appendix B of this title for an example of a
calculation of density incentives in the subdivision enhancement overlay
district.)
For subdivisions located in a multi-family zone with a short term rental
overlay district (STRO) see Chapter 18 Multi-Family Design Guidelines and
Standards.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.811: PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL OPEN SPACE:
For a subdivision located in single family and two family zones located within
an area identified as a short term rental overlay district (STRO), a density
incentive the provision of open space areas, in addition to the required
minimum ten percent (10%) of the subdivision site, shall be provided as
follows:
Improved Open Space Area Being Provided Maximum Density Incentive (Percentage
As A Percentage Of The Total            Of Allowed Base Density)
Subdivision Site
Improved Open Space Area Being Provided Maximum Density Incentive (Percentage
As A Percentage Of The Total            Of Allowed Base Density)
Subdivision Site
10                                      0.0
11                                      1.0
12                                      2.0
13                                      3.0
14                                      4.0
15                                      5.0
16                                      6.0
17                                      7.0
18                                      8.0
19                                      9.0
20+                                     10.0
 
For subdivisions located in a multi-family zone with a short term rental
overlay district (STRO) see Chapter 18 Multi-Family Design Guidelines and
Standards.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.812: IMPROVEMENTS AND ENHANCEMENTS TO OPEN SPACE AREAS:
For a subdivision located in single family and two family zones to qualify for
a short term rental overlay district (STRO), and to qualify for any density
incentives that may be provided, the subdivision shall provide improvements and
features to the open space area for the benefit of both subdivision and
community residents. These open space improvements may include improvements to
facilitate public access and use, park equipment, trails and walkways, public
art features, streetscape landscaping and buffering treatments or other
improvements and enhancements as recommended by the commission, and approved by
the city council.
For subdivisions located in a multi-family zone with a short term rental
overlay district (STRO) see Chapter 18 Multi-Family Design Guidelines and
Standards.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.813: CONSISTENCY IN DESIGN ELEMENTS:
Subdivisions located in single family and two family zones to qualify for a
short term rental overlay district (STRO) that provide and incorporate a
consistent and overall subdivision design theme, such as unified architectural
building styles, consistency in building materials, colors, height, type and
quality, or provide other subdivision design features and amenities, designed
to add long term attractiveness and quality to the subdivision, and recommended
by the commission, and approved by the city council, may receive up to a five
percent (5%) density incentive. To receive a density incentive for design
elements, the subdivision drawings and covenants, conditions and restrictions
(CC&Rs) shall be reviewed and accepted by the commission and city council as
including sufficient guarantees to provide the subdivision features and
building design elements.
For subdivisions located in a multi-family zone with a short term rental
overlay district (STRO) see Chapter 18 Multi-Family Design Guidelines and
Standards.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.814: CONVENIENCE IN LAYOUT, VARIETY OF LOT SIZES AND UNIQUE SUBDIVISION
FEATURES:
Subdivisions located in single family and two family zones to qualify for a
short term rental overlay district (STRO) that provide creative, or
extraordinary design layout, including variations in lot sizes, and incorporate
unique features and amenities for the benefit of subdivision and community
residents, not typically required or provided in other subdivisions, and
recommended by the commission, and approved by the city council, may receive up
to a ten percent (10%) density incentive. To receive a density incentive for
creative or extraordinary subdivision design, unique features and amenities,
the subdivision drawings and covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs)
shall be reviewed and accepted by the commission and city council as including
sufficient guarantees to provide the variety of lot sizes and unique
subdivision features.
For subdivisions located in a multi-family zone with a short term rental
overlay district (STRO) see Chapter 18 Multi-Family Design Guidelines and
Standards.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.815: LOT STANDARDS:
   (1)   Lot Area: In order to provide for creativity and flexibility in
subdivision design and to meet the purposes of this chapter, lots located
within a subdivision located in single family and two family zones with a short
term rental overlay district (STRO) may be smaller than the minimum size
required by the underlying zone, as recommended by the commission, and approved
by the city council.
   (2)   Lot Width And Frontage: The minimum lot width and lot frontage of lots
located in single family and two family zones with a short term rental overlay
district (STRO) may be less than required by the underlying zone, as
recommended by the commission, and approved by the city council.
   (3)   Other Lot Standards: All other lot standards, except lot area, width
and frontage, shall be met, as required by the underlying zone.
For subdivisions located in a multi-family zone with a short term rental
overlay district (STRO) see Chapter 18 Multi-Family Design Guidelines and
Standards.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.816: BUILDING STANDARDS:
All requirements for primary and accessory buildings, as provided by the
underlying zone, shall be met, or as allowed by this article.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.817: YARD REGULATIONS:
The design of a subdivision located in single family and two family zones with
a short term rental overlay district (STRO) may consider variations in the
siting and orientation of buildings and structures, but shall comply with the
following minimum setback standards. Exceptions to these minimum setback
requirements may be recommended by the commission and approved by the city
council during the subdivision application or use application approval
processes when determined appropriate.
   (1)   Front Yard Setback: The minimum front yard setback for primary
buildings shall be twenty feet (20').
   (2)   Rear Yard Setback: The minimum rear yard setback for primary buildings
shall be ten feet (10').
   (3)   Side Yard Setback: The minimum side yard setback for lots located in
single family and two family zones with a short term rental overlay district
(STRO) may be less than required by the underlying zone, as recommended by the
commission, and approved by the city council.
   (4)   Side Yard Corner Setback: The minimum side yard setback for lots
located in single family and two family zones with a short term rental overlay
district (STRO) may be less than required by the underlying zone, as
recommended by the commission, and approved by the city council.
   (5)   Accessory Buildings: The minimum yard requirements for accessory
buildings and structures, including all setback requirements, shall be as
required by the underlying district.
For subdivisions located in a multi-family zone with a short term rental
overlay district (STRO) see Chapter 18 Multi-Family Design Guidelines and
Standards.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
16.07.818: OPEN SPACE STANDARDS, USE, PERMANENT PROTECTION, OWNERSHIP AND
MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS:
All matters relating to open space areas being provided with a subdivision
located in single family and two family zones with a short term rental overlay
district (STRO), including development standards, allowed uses, permanent
protections, ownership and maintenance shall be controlled by the requirements
and provisions of sections
16.07.417 through
16.07.421 of this chapter.
For subdivisions located in a multi-family zone with a short term rental
overlay district (STRO) see Chapter 18 Multi-Family Design Guidelines and
Standards.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2022-14, 2022)
PART 9. HISTORIC TOWNSHIP OVERLAY DISTRICT (HO)
16.07.901: HISTORIC TOWNSHIP DEFINED:
The "historic township" is defined as that area of the city generally
designated as such on the land use plan. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015)
16.07.902: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this part is to minimize flag lots and to encourage infill and
redevelopment within the historic township. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015)
16.07.903: STREETS AND PRIVATE ACCESSES:
In order to make infill development feasible, narrower streets or private
accesses may be used. However, any street or access needed as a fire access
must meet the minimum requirements for fire access roads as set forth in the
international fire code as adopted by the city. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015)
16.07.904: FRONTAGE, LOT WIDTH, LOT SIZES, AND SETBACKS:
In order to make infill development feasible, narrower frontages/lot widths,
smaller lot sizes, and reduced setbacks may be used as approved by the city
council. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015)
16.07.905: HISTORIC TOWNSHIP CITY BLOCK DEFINED:
The "historic township city block" is defined as that block between Main Street
and 100 West, and between Center Street and 100 North. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015)
16.07.906: SETBACKS FOR PUBLIC BUILDINGS WITHIN THE HISTORIC TOWNSHIP CITY
BLOCK:
The required minimum setback from back of curb shall be twenty feet (20'),
which is the current setback for the existing city hall, for any public
building, or addition thereto, constructed within the historic township city
block. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015)
16.07.907: HEIGHT LIMITS FOR PUBLIC BUILDINGS WITHIN THE HISTORIC TOWNSHIP CITY
BLOCK:
The general height limit for any public building, or addition thereto,
constructed within the historic township city block shall be twenty five feet
(25'), unless the city council grants a special exception to extend the height
up to a maximum of thirty five feet (35'), which is the current height for the
existing firehouse. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015)
16.07.908: PUBLIC BUILDINGS REQUIRED TO GO THROUGH PERMITTING PROCESSES:
Before any public building can be constructed within the historic township city
block it must go through the permitting processes required of any other
buildings, including conditional use permit and building permit processes.
(Ord. 2015-15, 2015)
CHAPTER 8
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (MU) AND SENSITIVE LANDS OVERLAY
DISTRICT (SL)
SECTION:
16.08.100: Scope
Part 1. Mixed Use Development Overlay District (MU)
16.08.101: Purpose
16.08.102: Uses Allowed Within Mixed Use Development Overlay District; District
Establishment
16.08.103: Approval Procedures
16.08.104: Approval Criteria
16.08.105: Mixed Use Project Plan Required
16.08.106: Mixed Use Project Development Agreement
16.08.107: Development Approval Procedures
16.08.108: Development Requirements And Standards
Part 2. Sensitive Lands Overlay District (SL)
16.08.201: Purpose
16.08.202: Applicability
16.08.203: Sensitive Lands Map And Overlay District
16.08.204: Sensitive Lands Defined
16.08.205: All Approvals, Licenses And Permits To Comply
16.08.206: Pre-Application Meeting And Site Visit
16.08.207: Application Requirements For Use Applications And Subdivision
Applications Proposed In Sensitive Lands Areas
16.08.208: Sensitive Lands Determination And Inventory Required With
Application
16.08.209: Sensitive Lands Determination And Inventory Requirements
16.08.210: Sensitive Lands Survey And Site Visit
16.08.211: Sensitive Lands Protection Regulations; Streams And Floodplains
16.08.212: Sensitive Lands Protection Regulations; Wetlands
16.08.213: Sensitive Lands Protection Regulations; Slopes, Low Density
Residential
16.08.214: Sensitive Lands Protection Regulations; Slopes, Nonresidential And
Medium To High Density Residential
16.08.215: Sensitive Lands Protection Regulations; Ridgelines
16.08.216: Sensitive Lands Development Rights
16.08.217: Construction Or Development Projects Proposed On Sensitive Lands
16.08.218: Transfer Of Sensitive Lands Development Rights
16.08.219: On Site Transfer Of Development Rights; Application To Establish
Planned Development Overlay District (PD) Required
16.08.220: Open Space Areas
16.08.221: Development Approval Procedures
16.08.222: Beneficial Use Of Property
16.08.223: Reasonable Use Of Property
16.08.100: SCOPE:
The following special purpose districts are provided by the city to more fully
accomplish the purposes of the general plan, all city land use ordinances,
including this title, and all other applicable city goals, policies and
requirements. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
PART 1. MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (MU)
16.08.101: PURPOSE:
The mixed use development overlay district (MU) provides opportunities for a
complementary and compatible mix of land uses. The mixed use development
overlay district (MU) allows for the establishment of a complementary mix of
residential and nonresidential uses within a convenient and pedestrian friendly
development layout. The mixed use overlay district (MU) is provided to achieve
the following purposes:
   (1)   Provide for the implementation of the general plan.
   (2)   Provide flexibility in the type and arrangement of uses to anticipate
changes in the marketplace.
   (3)   Provide an opportunity for a variety and diversity of land uses that
may be mixed vertically or horizontally in a unified and complementary manner.
   (4)   Achieve convenience for residents and promote neighborhood vitality in
a compact development pattern.
   (5)   Provide opportunities for a variety of businesses, and reduce the need
for vehicular traffic in the neighborhood and the city.
   (6)   Encourage efficiencies in land utilization.
   (7)   Strengthen the city's economic base.
   (8)   Ensure that the appearance and effects of buildings and uses are
harmonious with each other, with natural site qualities, and with the character
of the area and the City.
   (9)   Encourage an attractive and pedestrian friendly streetscape.
   (10)   Provide amenities and features that enhance the mixed use project
area, the neighborhood and the City. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.08.102: USES ALLOWED WITHIN MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT; DISTRICT
ESTABLISHMENT:
The Mixed Use Development Overlay District (MU) allows a combination of uses
within the same building or on the same lot or parcel, according to an approved
mixed use project plan, as provided herein.
The uses allowed by the establishment of a Mixed Use Development Overlay
District (MU) shall be a combination of those uses allowed by one (1) of the
zoning districts identified in
table 8-1, column A of this section, with those uses allowed by one (1) of the
zoning districts identified in
table 8-1, column B of this section. The uses allowed within a Mixed Use
Development Overlay District (MU) may be further restricted by the Council as
identified in the required and approved mixed use project plan and development
agreement, as applicable. (Ord. 2009-09, 2009)
TABLE 8-1
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT USE COMBINATIONS
Allowed Zoning Districts
A B
Allowed Zoning Districts
A                              B
Residential Agriculture (RA-5) Neighborhood Commercial (CN)
Residential Agriculture (RA-1) Community Commercial (C-1)
Residential Estates (RE-43.0)  Resort Commercial (RC)
Residential Estates (RE-37.0)   
Residential Estates (RE-25.0)   
Residential Estates (RE-20.0)   
Residential Estates (RE-17.5)   
Residential Estates (RE-15.0)   
Residential Estates (RE-12.5)   
Single-Family (R-1-10)          
Single-Family (R-1-7.5)         
Single-Family (R-1-5)           
Multiple Residential (R-M)      
Twinhome (R-2-10)               
 
(Ord. 2014-05, 2014; amd. Ord. 2016-06, 2016; Ord. 2017-06, 2017; Ord. 2017-17,
2017)
16.08.103: APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
The establishment of a Mixed Use Development Overlay District (MU) shall
require the approval of a zoning districts map amendment application, and the
approval of a mixed use project plan, with an accompanying development
agreement, as may be determined necessary by the City Council, following the
receipt of a commission recommendation. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.08.104: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
The establishment of a Mixed Use Development Overlay District (MU) may be
approved by the City Council, following the receipt of a commission
recommendation, with a finding that a Mixed Use Overlay District will:
   (1)   Enhance the subject property by integrated planning and design as a
whole, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (2)   Not conflict with any policies of the General Plan.
   (3)   Meet the intent and purpose of this chapter.
   (4)   Promote economies in the provision of infrastructure, facilities and
services, and promote efficiencies in the long term maintenance of open space
areas and the amenities being provided.
   (5)   Provide a better land use pattern, site design and increased amenities
than would be likely if the property were developed as separate zoning
districts.
   (6)   Enhance the economic base of the City.
   (7)   Not create a burden on the infrastructure, facilities and service
capacities of the city. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.08.105: MIXED USE PROJECT PLAN REQUIRED:
A mixed use project plan ("project plan") shall be presented to the commission
for recommendation, and approval by the city council, as part of the
application for a zoning districts map amendment to establish a mixed use
development overlay district (MU). The project plan must achieve, and must
identify techniques to provide, a mixed use development with uniform and
compatible site and building standards when the project area is completely
built out. The project plan must also demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, all provisions of this title, and all other land
use ordinances, as applicable.
The project plan may be required to be accompanied by a development agreement,
when deemed necessary by the city council. Regardless of the size and ownership
of lands proposed to be included within a mixed use development overlay
district (MU), the required project plan shall include amenities and elements
to create, or complement a "walkable" mixed use area.
The project plan shall include all property proposed for a mixed use
development overlay district (MU) and shall show all phases of the development
(including any phasing plans). Once approved by the city council, the project
plan shall be controlling for all required future approvals, permits and
licenses, including, but not limited to, subdivision and use applications, and
any additional procedural requirements set forth in this chapter, this title
and all other land use ordinances, as applicable. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.08.106: MIXED USE PROJECT DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
A mixed use project plan ("project plan") may be required to be accompanied by,
or included within the provisions of a development agreement, when deemed
necessary by the city council. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.08.107: DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
Applications for any required approvals, permits or licenses for property
located in a mixed use development overlay district (MU) shall be submitted,
processed and considered in accordance with the requirements and procedures set
forth in all land use ordinances, including this title, consistent with the
approved project plan. Amendments to any existing approvals, permits or
licenses shall be obtained by following the procedure required for the original
approval. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.08.108: DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS:
The purpose of this section is to achieve the purposes of this chapter and to
ensure all allowed uses are located and conducted so as to not adversely impact
adjacent uses, including, but not limited to, traffic, noise and safety. All
proposed uses and activities shall be approved only if such uses and activities
comply fully with the following standards, in addition to all other applicable
requirements of this title.
Table 8-2 of this section identifies the development requirements and standards
applicable to all mixed use development overlay districts (MU).
TABLE 8-2
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS
Development Requirement Standard
Development Requirement                 Standard
                                        As allowed by the 2 zoning districts
Allowed uses                            contained within the mixed use
                                        development overlay district.
                                        A use allowed in either of the 2 zoning
                                        districts contained within the mixed
                                        use overlay district shall be reviewed
Required use approval procedure         and approved or denied as a class I,
                                        class II, class III, class IV, or class
                                        V use in a mixed use development
                                        overlay district, whichever is most
                                        restrictive.
                                        As allowed by the applicable
                                        agriculture, residential agriculture,
Allowed residential density             residential estates, single-family or
                                        multiple residential zone district
                                        included in the mixed use development
                                        overlay district.
                                        All lots used exclusively for a
                                        residential use shall meet the minimum
                                        lot size of the applicable agriculture,
                                        residential estates, single-family or
                                        multiple residential zone district
                                        included in the mixed use development
                                        overlay district. All commercial,
Minimum lot size                        office or mixed use lots shall be of
                                        sufficient size to provide compliance
                                        with all building setbacks,
                                        landscaping, access, parking and other
                                        standards as specifically provided by
                                        an approved mixed use project plan, or
                                        necessary for use approval, as provided
                                        by this title.
                                        A minimum open space area of 10 percent
Required open space                     of the mixed use project plan area
                                        shall be provided.
                                        All matters related to open space use
                                        regulations, open space design
Open space use regulations, open space  standards, permanent open space
design standards, permanent open space  protections and open space ownership
protections and open space ownership    and maintenance options shall be
and maintenance                         governed by the requirements and
                                        provisions of sections
                                        16.07.417 through
                                        16.07.421 of this title.
                                        All "sensitive lands areas", as defined
                                        by this title, and located within the
                                        boundaries of a mixed use project plan
                                        area shall comply with all requirements
                                        of the sensitive lands overlay district
                                        (SL). When any sensitive lands areas
Sensitive lands                         exist on any portion of a mixed use
                                        development overlay district (MU), the
                                        requirements of the sensitive lands
                                        overlay district (SL) shall prevail, or
                                        as may be specifically provided by the
                                        approved mixed use project plan to
                                        achieve the purposes of this title.
                                        The more restrictive of the 2 zoning
                                        districts contained within the mixed
Maximum building size                   use overlay district, or as
                                        specifically provided by the approved
                                        mixed use project plan.
                                        The more restrictive of the 2 zoning
                                        districts contained within the mixed
Maximum building height                 use overlay district, or as
                                        specifically provided by the approved
                                        mixed use project plan.
                                        The more restrictive of the 2 zoning
                                        districts contained within the mixed
Minimum required front yard setback     use overlay district, or as
                                        specifically provided by the approved
                                        mixed use project plan.
                                        The more restrictive of the 2 zoning
                                        districts contained within the mixed
Minimum required side yard setback      use overlay district, or as
                                        specifically provided by the approved
                                        mixed use project plan.
                                        The more restrictive of the 2 zoning
                                        districts contained within the mixed
Minimum required rear yard setback      use overlay district, or as
                                        specifically provided by the approved
                                        mixed use project plan.
                                        All requirements for primary and
                                        accessory buildings shall be either as
Building standards                      required by the 2 zoning districts
                                        contained within the mixed use overlay
                                        district, or as specifically provided
                                        by the approved mixed use project plan.
                                        As required by the 2 zoning districts
                                        contained within the mixed use overlay
                                        district. Total required off street
                                        parking spaces may be determined by the
                                        review and acceptance by the city of a
Minimum off street parking requirements shared parking analysis, conducted
                                        using accepted information and analysis
                                        methods, and approved and accepted as
                                        part of mixed use project plan. (See
                                        section
                                         16.20.113 of this title.)
                                        The location of all parking areas shall
                                        be considered understanding the visual
                                        and pedestrian amenity impacts of off
                                        street parking areas. The relationships
                                        and placement of buildings, open
Location of off street parking areas    spaces, vehicle and pedestrian
                                        facilities and off street parking areas
                                        is a critical design element in mixed
                                        use areas and shall be considered by
                                        the commission and city council prior
                                        to mixed use project plan approval.
                                        All mixed use project plans shall be
                                        required to include measures of design,
                                        layout and other design elements that
                                        are generally characterized as
                                        traditional neighborhood design (TND)
                                        principles, which may include
                                        residential designs that deemphasize
                                        garages which may be set back from the
General design principles               front line of the home or provided with
                                        side entry, street side covered front
                                        porches, balconies and decks, wrap
                                        around porches, streets designed for
                                        low vehicle speeds and which emphasize
                                        pedestrian facilities, off street
                                        parking areas hidden from public
                                        streets, extensive use of street facing
                                        windows, pedestrian facilities and
                                        connections.
                                        The appropriate use of materials,
                                        colors and other features indicative of
                                        the desert environment of the city. All
                                        buildings shall possess a similar
                                        architectural theme and have common
Architectural design and materials      architectural elements creating a
requirements                            unifying development character and
                                        design theme. All sides of buildings
                                        shall receive equal design
                                        consideration, particularly where
                                        exposed to pedestrian and/or vehicular
                                        traffic and adjacent properties.
                                        All buildings shall address the street
                                        and provide architectural and other
                                        design elements to create a presence
                                        and attractive and inviting building-
                                        street relationship. All buildings
Building orientation                    shall provide windows, balconies,
                                        terraces or other design features that
                                        are oriented to the street. Window
                                        shape and size shall be compatible from
                                        building to building. Tinted windows or
                                        windows with reflective film or glass
                                        are prohibited at street level.
                                        All mixed use project plans shall
                                        propose a consistent and unified
                                        signage scheme, such signage complying
                                        with the site and building design
Signs                                   requirements and approval procedures,
                                        as provided by this title. Signs
                                        utilizing the same materials and colors
                                        as used on the principal buildings are
                                        preferred.
                                        A landscaping plan shall be presented
                                        accompanying the proposed mixed use
Required landscaping and landscaping    project plan, such landscaping plan
plan                                    complying with the site and building
                                        design requirements and approval
                                        procedures, as provided and required by
                                        this title.
                                        A building and site lighting plan shall
                                        be presented accompanying the proposed
                                        mixed use project plan, such building
Building and site lighting              and site lighting plan complying with
                                        the site and building design
                                        requirements and approval procedures,
                                        as provided and required by this title.
                                        Necessary and appropriate street widths
                                        shall be determined during mixed use
                                        project plan review and approval by the
                                        city council, following the receipt of
Street widths                           a planning commission recommendation.
                                        All streets shall be designed and
                                        constructed to provide traffic calming
                                        strategies and necessary pedestrian
                                        connections and pedestrian and traffic
                                        compatibilities.
                                        For all other building and site design
                                        elements, the building and site design
                                        plans shall comply with the site and
Other site design requirements and      building design requirements and
features                                approval procedures, as provided and
                                        required by this title, or as may be
                                        further identified and required by the
                                        approved mixed use project plan.
                                        No use shall be designed or operated to
                                        expose adjoining properties and uses to
Nuisance                                offensive noise, odors, dust,
                                        electrical interference and/or
                                        vibration, or create any other
                                        nuisance.
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
PART 2. SENSITIVE LANDS OVERLAY DISTRICT (SL)
16.08.201: PURPOSE:
The purposes of the sensitive lands overlay district (SL) are to:
   (1)   Protect and preserve the sensitive lands areas of the city, as defined
by this chapter and this title. Such sensitive lands resources include, but are
not limited to: lava fields, major hillsides, ridges and ridgelines, knolls,
mesas, cuestas, escarpments, boulder outcroppings, large boulders, canyons,
natural drainage areas and other areas of visual significance.
   (2)   Protect the health, welfare and safety of all residents, and minimize
any risks to life and property.
   (3)   Minimize the potential for demands on the fiscal resources of the city
to mitigate and correct any risks to the health, welfare and safety of the
public, property owners, individuals, public infrastructure, facilities and
services, and private investment.
   (4)   Preserve the natural setting of the city to maintain and strengthen
private property values, provide a desirable environment for businesses and
residents, protect and enhance the city economy, and protect the quality of
life and amenities of existing and future residents.
   (5)   Guide and require responsible land use and development for those lands
identified to have development limitations due to environmental sensitivity.
   (6)   Require that all development and construction located on sensitive
lands areas occur in harmony with the natural features and topography of the
site, thereby reducing visual and site impacts.
   (7)   Establish a sensitive lands development process that requires
applicants to select suitable development sites on their property through the
use of slope calculations, maximum land holding capacity, or development
agreements to determine the appropriate density, intensity, design and location
of structures and improvements.
   (8)   Permit the flexibility to modify or remove relatively small
topographic features which may have slopes distinctly different from
surrounding property in order to facilitate reasonably efficient development in
a particular area. The exclusion of such features or areas shall not be
contrary to the overall purpose of this chapter.
   (9)   Establish a sensitive lands committee as a recommending body to staff,
planning commission and city council. The sensitive lands committee will review
proposed projects in the sensitive lands overlay district based on this
chapter.
   (10)   Establish a method of protecting sensitive lands by minimizing its
disturbance by development while allowing for land owners to develop lands in a
responsible manner and minimizing the economic impact. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014;
amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.202: APPLICABILITY:
The standards, guidelines and procedures established by this chapter shall
apply to all lands lying within the sensitive lands overlay district as
delineated on the Sensitive Lands Map attached to the ordinance codified herein
or, in rare cases, in other areas deemed to meet the intent of this chapter by
the city staff. In addition, all properties seeking annexation or preapproval
of projects pending annexation to the city will be evaluated according to the
standards and procedures outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.203: SENSITIVE LANDS MAP AND OVERLAY DISTRICT:
The sensitive lands overlay district is delineated on the Sensitive Lands Map
attached to the ordinance codified herein.
The purpose of the sensitive lands map is to identify areas that may contain
sensitive or unique geological features within the City of Ivins. The map is
designed as an aid for general planning to indicate where more detailed, site-
specific special studies are required. The map is not a substitute for site-
specific investigations. Sensitive lands boundaries shown on the map are
approximate and are subject to change with additional information. Furthermore,
small, localized areas of sensitive lands may exist on a project site but their
identification may be limited by data availability or map scale. (Ord. 2023-26,
2023)
16.08.204: SENSITIVE LANDS DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, and this title, the following lands are
hereby determined and identified to be "sensitive lands", and subject to the
requirements of this chapter and this title:
   (1)   All areas subject to flooding, as identified by the city sensitive
lands map, incorporated herein by reference.
   (2)   All areas of wetlands, as identified by the city sensitive lands map,
or as may be identified by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
   (3)   All areas of hillsides:
      (a)   In low density residential zones where the slope of the natural
grade is equal to or greater than eight percent (8%) (one foot (1') of grade
change for every twelve and one half feet (12½') of horizontal run) for a
minimum distance of forty feet (40') measured in the predominant slope
direction of a hillside meeting all of the following conditions:
         (i)   The hillside is conspicuously visible from major public viewing
areas defined as collector streets, arterial streets and public gathering
places.
         (ii)   The hillside rises more than thirty (30) vertical feet over a
distance of three hundred seventy five feet (375') or less (greater than or
equal to an eight percent (8%) slope).
         (iii)   Minor washes or outcrops that disrupt the contiguous hillside
slope may be excluded in the analysis of the slope.
      (b)   Not in low density residential zones (i.e., commercial and medium-
to high-density residential) where the slope of the natural grade is equal to
or greater than twelve percent (12%) (one foot (1') of grade change for every
six and two-thirds feet (6') of horizontal run) for a minimum distance of forty
feet (40') measured in the predominant slope direction of a hillside meeting
all of the following conditions:
         (i)   The hillside is conspicuously visible from major public viewing
areas defined as collector streets, arterial streets and public gathering
places.
         (ii)   The hillside rises more than thirty (30) vertical feet over a
distance of two hundred feet (200') or less (greater than or equal to a twelve
percent (12%) slope).
         (iii)   Minor washes or outcrops that disrupt the contiguous hillside
slope may be excluded in the analysis of the slope.
   (4)   All ridgeline protection areas within the Sensitive Lands Overlay
District defined as:
      (a)   Class A Ridgeline: Areas within one hundred (100) vertical feet of
the ridgeline of Landhill (see Figure 8-12 for clarification), as identified on
the city sensitive lands map, incorporated herein by reference; and
      (b)   Class B Ridgeline: Using the map as a reference and guideline,
interior bluff ridgelines which are prominent bluffs, cuestas, knolls or hills
where the slope abruptly changes from a very steep slope to a nearly flat slope
or reverse grade slope such that it creates an interior ridge that could be
viewed from multiple locations surrounding the feature and significantly impact
views.
         (i)   To be classified as an interior bluff ridgeline sensitive lands,
the ridgeline must be located adjacent to a very steep slope which is defined
as a slope greater than fifteen percent (15%) over a height of at least twenty
foot (20') rise over a run of 166.67 feet or less). The ridgeline must be
contiguous for at least two hundred feet (200') lengthwise.
         (ii)   The location of the ridgeline shall be located approximately at
the location where the slope becomes steeper than fifteen percent (15%). The
location may be moved by the city if deemed more appropriate during a site
visit to the location that seems to be most prominent from most possible
viewpoints.
         (iii)   The sensitive lands map identifies most Class B Ridgelines;
however, the city may identify additional Class B ridgelines if deemed to
significantly contribute to the natural beauty of Ivins.
      (c)   Class C Ridgeline: Using the map as a reference and guideline,
areas where there is a significant ridgeline with a unique rock outcropping and
as identified by the site study and sensitive lands site visit.
         (i)   To be classified as an interior bluff ridgeline sensitive lands,
the ridgeline must be located adjacent to a very steep slope which is defined
as a slope greater than 15 percent over a height of at least fifteen foot (15')
rise over a run of one hundred twenty five feet (125') or less). The ridgeline
must be contiguous for at least one hundred feet (100') lengthwise.
         (ii)   The location of the ridgeline shall be located approximately at
the location where the slope becomes steeper than fifteen percent (15%). The
location may be moved by the city if deemed more appropriate during a site
visit.
   (5)   Habitat conservation plan areas, as identified by the city sensitive
lands map.
   (6)   Lava fields and areas of rock outcroppings defined as:
      (a)   Lava fields as shown in shading on the city sensitive lands map
represent the area of a solidified lava flow that has frequent basalt
outcroppings.
      (b)   Rock outcroppings shall be defined as areas where rock layers,
large boulders, or a field of boulders are exposed and preservation of the
feature would notably contribute to maintaining the natural beauty of the City.
These features are typically four thousand (4,000) square feet and larger but
may be smaller as determined by the City from site meetings.
      (c)   Significant Rock Outcroppings have been specifically identified on
the City sensitive lands map and in the list below.
         (i)   Tuacahn Wash Waterfall (300 S/Tuacahn Wash).
         (ii)   Pickleball Trails Slickrock and Rockfall Zone.
         (iii)   Sage Way Rockfall Zone.
         (iv)   Dry Wash Rockfall Zone.
         (v)   Kayenta Rock (Shonto/Evening Star Drive).
         (vi)   Elephant Rock (Evening Star Drive/Big Soldier).
         (vii)   Dry Wash Slot Canyon Complex.
   (7)   Areas of known geologic hazard, as identified by the city sensitive
lands map, or as may be identified by a county, state or federal agency with
authority. Examples of geologic hazards are expansive clays, rockfall zones,
landslide zones, etc. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.205: ALL APPROVALS, LICENSES AND PERMITS TO COMPLY:
   (1)   All approvals, licenses and permits issued for any use and/or
construction on any sensitive lands areas are required to recognize any
requirements of the land use authority, as applicable.
   (2)   No approval, license or permit, including any required building
permits, proposed on any sensitive lands areas, shall be issued until the
sensitive lands committee has either decided the approval, license or permit,
or provided a recommendation to the land use authority, with authority, for the
approval, license or permit. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.206: PRE-APPLICATION MEETING AND SITE VISIT:
   (1)   The applicant may request an optional pre-design meeting and site
visit with the sensitive lands committee in order to identify and clarify the
potential locations of sensitive lands as defined in
16.08.204  which may vary by application at the discretion of the sensitive
lands committee.
   (2)   The pre-application site visit may result in a determination that the
proposed project will not disturb any sensitive lands and the sensitive lands
committee may determine to waive the requirement of the developer to file a
sensitive lands application.
      (a)   The technical review committee as it reviews the development
applications will further confirm that the development does not encroach on
sensitive lands. If plans are modified during the approval process such that
disturbance is evident, the technical review committee may pause their review
process and require that the developer submit the sensitive lands application.
(Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.207: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR USE APPLICATIONS AND SUBDIVISION
APPLICATIONS PROPOSED IN SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
In addition to the other requirements of all land use ordinances for use or
subdivision applications, the following additional information and materials
are required at the discretion of the sensitive lands committee when such
applications propose the location of a use or subdivision on any sensitive
lands area:
   (1)   Site Plan: Digital PDF file of a site plan or subdivision layout plan,
drawn at a scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20'), or as required by
the zoning administrator, prepared by a licensed engineer or architect
identifying the following:
      (a)   For use applications, the location and dimension of the property
and all proposed uses and buildings, existing buildings or other structures
located on the property, and existing buildings and structures located within
one hundred feet (100') of the property. Existing property lines and existing
fence lines shall be shown. For subdivision applications, the location and
dimension of the property and all proposed lots, streets, roads and other
rights of way shall be shown. Existing property lines and existing fence lines
shall be shown.
      (b)   A calculation, identifying areas and percentages of all pervious
and impervious areas.
      (c)   A description of all proposed uses and buildings, including the
total site area and building square footage, by building.
      (d)   The location of all zoning district boundaries.
      (e)   The location and dimension of all sensitive lands areas and
features, as defined herein.
      (f)   The proposed setbacks and exterior dimensions of all proposed
buildings and structures.
      (g)   The location of roads and streets adjacent to the site, or proposed
to serve the site, and including any permits as required by Washington County,
or the state department of transportation, as applicable.
      (h)   The location and dimension of all proposed ingress and egress
points, off street parking and loading areas, including the total number of
parking and loading spaces.
      (i)   The location and dimension of all pedestrian and biking facilities,
including sidewalks and trails, if any.
      (j)   All public and private rights of way and easements located on or
adjacent to the property proposed to be continued, created, relocated or
abandoned, shall be shown.
      (k)   The pdf site plan shall be georeferenced such that it can be used
during the field survey with a GPS enabled device and software that will show
the location where one is standing on the project site.
   (2)   Site Model (When Requested By City); Use Applications: A three-
dimensional representation of the site (a model or a computer generated
visualization/simulation), identifying the form, and massing of all proposed
structures showing the relationships of all buildings, structures and proposed
improvements to the site topography. The three-dimensional representation must
accurately depict the proposed building lines and massing of all structures and
roof forms as well as visually relating the proposed buildings and structures
to the natural terrain and showing the location and appearance of the building,
lot, landscaping and skyline.
   (3)   Site Model (When Requested By City); Subdivision Applications: A
three-dimensional representation of the site (a model or a computer generated
visualization/simulation), identifying the location of all existing and
proposed streets and roads adjacent to the subdivision site, or proposed to be
created on the subdivision site; proposed lot arrangement; and the location,
form and massing of all proposed structures, showing the relationships of all
buildings, structures and proposed changes to the site topography. The three-
dimensional representation must accurately depict the proposed subdivision
design features as well as visually relating the proposed locations of all
buildings and structures to the natural terrain and showing the location and
appearance of all buildings, lots, landscaping and skyline.
   (4)   Site Photographs: Photographs of the site looking out from the
property in all directions and of the property from several different
viewpoints and of any unique geologic features contained within the site.
   (5)   Grading And Drainage Plan: A detailed grading and drainage plan shall
be provided, prepared by a registered engineer or geologist, identifying the
existing topography, and the proposed finished grade of the site, shown at a
maximum contour interval of two feet (2'), or as required by the zoning
administrator. All areas of excavation and fill, slopes of cut and fill, total
cubic yards of excavation and fill, methods of concealment for each exposed cut
and fill, and calculations identifying the limits and amount of disturbance for
the total site shall be shown. This plan shall show the original drainage
pattern (natural course) and proposed changes, if any. If any structures or
culverts are involved, it will be necessary to include an estimate of peak
flows for a one hundred (100) year storm event to establish drainage facility
cross sections. Any sheet flows diverted from their original drainage shall be
returned to the natural course before leaving the property.
   (6)   Erosion Control Plan: Information and plans identifying proposed
temporary and permanent erosion control measures.
   (7)   Landscaping And Revegetation: A landscape plan shall be provided,
prepared by a registered landscape architect, identifying all proposed
landscape, screening and buffering features, including the building envelope;
building footprint; all accessory structures and locations; significant natural
features; plant materials list with type, quantity and size; plant location;
location and species of plant materials existing on the site; and methods for
the revegetation of all disturbed areas. All proposed plant materials should be
drought tolerant. Native vegetation shall be identified and preserved to the
maximum extent possible in the landscape plan.
   (8)   Fences And Walls: The location of all fences and walls, identifying
the proposed height, materials and colors. All fences and walls shall be
located within the maximum limits of disturbance area for each lot, as
applicable. No retaining wall shall exceed three feet (3') in height, measured
from the immediately adjacent lowest natural or finished grade. Retaining walls
shall not be terraced or stacked in any manner that increases the height of any
retaining wall, or series of retaining walls, to a height greater than three
feet (3') from the immediately adjacent lowest natural or finished grade.
   (9)   Building Plans: The exterior elevations of every side of all proposed
structures, clearly showing proposed building materials and colors proposed for
all exterior building facades. This information shall include a proposed
building materials and colors board, including color chips and material
samples, identified with the manufacturer's name, color and LRV number, where
applicable. The location of all associated mechanical and ancillary equipment,
if any, shall be provided, including any screening treatments proposed.
   (10)   Site And Building Lighting Plans: Information and plans shall be
provided identifying all proposed site and building lighting, identifying the
type, design, location, intensity, height and direction of all site and
building lighting. A photometric plan of the site, including all site and
building lighting, may be required by the sensitive lands committee and/or land
use authority.
   (11)   Waste And Storage Areas: The location and dimensions of all proposed
solid waste collection areas and storage areas, including the proposed method
of screening.
   (12)   Construction Plans: A narrative identifying the phases of
construction, a construction schedule, and a list of all permits necessary for
the proposed uses, as applicable.
   (13)   Site Visit: An on-site meeting with the sensitive lands committee to
clarify the intent and purpose of the preservation efforts as described in
16.08.201 . At their discretion, the sensitive lands committee may identify new
or previously acknowledged areas or geological features as significant or
insignificant and may reasonably modify the sensitive lands requirements herein
in order to achieve the intent of these ordinances. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd.
Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.208: SENSITIVE LANDS DETERMINATION AND INVENTORY REQUIRED WITH
APPLICATION:
A sensitive lands determination and inventory, complying with the requirements
of section
16.08.206  of this chapter, shall be required to accompany any land use
application required by this title when:
   (1)   The property, that is the subject of the application, is identified as
being located, wholly or in part, within a sensitive land area, as identified
by the city sensitive lands map.
   (2)   The city council, commission, sensitive lands committee or zoning
administrator has information or knowledge that indicates the possibility that
sensitive lands may exist. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.209: SENSITIVE LANDS DETERMINATION AND INVENTORY REQUIREMENTS:
When required by section
16.08.205  of this chapter, a sensitive lands determination and inventory shall
comply with the following:
   (1)   Be performed by qualified professionals with the necessary licensure,
certification or expertise required to identify and delineate all sensitive
lands areas occurring on the proposed development site.
   (2)   Be based on a survey of the subject property.
   (3)   Include necessary text and map materials sufficient to clearly
identify and delineate the following site features and conditions, as may be
applicable to the site:
      (a)   The area and boundaries of all areas subject to flooding, including
the boundaries of all natural drainageways and 100-year floodplains, including
a map identifying the base and 100-year floodplain elevations.
      (b)   The area and boundaries of all wetlands, as identified by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, or a wetlands delineator, as certified by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers.
      (c)   A color shaded slope analysis of the site area, using a contour
interval of two feet (2') or less and identifying all areas and boundaries
where the slope of the natural grade of the subject property is:
         (i)   Less than eight percent (8%).
         (ii)   Equal to, or greater than eight percent (8%), but less than
twelve percent (12%).
         (iii)   Equal to, or greater than twelve percent (12%), but less than
fifteen percent (15%).
         (iv)   Equal to, or greater than fifteen percent (15%). These areas
shall be identified as "areas of very steep slope".
      (d)   Cross sections of the site topography across the subject site at
approximately two hundred foot (200') intervals in the predominant direction of
slope with at least two (2) cross sections. The cross sections should be
located in areas considered to be representative of the site slopes, have
angled vertices to roughly follow the predominant slope, and may need to be
placed more frequently as necessary to define the boundaries of sensitive
lands.
      (e)   Identify the boundaries that will define the areas on the
hillsides/slope where slopes are eight percent (8%) to twelve percent (12%),
twelve percent (12%) to fifteen percent (15%), and greater than fifteen percent
(15%) based on the analysis of the color shaded slope analysis provided with
item (c) and the cross-sections provided with item (d).
      (f)   All areas within one hundred (100) vertical feet of the Class A
Landhill Ridgeline (See
Figure 8-12  for clarification), as identified on the city ridgelines sensitive
lands map.
      (g)   All areas within one hundred fifty (150) horizontal feet of Class B
interior city bluff ridgelines, in all locations as identified on the city
ridgelines sensitive lands map, incorporated herein by reference, starting at
the point where the slope becomes steeper than fifteen percent (15%) then
extending out on uphill side as shown in Figure 8-13.
      (h)   All areas within twenty (20) horizontal feet both sides of a Class
C interior city bluff ridgeline in all locations identified on the city
sensitive lands map, incorporated herein by reference. The ridgeline is defined
as the line where the ridgeline is most prominent to most observation points,
approximately located at the point where the slope becomes steeper than fifteen
percent (15%).
      (j)   Habitat conservation plan areas, as identified by the city
sensitive lands map.
      (k)   The area and boundaries of lava fields in accordance with the
definition in
16.08.204 .
      (l)   The area and boundaries of rock outcroppings with an area of four
thousand (4,000) square feet or larger per the definition in
16.08.204 .
      (m)   The area and boundaries of significant rock outcroppings per the
definition in
16.08.204
      (n)   Areas of known geologic hazard, as identified by the city sensitive
lands map, or as identified by a county, state or federal agency with
authority.
      (o)   All maps showing locations of sensitive lands shall be
georeferenced such that it can be used during the field survey with a GPS
enabled device and software that will show the location where one is standing
on the project site. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26, 11-16-2023)
16.08.210: SENSITIVE LANDS SURVEY AND SITE VISIT:
A sensitive lands site visit shall be conducted for all properties that are
located within the Sensitive Lands Overlay District to evaluate the Sensitive
Lands Determination and Inventory that was conducted by the professionals hired
by the developer to aid in verifying the completeness and accuracy of the
inventory.
   (1)   The site visit shall be conducted by the Sensitive Land Committee as
part of a scheduled committee meeting, but shall also invite Mayor, City
Council and Planning Commission.
   (2)   At the discretion of the city (Sensitive Lands Committee, Planning
Commission, or final approval body City Council), it may identify new or
previously unacknowledged areas or geological features as significant or
insignificant and may reasonably modify the sensitive lands requirements herein
in order to achieve the intent of these ordinances.
   other markers as appropriate) to identify the boundaries of the sensitive
lands matching the Sensitive Lands Determination and Inventory documents that
were submitted with the application as required per this ordinance.
   (4)   The following boundaries shall be surveyed:
      (a)   Boundary edge of lava fields, rock outcroppings, and boulder
fields.
      (b)   Location of Class B and C Ridgelines
      (c)   Transition boundaries between areas of hillside designations
         (i)   Low Density Residential Hillsides: Transition between areas not
sensitive lands with less than eight percent (8%) average slopes and areas of
sensitive lands steep slope greater than eight percent (8%).
         (ii)   Not Low Density Residential Hillsides: Transition between areas
not sensitive lands hillside with less than twelve percent (12%) average slopes
and areas of sensitive lands steep slope greater than twelve percent (12%).
         (iii)   All Land Uses Hillsides: Transition between areas of sensitive
lands steep slope with less than fifteen percent (15%) average slopes and areas
of sensitive lands very steep slope greater than fifteen percent (15%).
      (d)   Boundary edge of delineated wetlands and floodplains.
(Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.211: SENSITIVE LANDS PROTECTION REGULATIONS; STREAMS AND FLOODPLAINS:
The following requirements and standards are provided to promote, preserve and
enhance stream corridors and areas subject to flooding, to protect them from
potentially irreversible impacts, and to protect private and public property
from damage due to flooding. Unless modified by this section, all development
standards of the zoning district in which the property is located, and any
zoning district overlay provisions, shall apply.
   (1)   Prohibited Activities: No person shall disturb, remove, fill, dredge,
clear, destroy or alter any stream corridor, except as may be expressly allowed
by a valid stream channel alteration permit, as issued by the state Department
of Natural Resources.
   (2)   Required Setbacks: Setbacks for any building, structure or improvement
located within or adjacent to a stream corridor shall comply with the more
restrictive setback requirements of the zoning district, including any overlay
districts, in which it is located, or the requirements of the state Department
of Natural Resources, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as applicable.
   (3)   Runoff Controls: All construction and development projects located
adjacent to a stream corridor shall apply best management practices for both
temporary and permanent runoff controls to minimize sediment and other
contaminants, as may be required by a local, state or federal agency with
jurisdiction.
   (4)   Management Recommendations: The sensitive lands committee, commission
or city council, as applicable, may request recommendations from any local,
state or federal agencies, or other professionals, prior to deciding a land use
application for any required approval, permit or license.
   (5)   Development Or Construction Must Comply: Any development or
construction within a floodplain must comply with the Ivins City flood damage
prevention ordinance, title 7, chapter 11 of this code. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014;
amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.212: SENSITIVE LANDS PROTECTION REGULATIONS; WETLANDS:
   (1)   Prohibited Activities: No person shall disturb, remove, fill, dredge,
clear, destroy or alter any wetland, as identified by the city sensitive lands
map, or as may be identified by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, except as may
be expressly allowed by a valid and necessary permit, as issued by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers.
   (2)   Required Setbacks: Setbacks for any building, structure or improvement
located within or adjacent to a wetland, as identified by the city sensitive
lands map, or as may be identified by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, shall
comply with the more restrictive setback requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as applicable.
   (3)   Runoff Controls: All construction and development projects located
adjacent to a wetland shall apply best management practices for both temporary
and permanent runoff controls to minimize sediment and other contaminants, as
may be required by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
   (4)   Management Recommendations: The sensitive lands committee, commission
or city council, as applicable, may request recommendations from any local,
state or federal agency, or other professionals, prior to deciding a land use
application for any required approval, permit or license. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014;
amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.213: SENSITIVE LANDS PROTECTION REGULATIONS; SLOPES, LOW DENSITY
RESIDENTIAL:
To protect and preserve the natural beauty of the city, to avoid unnecessary
excavation and grading, to preserve naturally occurring landscape features, to
protect the visual quality, character and view amenities of the city, the
following requirements and standards are provided for low density residential
zoned areas determined to have a slope equal to, or greater than eight percent
(8%) as previously defined in this chapter. Unless modified by this section,
all development standards of the zoning district in which the property is
located, and any zoning district overlay provisions, shall apply.
   (1)   Street Alignment: All street alignments shall parallel contours of the
natural terrain, as practicable. Short sections of roadways that run
perpendicular to contours and serve the purpose of connecting main parallel
sections should follow natural drainageways, where possible, and should be
curved and contoured to minimize any adverse visual impact. Public street
lighting shall be in compliance with Ivins City standards.
   (2)   Maximum Street Grade: The maximum grade of any street or road located
in areas determined to have a slope equal to, or greater than eight percent
(8%), shall be eight percent (8%). Short runs may be permitted to exceed eight
percent (8%) if the sensitive lands committee, commission and the city council
find that such street grades are necessary and will not create significant
visual, environmental or safety impacts, and the street design and alignment
follows contour lines to preserve the natural character of the land, and all
cut and fill slopes are minimized and revegetated, as identified in an approved
landscape and revegetation plan.
   (3)   Street Design: In accordance with city standards (see current
transportation master plan). A rural cross section may be considered if it is
demonstrated to achieve a reduction of impact to sensitive lands.
         (a)   Drainages shall be crossed perpendicular to flow lines.
         (b)   Drainage crossings shall utilize sag curves to lower roadway
profiles.
         (c)   Roadway profiles shall be designed to minimize areas of both cut
and fill. Cut sections are preferred over fill sections.
         (d)   All cut and fills shall be minimized as much as practical and
limited to conform to the street design criteria of this section, including
that all street alignments conform to, and parallel the contours of the natural
terrain, as practicable.
         (e)   All cut and fill areas shall be recontoured to the natural,
varied contour of surrounding terrain with a maximum tapered slope back to
natural grade of not greater than two to one (2:1).
         (f)   All areas of cut and fill shall be temporarily planted or
otherwise protected from erosion during the period of construction and shall be
permanently planted or otherwise protected from erosion within twenty (20) days
after the completion of all grading or excavation, as identified by an approved
landscape and revegetation plan.
         (g)   All streets shall be located and screened to minimize any visual
impacts associated with streets, street locations and other infrastructure.
   (4)   Benching And Terracing Prohibited: No cutting, grading, filling,
excavating, benching or terracing of any proposed lot or parcel shall be
permitted or authorized to occur outside of the maximum limits of disturbance
area for each lot or parcel, as provided herein.
   (5)   Maximum Limits Of Disturbance Area: The maximum area of any lot or
parcel that may be disturbed shall be limited as determined by the average
slope of the subdivision lot or parcel, as provided by
table 8-3  of this section. The maximum area of any lot or parcel that may be
disturbed may be increased, as further provided by table 8-3 of this section,
if the lot or parcel is located in an area within a planned development overlay
(PD) district. The maximum limits of disturbance area shall be identified on
each lot or parcel and shall include all graded, excavated, filled or otherwise
disturbed areas, the area occupied by the primary building, all accessory
building areas, areas of hard surfacing, including driveways, walkways, patios,
off street parking areas, and all areas of disturbance or nonnative vegetation.
FIGURE 8-2 (NOT USED)
TABLE 8-3
MAXIMUM SUBDIVISION LOT OR PARCEL LIMITS OF DISTURBANCE
                             Maximum Limits Of Maximum Limits Of Disturbance
Average Lot Slope (Column A) Disturbance Area  Area For Lots Located In
                             (Column B)        Planned Development Overlay
                                               (PD) District (Column C)
                             Maximum Limits Of Maximum Limits Of Disturbance
Average Lot Slope (Column A) Disturbance Area  Area For Lots Located In
                             (Column B)        Planned Development Overlay
                                               (PD) District (Column C)
Less than 8 percent          100 percent       100 percent
                                               1 percent increase in the
Less than 8 percent but                        maximum limits of disturbance
surrounded by lots on at                       area (column B) for each 1
least 3 sides with average   50 percent        percent of open space area
slopes greater than 8                          being provided as identified
percent                                        by an approved planned
                                               development project plan
                                               1 percent increase in the
                                               maximum limits of disturbance
8 percent to less than 9                       area (column B) for each 1
percent                      45 percent        percent of open space area
                                               being provided as identified
                                               by an approved planned
                                               development project plan
                                               1 percent increase in the
                                               maximum limits of disturbance
9 percent to less than 10                      area (column B) for each 1
percent                      40 percent        percent of open space area
                                               being provided as identified
                                               by an approved planned
                                               development project plan
10 percent to less than 11   35 percent        35 percent
percent
11 percent to less than 12   30 percent        30 percent
percent
12 percent to less than 13   25 percent        25 percent
percent
13 percent to less than 14   20 percent        20 percent
percent
14 percent to less than 15   15 percent        15 percent
percent
15 percent or greater        10 percent        10 percent
 
For the purposes of this section, the average slope of a lot shall be the
average slope of a connecting line drawn from the lowest point of the lot to
the highest point following the path most nearly perpendicular to the natural
grade contours.
   Any areas of the lot that are excluded from disturbance with a restriction
on the subdivision plat (or other equivalent method of restriction) may be
excluded from the calculation of the average lot slope, provided that the
revised average lot slope does not increase the disturbance area by more than
two (2) times the original calculation or to more than forty five percent (45%)
of the entire lot.
FIGURE 8-3
REPRESENTATION OF LIMITS OF DISTURBANCE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4769.png]
 
   (6)   Maximum Building/Structure Height: The maximum height of all primary
buildings or structures shall not exceed eighteen feet (18') above the natural
or finished grade, whichever is lower.
FIGURE 8-4
MAXIMUM BUILDING/STRUCTURE HEIGHT FOR LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ON
SLOPES GREATER THAN 8 PERCENT
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4000.jpg]
FIGURE 8-5
BUILDING/STRUCTURE HEIGHTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4002.jpg]
   (7)   Areas Of Cut And Fill Slope: All proposed areas of cut and fill on
lots shall meet the following requirements:
      (a)   All cut and fill areas shall be minimized as much as practicable.
      (b)   All cut and fill areas shall be located within, and included in,
the maximum limits of disturbance area for each lot.
      (c)   All cut and fill areas shall be recontoured to the natural, varied
contour of surrounding terrain with a maximum tapered slope back to natural
grade of not greater than two to one (2:1).
      (d)   All areas of cut and fill shall be temporarily planted or otherwise
protected from erosion during the period of construction and shall be
permanently planted or otherwise protected from erosion within twenty (20) days
after the completion of all grading or excavation, as identified by an approved
landscape and revegetation plan.
      (e)   No fill areas shall exceed three (3) vertical feet, measured from
the naturally occurring grade. No retaining walls shall be used in association
with any fill areas or fill slopes. All fill slopes shall be recontoured to the
natural, varied contour of surrounding terrain with a maximum tapered slope
back to natural grade of not greater than two to one (2:1).
FIGURE 8-6
FILL AREA REQUIREMENTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4004.jpg]
      (f)   All cut areas shall be minimized, as much as practicable, and shall
only be allowed for the purposes of siting a primary structure. All cut areas
shall be screened with buildings, building walls or other screening treatments,
as allowed by the sensitive lands committee, commission or city council, as
applicable. All cut areas shall be included in the maximum limits of
disturbance area.
FIGURE 8-7
BUILDING-SLOPE RELATIONSHIP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4006.jpg]
   (9)   Topsoil Quality: All topsoil from any disturbed portion of the
development site shall be preserved and utilized in revegetation. All fill soil
shall be of a quality sufficient to support native plant growth.
   (10)   Subdivision Layout And Site And Building/Structure Design
Requirements:
      (a)   Chapter 19 this title provides requirements for site and building
design. The requirements of chapter 19 of this title shall apply to all land
use application approvals, permits and licenses, including all use and
subdivision application approvals and building permits for buildings or
structures located in areas of steep, or very steep, slope.
      (b)   All provisions of chapter 19 of this title shall apply, as
applicable, but specifically the color of all exterior building materials and
surfaces shall blend new buildings with the natural environment. Exterior
building colors that respect and enhance the natural tones of the southern Utah
environment shall be used. All wall extensions from buildings, and walls and
fences, shall be the same or similar color, as the main building. The light
reflective value (LRV) of materials used on all exterior walls and roof areas
shall be between seven (7) (darkest value of shaded vegetation) and thirty
eight (38) (approximate value of red sandstone and soil in the city).
Generally, the more visible the structure, the lower its LRV should be. The
strength, intensity and brightness of the color selected (chroma) shall be in
the range from very weak (grayish) to medium weak (neutral or earth tone).
Strong chroma colors should be avoided. Stains, flat paints and matte finishes
are required. High gloss paints, factory finished metals or other materials
which increase visual impacts are not permitted. Chimneys, flues, vents,
gutters, downspouts, mechanical and electrical equipment, railings, window
shading devices and other exterior devices shall be similar in LRV and chroma
to the surrounding surfaces of the building.
   (11)   Lighting: All street lighting, if required, shall be fully shielded
and hooded and be unobtrusive in design and color. All exterior building
lighting shall be shielded and hooded so no light source is visible from
adjacent properties. All lighting shall be in compliance with the current Ivins
City outdoor lighting ordinance, title 14, chapter 10 of this code.
   (12)   Additional Off Street Parking: In addition to the off street parking
requirements provided by chapter 20 of this title, additional off street
parking may be required or recommended by the sensitive lands committee,
commission or city council, sufficient to protect public safety vehicle access.
For any dwelling, a minimum of four (4) off street parking spaces shall be
provided.
   (13)   Retaining Walls And Fences:
      (a)   The location of all retaining walls and fences, identifying
proposed height, materials and colors, shall be shown.
      (b)   All walls and fences shall be located within the maximum limits of
disturbance area for each lot.
      (c)   No retaining walls shall be used in association with any fill areas
or fill slopes. All fill slopes shall be recontoured to the natural, varied
contour of surrounding terrain with a maximum tapered slope back to natural
grade of not greater than two to one (2:1).
FIGURE 8-8
RETAINING WALLS ON FILLS PROHIBITED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4008.jpg]
      (d)   Retaining walls shall only be used to minimize areas of cut slopes.
      (e)   No retaining wall shall exceed three feet (3') in height, measured
from the adjacent natural or finished grade, whichever is lower.
FIGURE 8-9
RETAINING WALLS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4010.jpg]
      (f)   Retaining walls shall not be terraced or stacked in any manner that
increases the height of any retaining wall, or series of retaining walls, to a
height greater than three feet (3') from the adjacent natural or finished
grade, whichever is lower.
FIGURE 8-10
STACKING OF RETAINING WALLS PROHIBITED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4012.jpg]
      (g)   Retaining walls shall be constructed of materials or be finished to
blend the wall with the surrounding landscape colors and features. All exposed
portions of any retaining walls shall be treated and finished and be a color so
that no untreated concrete, concrete block or similar materials are visible.
   (14)   Transition Areas: For projects located in areas that transition from
areas with slopes less than eight percent (8%) to areas greater than or equal
to eight percent (8%). A transition area shall be defined as the area within
the slope of the first twenty five feet (25') of vertical rise in residential
areas and the first thirty five feet (35') of vertical rise in commercial
areas. See figure 8-113 of this section for illustration.
      (a)   Transition areas shall be exempted from the slope restrictions of
the sensitive lands ordinance except for building/structure height which shall
be restricted by an interpolated building height envelope that will transition
from the nonsensitive lands zone through the transition area as illustrated in
figure 8-11 of this section.
FIGURE 8-12
TRANSITION AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4014.jpg]
   (15)   Management Recommendations: The sensitive lands committee, commission
or city council may request recommendations from any local, state or federal
agency, or other professionals, prior to deciding a land use application for
any required approval, permit or license. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-
26, 2023)
16.08.214: SENSITIVE LANDS PROTECTION REGULATIONS; SLOPES, NONRESIDENTIAL AND
MEDIUM TO HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL:
To protect and preserve the natural beauty of the city, to avoid unnecessary
excavation and grading, to preserve naturally occurring landscape features, to
protect the visual quality, character and view amenities of the city, the
following requirements and standards are provided for nonresidential and medium
to high density residential zoned areas determined to have a slope equal to, or
greater than twelve percent (12%) as previously defined in this chapter.
   (1)   Street Alignment: See subsection
16.08.209 (1) of this chapter.
   (2)   Maximum Street Grade: The maximum grade of any street or road shall be
twelve percent (12%).
   (3)   Street Design: See subsection
16.08.209 (3) of this chapter.
   (4)   Benching And Terracing: See subsection
16.08.209 (4) of this chapter.
   (5)   Maximum Limits Of Disturbance: Nonresidential (i.e., commercial and
industrial) or medium to high density residential lots shall identify areas
where slopes are greater than twelve percent (12%) based on the predominant
slope of hillsides that have a vertical rise greater than thirty feet (30') as
previously defined in this chapter. No more than thirty percent (30%) of these
areas shall be disturbed by building/structure construction, grading or
placement of impervious surfaces.
   (6)   Maximum Building/Structure Height: The maximum height of all primary
buildings or structures shall not exceed twenty six feet (26') above the
natural or finished grade, whichever is lower. Special exceptions may be
allowed per chapter 28 of this title. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26,
2023)
16.08.215: SENSITIVE LANDS PROTECTION REGULATIONS: RIDGELINES:
The purpose of this subsection is to ensure all development and construction
occurring near significant ridgelines blend with the natural topography.
   (1)   Class A Ridgeline Protection of Landhill: As shown on
Figure 8-12 , no building or structure shall be permitted within any area
identified within one hundred (100) vertical feet of the Class A Ridgeline of
Landhill, as identified by the city sensitive lands map.
FIGURE 8-14
CLASS A RIDGELINE PROTECTION OF LANDHILL.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4016.jpg]
The finished floor elevation of all buildings/structures shall be established
at least 100 feet below the Landhill ridgeline.
   (2)   Class B Ridgeline Protection of Interior City Bluff: As identified on
the city sensitive lands map, no permanent building or structure shall be
permitted within seventy five (75) horizontal feet of any interior city bluff
ridgeline without a slope stability analysis performed by a qualified
geotechnical engineer of the adjacent slope as defined in this chapter and
identified by the city ridgelines map, and no building or structure within one
hundred fifty (150) horizontal feet of the ridgeline shall rise above a
projected sightline originating at the ridgeline point and projected vertically
six feet (6') and then at a twelve percent (12%) slope away from the ridgeline
and very steep slope. See Figure 8-13.
FIGURE 8-15
CLASS B RIDGELINE PROTECTION OF INTERIOR CITY BLUFF
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4018.jpg]
      (a)   Berming on the ridgeline is allowed to raise the site line by a
maximum of four feet (4') on an individual parcel greater than five (5) acres
or as a subdivision improvement when the subdivision is greater than five (5)
acres.
         (i)   Any fills or berming on a ridgeline shall comply with strict
landscaping requirements such that the fill or berming is not visible from
public viewpoints.
         (ii)   The berming shall be no steeper than a 3:1 slope.
         (iii)   The landscaping shall match native landscaping, with the
exception that trees and bushes may be planted to enhance vegetative screening.
         (iv)   Soil material used for the fill or berming shall match in color
and texture the native surroundings.
         (v)   No part of the berm shall be closer to the defined ridgeline
than twenty feet (20').
      (b)   Privacy fencing shall be set back from the defined ridgeline a
minimum of twenty feet (20').
   (3)   Class C Ridgeline Protection Of Interior City Bluff: There shall be no
disturbance of a Class C Ridgeline within twenty feet (20') either side unless
there is roadway required by the master plan or to provide for city required
connectivity for which cases disturbance shall be minimized. (Ord. 2023-26,
2023)
16.08.216: SENSITIVE LANDS DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS:
The development rights, applicable to "sensitive lands" areas, as defined
herein, are provided and identified by
table 8-4  of this section. The allowed development rights for a sensitive land
area are dependent on:
   (1)   The nature and type of sensitive lands areas determined to exist on
the development site; and
   (2)   Whether an applicant for an approval, permit or license proposes
construction or development on any sensitive land area, identified as
"sensitive land development rights" by
table 8-4  of this section, or proposes to transfer available development
rights to another area of the development site, located outside of any
sensitive lands areas, determined by a sensitive lands determination and
inventory, identified as "transferable sensitive land development rights" (
table 8-4  of this section).
TABLE 8-4
SENSITIVE LANDS DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
               Column A                          Column B
Sensitive Land Sensitive Land Development Rights Transferable Sensitive Land
                                                 Development Rights
                          Column A                   Column B
Sensitive Land            Sensitive Land Development Transferable Sensitive
                          Rights                     Land Development Rights
                                                     40 percent of density
                                                     allowed by the base
Areas subject to                                     district, plus any density
flooding, as identified   20 percent of density      incentives that may apply
by the city sensitive     allowed by the base        through a planned
lands map                 district                   development overlay
                                                     district (PD) and approved
                                                     planned development
                                                     project plan
                                                     40 percent of density
Areas of wetlands, as                                allowed by the base
identified by the city                               district, plus any density
sensitive lands map, or   20 percent of density      incentives that may apply
as may be identified by   allowed by the base        through a planned
the U.S. Army Corps of    district                   development overlay
Engineers                                            district (PD) and approved
                                                     planned development
                                                     project plan
                                                     100 percent of density
                                                     allowed by the base
                                                     district, plus any density
Areas of slope less than  100 percent of density     incentives that may apply
8 percent                 allowed by the base        through a planned
                          district                   development overlay
                                                     district (PD) and approved
                                                     planned development
                                                     project plan
                                                     80 percent of density
                                                     allowed by the base
                                                     district, plus any density
Areas of slope equal to 8 75 percent of density      incentives that may apply
percent, but less than 10 allowed by the base        through a planned
percent                   district                   development overlay
                                                     district (PD) and approved
                                                     planned development
                                                     project plan
                                                     65 percent of density
                                                     allowed by the base
                                                     district, plus any density
Areas of slope equal to   55 percent of the density  incentives that may apply
10 percent, but less than allowed by the base        through a planned
12 percent                district                   development overlay
                                                     district (PD) and approved
                                                     planned development
                                                     project plan
                                                     50 percent of density
                                                     allowed by the base
                                                     district, plus any density
Areas of slope equal to   35 percent of the density  incentives that may apply
12 percent, but less than allowed by the base        through a planned
14 percent                district                   development overlay
                                                     district (PD) and approved
                                                     planned development
                                                     project plan
                                                     35 percent of density
                                                     allowed by the base
                                                     district, plus any density
Areas of slope equal to   15 percent of the density  incentives that may apply
14 percent, but less than allowed by the base        through a planned
15 percent                district                   development overlay
                                                     district (PD) and approved
                                                     planned development
                                                     project plan
                                                     30 percent of density
                                                     allowed by the base
                                                     district, plus any density
Areas of slope greater    5 percent of the density   incentives that may apply
than 15 percent           allowed by the base        through a planned
                          district                   development overlay
                                                     district (PD) and approved
                                                     planned development
                                                     project plan
                                                     30 percent of density
                                                     allowed by the base
Areas within 100 vertical                            district, plus any density
feet of a ridgeline, as   5 percent of density       incentives that may apply
identified on the city    allowed by the base        through a planned
ridgelines sensitive      district                   development overlay
lands map                                            district (PD) and approved
                                                     planned development
                                                     project plan
                                                     40 percent of density
                                                     allowed by the base
                                                     district, plus any density
                          20 percent of density      incentives that may apply
Habitat conservation plan allowed by the base        through a planned
areas, as identified by   district or in compliance  development overlay
the city sensitive lands  with an approved habitat   district (PD) and approved
map                       conservation plan          planned development
                                                     project plan or in
                                                     compliance with an
                                                     approved habitat
                                                     conservation plan
                                                     The density allowed by the
                                                     base district shall apply
                                                     when a minimum of 30
                          The density allowed by the percent of the lava area
                          base district shall apply  remains undisturbed and
Areas of lava fields and  when a minimum of 30       provided at locations to
rock outcroppings with an percent of the lava area   provide access and views,
area of 8,000 square      remains undisturbed and    plus any density
feet, or larger, as       provided at locations to   incentives that may apply
identified by the city    provide access and views,  through a planned
sensitive lands map       otherwise 5 percent of the development overlay
                          density allowed by the     district (PD) and approved
                          base district              planned development
                                                     project plan, otherwise 5
                                                     percent of the density
                                                     allowed by the base
                                                     district
                                                     30 percent of density
Areas of known geologic                              allowed by the base
hazard, as identified by                             district, plus any density
the city sensitive lands  5 percent of density       incentives that may apply
map, or as may be         allowed by the base        through a planned
identified by a county,   district                   development overlay
state or federal agency                              district (PD) and approved
                                                     planned development
                                                     project plan
 
FIGURE 8-16
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4767.png]
 
(Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.217: CONSTRUCTION OR DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS PROPOSED ON SENSITIVE LANDS:
In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the following
requirements shall apply to all land use applications for any approval, permit
or license required by this title, and proposing construction or development on
any sensitive lands areas, as identified by the sensitive lands determination
and inventory:
   (1)   Unless previously provided for by the provisions of an approved
habitat conservation plan, a land use application for any approval, permit or
license, proposing construction or development on any sensitive lands areas,
shall be accompanied by an environmental and development suitability analysis,
including necessary text and map materials, as may be required, performed by
qualified professionals, sufficient to identify:
      (a)   All adverse impacts to the natural condition of the site and all
adverse visual or environmental impacts to adjoining properties or the public
interest because of the proposed construction or development. Impacts to soil
and slope stability, visual character of slopes, flooding potential, wetlands
loss, erosion potential, proposed site grading and cut and fill slopes,
vegetation and wildlife habitat loss shall be identified.
      (b)   The areas determined to be the most suitable for construction or
development that create the least impacts to sensitive lands, including the
minimization of adverse visual or environmental impacts to adjoining properties
or the public interest will be identified.
      (c)   All best management practices, mitigation actions and strategies
proposed to minimize any construction or development related on site or off
site sensitive land impacts.
   (2)   The maximum density allowed for any development or subdivision project
proposed on any sensitive lands areas shall comply with the density
requirements of section 6.08.213,
table 8-4 , column A, "Sensitive Land Development Rights", of this chapter, as
applicable.
   (3)   Compliance with all requirements of the zoning district in which the
subject property is located, including any overlay districts, unless modified
by the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26,
2023)
16.08.218: TRANSFER OF SENSITIVE LANDS DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS:
In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the following
requirements shall apply to all land use applications for any approval, permit
or license required by this title, and proposing the transfer of development
rights available to any sensitive lands areas to other areas on the development
site, outside of any sensitive lands areas, as identified by the sensitive
lands determination and inventory:
   (1)   A land use application for any approval, permit or license proposing
the transfer of development rights available to any sensitive lands areas to
other areas on the development site, shall be accompanied by an environmental
and development suitability analysis, including necessary text and map
material, as may be required, performed by qualified professionals, sufficient
to identify:
      (a)   All adverse impacts to the natural condition of the site and all
adverse visual or environmental impacts to adjoining properties or the public
interest because of the proposed construction or development. Impacts to soil
and slope stability, visual character of slopes, flooding potential, wetlands
loss, erosion potential, proposed site grading and cut and fill slopes,
vegetation and wildlife habitat loss shall be identified.
      (b)   The areas determined to be the most suitable for construction or
development that create the least impact to sensitive lands, including the
minimization of adverse visual or environmental impacts to adjoining properties
or the public interest will be identified.
      (c)   All best management practices, mitigation actions and strategies
proposed to minimize any construction or development related on site or off
site sensitive land impacts.
   (2)   The maximum density allowed for any development or subdivision project
that proposes to transfer development rights available to a sensitive lands
area (section 16.08.213,
table 8-4 , column A, of this chapter) to another area of the development site,
located outside of any sensitive lands areas, determined by a sensitive lands
determination and inventory, shall comply with the density requirements of
section 16.08.213, table 8-4, column B, "Transferable Sensitive Land
Development Rights", of this chapter, as applicable.
   (3)   Compliance with all requirements of the zoning district in which the
subject property is located, unless modified or changed by the requirements of
this section or the requirements of the planned development overlay district
(PD) or planned development project plan, as applicable. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014;
amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.219: ON SITE TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS; APPLICATION TO ESTABLISH
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (PD) REQUIRED:
   (1)   A land use application for any approval, permit or license required by
this title, and proposing the transfer of development rights, shall be
accompanied by a zoning districts map amendment application to establish a
planned development overlay district (PD).
   (2)   An application to establish a planned development overlay district
(PD) shall be approved by the city council, following the receipt of a
sensitive lands committee and commission recommendation, prior to any approval,
permit or license authorizing any transfer of sensitive land development
rights. A planned development project plan and development agreement shall be
approved by the city council concurrent with the approval of a zoning districts
map amendment application to establish a planned development overlay district
(PD). (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.220: OPEN SPACE AREAS:
All matters related to open space use regulations, open space design standards,
permanent open space protections and open space ownership and maintenance
options shall be governed by the requirements and provisions of the planned
development overlay district (PD), as provided by sections
16.07.417  through
16.07.421  of this title. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.221: DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
Once approved by the city council, the planned development layout plan and
development agreement shall be controlling for all required future approvals,
permits and licenses, including, but not limited to, the submission and
approval of use and subdivision applications, and any additional procedural
requirements set forth in this chapter, this title and all other applicable
land use ordinances. Any amendments to an existing approval, permit or license
shall be considered and approved by following the procedure required for
original approval. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.222: BENEFICIAL USE OF PROPERTY:
See section
16.11.109  of this title. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26, 2023)
16.08.223: REASONABLE USE OF PROPERTY:
If an applicant for any approval, permit or license required by this title
demonstrates that application of the requirements of this chapter would deny
all reasonable use of the subject property, the city council may modify the
application of these requirements to the extent necessary to provide a
reasonable use of the subject property. (Ord. 2014-08, 2014; amd. Ord. 2023-26,
2023)
CHAPTER 9
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
16.09.101: Purpose
16.09.102: Eligibility
16.09.103: When Required
16.09.104: Content
16.09.105: Form And Consistency
16.09.106: Applicable Provisions And Regulations
16.09.107: Periodic Review
16.09.108: Amendment Or Cancellation
16.09.109: Recording Of Development Agreement
16.09.110: Modification Or Suspension To Comply With State Law
16.09.101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the general plan and the purposes
of applicable land use regulations to the extent allowed by state law. A
development agreement may be considered by the city council as a method of
providing the city with additional control and flexibility in the approval of
development projects, commercial and residential, by tailoring development
standards and requirements to the unique features of a particular development
site. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 2023)
16.09.102: ELIGIBILITY:
Persons entering into a development agreement with the city council must have a
legal or equitable interest in the property that is the subject of the
development agreement. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 2023)
16.09.103: WHEN REQUIRED:
All development applications, including subdivisions, whether residential,
commercial or multi-use, shall trigger the requirement for a development
agreement to be approved by the city council, regardless of whether it is to be
constructed in a single phase or multiple phases. However, a development
agreement is not required as a condition for developing land if the city’s land
use regulations establish all applicable standards for development on the land.
(Ord. 2015-15, 2015; amd. Ord. 2021-11, 9-2-2021; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 2023)
16.09.104: CONTENT:
   (1)   The city should consider the following sections for possible inclusion
in any development agreement, as applicable:
      (a)   Duration of agreement.
      (b)   Description of the subject property.
      (c)   Allowed uses.
      (d)   Maximum density or intensity of the allowed uses and construction
requirements including, but not limited to, exterior colors, design guidelines,
minimum and maximum building heights and building size.
      (e)   A subdivision layout or site plan identifying, but not limited to,
the location and arrangement of all allowed uses, circulation patterns, and all
required dedications and improvements.
      (f)   A phasing schedule for all project phases and the timing for the
provision of all features, dedications and improvements.
      (g)   A listing of all project features and facilities being voluntarily
provided to the city, in addition to those typically required by all land use
ordinances.
      (h)   In high density residential zones (R-1-5 to Multi-Family),
developments having twenty-five units or more shall have a requirement that a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the units are sold to owner occupants.
      (i)   Other conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for
subsequent actions and approvals.
   (2)   If the development agreement restricts an applicant’s rights under
clearly established state law, the development agreement must contain a clear
disclosure, using bold type and a larger font, of the rights being restricted.
(Ord. 2015-15, 2015; amd. Ord. 2021-11, 9-2-2021; Ord. 2023-11, 2023)
16.09.105: FORM AND CONSISTENCY:
A development agreement shall be approved by the council with a finding that
the development agreement is consistent with state law and the city’s land use
regulations. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 2023)
16.09.106: APPLICABLE PROVISIONS AND REGULATIONS:
All provisions of a development agreement shall comply with state law and, to
the extent allowed by state law, the city’s land use regulations governing the
uses of the land, density, design, improvement and construction standards and
specifications in effect at the time of the execution of the agreement. A
development agreement may not:
   (1)   Limit the city’s authority in the future to:
      (a)   Enact a land use regulation; or
      (b)   Take any action allowed under state code section 10-8-84;
   (2)   Require the city to change the zoning designation of an area of land
within the city in the future;
   (3)   Allow a use or development of land that applicable land use
regulations governing the area subject to the development agreement would
otherwise prohibit. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 2023)
16.09.107: PERIODIC REVIEW:
The zoning administrator should review a development agreement periodically, at
which time the applicant, or the applicant’s successor, shall be required to
demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement.
If the zoning administrator finds, based on the evidence, that the applicant
has not complied in good faith with all terms or conditions of the agreement,
the zoning administrator shall recommend to the city council that the agreement
be enforced as written, modified, or terminated. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015)
16.09.108: AMENDMENT OR CANCELLATION:
In addition to the provisions of section
16.09.107 of this chapter, a development agreement may be amended or canceled
in whole, or in part, by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement, or
their successors. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 2023)
16.09.109: RECORDING OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
After the city council has approved, and the parties have fully executed a
development agreement, the city recorder shall record the development agreement
in the office of the Washington County recorder. The recorded copy of the
development agreement shall be considered the official copy of said agreement.
The benefits, rights and obligations of a development agreement shall be
binding upon and shall inure to all successors to the original parties to the
agreement. (Ord. 2015-15, 2015; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 2023)
16.09.110: MODIFICATION OR SUSPENSION TO COMPLY WITH STATE LAW:
In the event that state laws prevents or precludes compliance with one or more
provisions of a development agreement, such provisions of the agreement shall
be modified or suspended as may be necessary to comply with state law. (Ord.
2015-15, 2015; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 2023)
CHAPTER 10
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
16.10.101: Purpose
16.10.102: Notice Of Public Hearings And Public Meetings To Consider Adoption
Of Or Amendments To General Plan Or Land Use Regulations, Including Zoning Text
And Map
16.10.103: (Repealed by Ord. 2023-09, 2023)
16.10.104: Required Notice For Other Public Hearings
16.10.105: Required Notice For Other Public Meetings
16.10.106: (Repealed by Ord. 2023-09, 2023)
16.10.107: Required Applicant Notice; Decision
16.10.108: Notice Challenge
16.10.101: PURPOSE:
As provided by the act, the city is required to provide notice of all public
hearings and public meetings. The notice requirements of the city for all
public hearings and public meetings regarding land use matters are established
by state law and are also provided herein. The city has a policy favoring
adequate notice of all public hearings and meetings. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd.
Ord. 2023-09, 2023)
16.10.102: NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS AND PUBLIC MEETINGS TO CONSIDER ADOPTION
OF OR AMENDMENTS TO GENERAL PLAN OR LAND USE REGULATIONS, INCLUDING ZONING TEXT
AND MAP:
   (1)   Public Hearings: Notice of public hearings to consider adoption of or
amendments to the general plan or land use regulations, including zoning text
and map shall set forth: the date, time and place of each public hearing, be
given at least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing, and be
provided as follows:
      (a)   Mail to the applicant(s).
      (b)   Submit to a newspaper of general circulation in Ivins City.
      (c)   Post on the Utah Public Notice Website.
      (d)   Post on the city’s official website.
      (e)   Post in at least five (5) public locations withing the city,
including Ivins City Hall or meeting location.
      (f)   For adoption of or amendments to the General Plan or Zoning Text
and Map, mail to each property owner whose property is located within three
hundred feet (300') of the property that is the subject of the public hearing.
      (g)   For adoption of, or amendments to, the General Plan or Zoning Text
and Map, post on the property that is the subject of the public hearing, a sign
on each street frontage and for parcels 5 acres or less, will be a minimum of
18 x 24 inches and for parcels over 5 acres, a sign that will be a minimum of
32 to 36 inches x 48 inches, to give notice to passersby.
      (h)   For adoption of or amendments to the General Plan or Zoning Text
and Map, mail to each “affected entity” as defined and identified by the act,
as may be required.
   (2)   Public Meetings: Notice of public meetings to consider adoption of or
amendments to the general plan or a land use regulation, including zoning text
and map, shall be provided as follows:
      (a)   Notice of the date, time, and place of the public meeting, at least
twenty four (24) hours before the meetings, which notice shall be given to the
applicant(s) and posted as follows:
         (i)   Submit to a newspaper of general circulation in Ivins City.
         (ii)   Post on the Utah Public Notice Website.
         (iii)   Post on the city’s official website.
         (iv)   Post in at least five (5) public locations withing the city,
including Ivins City Hall or meeting location. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord.
2023-09, 2023)
16.10.103: REPEALED:
(Repealed by Ord. 2023-09, 2023)
16.10.104: REQUIRED NOTICE FOR OTHER PUBLIC HEARINGS:
When required by state law, notice for other public hearings shall be provided
as follows:
   (1)   Notice of the date, time and place of each public hearing shall be
given at least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing provided by the
following means:
      (a)   Mail to the applicant(s);
      (b)   Submit to a newspaper of general circulation in Ivins City;
      (c)   Post on the Utah Public Notice Website;
      (d)   Post on the city’s official website;
      (e)   Post in at least five (5) public locations within the city,
including Ivins City Hall or meeting location. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord.
2023-09, 2023)
16.10.105: REQUIRED NOTICE FOR OTHER PUBLIC MEETINGS:
When required by the provisions of this title, notice of the public meeting
shall be provided as follows:
   (1)   Notice of the date, time and place of each public meeting, at least
twenty four (24) hours before the public meeting, which notice shall be:
      (a)   Mail to the applicant(s).
      (b)   Submit to a newspaper of general circulation in Ivins City.
      (c)   Post on the Utah Public Notice Website;
      (d)   Post on the city’s official website;
      (e)   Post in at least five (5) public locations within the city,
including Ivins City Hall or meeting location. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008; amd. Ord.
2023-09, 2023)
16.10.106: REPEALED:
(Repealed by Ord. 2023-09, 2023)
16.10.107:REQUIRED APPLICANT NOTICE; DECISION:
The applicant for a land use application shall be notified of any decision on
the application as required by the act. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008; amd. Ord. 2023-09,
2023)
16.10.108: NOTICE CHALLENGE:
If notice given under authority of this chapter, and authority of the act, is
not challenged under Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-801, within thirty (30)
days after the meeting or action for which notice is given, the notice is
considered adequate and proper. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 11
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
16.11.101: Purpose
16.11.102: Applications Required
16.11.103: Land Use Application Approval And Building Permit Required Prior To
Any Construction
16.11.104: Allowed Uses
16.11.105: Prohibited Uses
16.11.106: All Uses, Buildings And Structures To Comply With Zoning District
Requirements
16.11.107: All Buildings Taxed As Real Property
16.11.108: Subdivision And Sale Of Property
16.11.109: Allowed Minimum Use Of Legal Lots
16.11.110: Status Of Lots In Repealed Planned Development Zone (PD)
16.11.111: Adequate Public Facilities
16.11.112: Culinary Water And Sanitary Sewer Requirements
16.11.113: Utilities
16.11.114: Required Streets, Curb, Gutter, Sidewalks And Trails
16.11.115: Streets And Roads On Steep Slopes
16.11.116: Clear View At Intersecting Streets
16.11.117: Clear View At Driveways
16.11.118: Buildable Area And Survey Requirements
16.11.119: Lot Standards; Noncomplying Lots Prohibited
16.11.120: Every Building Or Structure To Be On A Lot
16.11.121: Lot Frontage Required
16.11.122: Lots In Two Or More Zoning Districts
16.11.123: Required Yard Areas For One Building Only
16.11.124: General Building Requirements
16.11.125: Minimum Height Of All Primary Buildings
16.11.126: Maximum Height Of All Primary Buildings
16.11.127: Exceptions To Maximum Height Limitations
16.11.128: Time Limits For Use And Building Permit Approvals
16.11.129: Time Limits For Construction
16.11.130: Required Mechanical and Individual Solar Photovaltaic System
Equipment Screening and Placement
16.11.131: City Policy On Basements
16.11.132: Front Yard Parking Prohibited
16.11.133: Required Yards To Be Unobstructed; Exceptions
16.11.134: Site Grading And Drainage
16.11.135: Requirements For Fences And Walls
16.11.136: Requirements For Retaining Walls
16.11.137: Construction Subject To Geologic, Flood Or Other Natural Hazards
16.11.138: Effect Of Official Maps
16.11.139: Required Property Maintenance
16.11.140: Noxious Weeds
16.11.101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of general development standards is to further the purposes of the
general plan, this title and all other land use ordinances. Compliance with all
general development standards, as well as all other requirements of this title,
and all other federal, state and local requirements, as applicable, is required
for any land use application approval required by this title, or any other
approval, permit or license required by all other land use ordinances. (Ord.
2005-13, 2005)
16.11.102: APPLICATIONS REQUIRED:
All requests to establish a use, or construction, alteration, enlargement,
repair or removal of any building, structure or part thereof, shall be
initiated by the submission of a land use application, as required by all land
use ordinances and/or building permit application, as required by the adopted
building code, as applicable. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.103: LAND USE APPLICATION APPROVAL AND BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED PRIOR TO
ANY CONSTRUCTION:
The construction, alteration, enlargement, repair or removal of any building,
structure, or part thereof, shall not be commenced until after the receipt of a
land use application approval, or building permit approval, as applicable.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.104: ALLOWED USES:
All uses allowed within the city are identified in the tables of uses, as
contained in chapter 33 of this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.105: PROHIBITED USES:
Any use not specifically provided in the tables of uses is hereby declared a
prohibited use in the city. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.106: ALL USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES TO COMPLY WITH ZONING DISTRICT
REQUIREMENTS:
Every building or structure erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged or moved,
and every building, structure or land rearranged, designed or intended for any
use shall be built or used only as allowed by the requirements of this title,
including the requirements of the zoning district in which the building,
structure or use is located, and all other land use ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.11.107: ALL BUILDINGS TAXED AS REAL PROPERTY:
All buildings shall be taxed as real property. For all mobile homes, an
affidavit shall be filed with the state tax commission, pursuant to the
requirements of Utah Code Annotated, as amended. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.108: SUBDIVISION AND SALE OF PROPERTY:
No person shall subdivide any land parcel, located wholly or in part within the
city, for any purpose unless and until an approval for such subdivision has
been received from the applicable land use authority. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.109: ALLOWED MINIMUM USE OF LEGAL LOTS:
Nothing in this title shall be construed to prevent the establishment of one
single-family dwelling on any legal lot or parcel of land, as determined by the
zoning administrator; provided, that such lot or parcel is located in a zoning
district that permits single-family dwellings, and all proposed construction
can qualify for a building permit, as required herein 1 . (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  16.25.105 of this title.
16.11.110: STATUS OF LOTS IN REPEALED PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE (PD):
A legal lot, created in any now repealed planned development zone (PD), as
previously provided by chapter 16 of the city zoning ordinance adopted October
1996 and revised May 2000, and legally existing on the effective date hereof,
is hereby determined to be a conforming lot, even if such lot is a size less
than required by the zoning district. Such lot shall qualify for one single-
family dwelling, provided the lot is located in a zoning district that permits
single-family dwellings, and all proposed construction can qualify for a
building permit 1 . (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
 
Notes
1 2. See also section
  16.25.105 of this title.
16.11.111: ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES:
   (1)   Land shall only be developed to the extent that adequate public
infrastructure, facilities and services are available, or will be available
concurrent with the development activity, and sufficient to meet the needs of
the proposed development. A land use authority may require an adequate public
facilities and services analysis to be provided to determine if adequate public
facilities and services are available to serve the proposed development, and if
such development will change the existing levels of service, or will create a
demand for services that exceeds existing service levels.
   (2)   Public facilities that may be required by a land use authority to be
included in an adequate public facilities and services analysis include, but
are not limited to, road and street facilities, intersections and bridges,
culinary water facilities, sanitary sewer facilities, storm drainage
facilities, fire protection and suppression facilities, park and recreational
facilities, culinary water pressure, fire and emergency services and response
times, police protection services and response times, and other required public
facilities and services. A land use authority may deny a land use application
if the demand for public facilities and services exceeds existing service
levels, or require the applicant for a land use application to provide the
required infrastructure, facilities or services, concurrent with demand,
consistent with all applicable legal authorities. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.112: CULINARY WATER AND SANITARY SEWER REQUIREMENTS:
All primary buildings requiring culinary water and sanitary sewer services
shall be connected to the culinary water and sanitary sewer systems of the
city. An on site sewer system may be approved by the city council only when the
boundary of the lot or parcel on which the primary building is proposed is
further than three hundred feet (300') from a public sewer line. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.11.113: UTILITIES:
   (1)   All primary buildings shall be connected to all necessary and required
utilities.
   (2)   All water, sewer, telephone, cable television, power and other
utilities shall be provided underground, with the following exceptions:
      (a)   Transformers, pedestals, fire hydrants and other appurtenances
normally associated with "underground" utility installations are permitted on
the surface of the ground.
      (b)   The development of existing lots in areas of the city now served
with existing aboveground utilities, are exempt from this requirement.
   (3)   As practicable, underground utilities shall be located within or
immediately adjacent to the disturbed areas of a development site, lot or
parcel. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.114: REQUIRED STREETS, CURB, GUTTER, SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS:
   (1)   The installation of necessary streets, street widening and
improvements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and trails of a type as required by the
land use ordinances of the city shall be required as a condition of any
required approval, permit or license.
   (2)   The city council, upon the receipt of a sensitive lands committee and/
or commission recommendation, may provide that the installation of necessary
streets, street widening and improvement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and trails
be delayed until a date certain, or provided as part of any areawide
improvement plan. The timing of any improvement plan shall be at the sole
discretion of the city council. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.115: STREETS AND ROADS ON STEEP SLOPES:
See section
16.08.209 of this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.116: CLEAR VIEW AT INTERSECTING STREETS:
In all zoning districts, no view obstruction, including a sight obscuring
fence, wall, sign or other similar structure, and no landscaping which exceeds
two feet (2') in height, shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular
area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at a point
thirty feet (30') from the intersection of the street lines, except for a
reasonable number of trees pruned high enough to permit unobstructed vision for
automobile drivers, bicyclists and pedestrians.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2926.gif]
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.117: CLEAR VIEW AT DRIVEWAYS:
In all zoning districts, no view obstruction, including a sight obscuring
fence, wall, sign or other similar structure, and no landscaping which exceeds
two feet (2') in height, shall be placed within a triangular area formed by a
driveway line, the street property line, and a line connecting them at points
twelve feet (12') along the driveway line and twelve feet (12') along the
street property line, except for a reasonable number of trees pruned high
enough to permit unobstructed vision for automobile drivers, bicyclists and
pedestrians. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.118: BUILDABLE AREA AND SURVEY REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Every lot or parcel created after the effective date hereof shall have
a buildable area sufficient to establish a building or structure thereon, which
meets the minimum standards of the zoning district in which the lot or parcel
is located. Buildable areas shall be required to be identified for each lot on
all subdivision plats and plans for the purposes of ensuring that a buildable
lot or parcel is provided, and to inform future owners of the approved
buildable area. Any area located within an easement may not be included within
any buildable area unless the easement beneficiary executes and records a
release of the easement in a form acceptable to the city attorney.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2928.gif]
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2008-17, 2008)
   (2)   In the event that a lot lacks clearly identified boundaries, the
building inspector shall require official recorded survey pins to be placed
prior to the issuance of a building permit. Such survey pins shall remain in
place for required inspections (footing, foundation, etc.). A copy of the
survey shall be provided to confirm that the survey pins' placement corresponds
with the property corners. In the event site constraints make it difficult to
place survey pins at a property corner, the affected survey pin may be placed
at a different location and noted on the survey. This subsection shall not
apply to small accessory buildings.
   (3)   In the case of lots abutting nondeveloped public property, all survey
pins must be in place. (Ord. 2008-17, 2008)
16.11.119: LOT STANDARDS; NONCOMPLYING LOTS PROHIBITED:
Every lot existing, or created, shall comply with the minimum lot size,
frontage and all other requirements of this title, and the city's other land
use ordinances, or prior enactments, for the zoning district in which such lot
is located. No lot shall be created that does not conform to the zoning
district requirements in which it is located. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.120: EVERY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE TO BE ON A LOT:
All buildings and structures, as defined herein, shall be located and
maintained on a separate legal lot, such lot meeting all requirements of the
land use ordinances, including the requirements of the zoning district in which
the lot is located. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.121: LOT FRONTAGE REQUIRED:
Every lot shall have frontage upon a dedicated or publicly approved road or
street, or right of way providing direct access to a dedicated or publicly
approved road or street. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.122: LOTS IN TWO OR MORE ZONING DISTRICTS:
Where a lot of record at the time of passage of the ordinance codified herein,
or any amendment thereto, falls into two (2) or more zoning districts, the
requirements of the more restrictive zoning district shall apply. (Ord. 2005-
13, 2005)
16.11.123: REQUIRED YARD AREAS FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY:
   (1)   No required yard or setback area for a lot or building shall be
considered as providing the required yard or setback for any other lot or
building.
   (2)   No area required to meet the lot width, area, setback or other
requirements of this title for any lot or building may be divided, sold or
leased separate from such lot or building. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.124: GENERAL BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
Ivins City is uniquely located at the base of Red Mountain in a desert
environment. Views are spectacular. Aesthetic features of the city have
significant economic value for all city residents, businesses, and property
owners. It is in the best interest of the city and the general welfare of all
residents, businesses, and property owners to protect the environmental values
of the city. In recognition of the goal of the city to protect and preserve the
naturally occurring values of the city, the following requirements are
provided:
   (1)   Architectural Style: Architectural styles that are inconsistent with a
desert environment and the Ivins City site plan and design requirements and
found to be foreign to Ivins City and tending to detract from the appearance of
the city are prohibited. Prohibited building styles shall include, but are not
limited to, A-frames, geodesic domes, Swiss chalets, log and earth shelter
homes. Prohibited building materials shall include, but are not limited to,
glass bottles, used tires, carpet tiles or other atypical exterior finish
materials.
   (2)   Minimum Width Of Single-Family Dwelling Units: All single- family
dwelling units shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide at the narrowest
point of the first story, excluding any accessory structure. The building width
shall be considered the lesser of the two (2) primary dimensions of the
building.
   (3)   Permanent Foundation Required: All buildings shall be located on and
permanently attached to a site built permanent foundation that meets the
Building Code, as adopted. All manufactured homes shall meet the applicable
requirements of the Building Code for the construction, establishment, and
location for manufactured housing installations.
   (4)   Garage Requirements: All accessory dwelling units for an owner or
employee and all single-family, two-family, condominium, manufactured and
mobile home dwelling units shall provide a minimum of a two car garage (400
square foot minimum). All multi-family dwelling units shall provide a minimum
of one (1) covered off street parking space, and one (1) additional off street
parking space.
   (5)   Enclosed Storage Required: All dwellings, excepting single-family
dwellings, shall provide a minimum of sixty four (64) square feet of enclosed
storage with a minimum height of six feet (6') located in the garage area, or
in an accessory building, meeting the requirements of this title. (Ord. 2009-
09, 2009)
16.11.125: MINIMUM HEIGHT OF ALL PRIMARY BUILDINGS:
No primary building shall be erected to a height less than one (1) story
entirely above grade. (Ord. 2009-09, 2009)
16.11.126: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF ALL PRIMARY BUILDINGS:
   (1)   No primary building located on a lot or parcel in any RA-5, RA-1, RE-
43.0, RE-37.0, RE-25.0, RE-20.0, RE-17.5, RE-15.0, RE-12.5, R-1-10, R-1-7.5, R-
1-5, R-2-10, Townhouse, or R-M District, such lot or parcel being and created
after the effective date hereof, shall be constructed to a height greater than
twenty five feet (25'), including the height of all roof mounted mechanical and
ancillary equipment, and including, but not limited to, towers, stairways,
tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain
a building, and fire or parapet walls. Additional height restrictions and
architectural restrictions may apply in accordance with section
16.11.134 Grading and Drainage for lots that abut existing developments that
lie downhill from the new development.
   (2)   No primary building located on a lot or parcel in a Sensitive Lands
Overlay District (SL) shall be constructed to a height greater than eighteen
feet (18'), including the height of all roof mounted mechanical and ancillary
equipment, and including, but not limited to, towers, stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain a
building, and fire or parapet walls.
   (3)   No primary building located on a lot or parcel in any CN, C-1, RC,
RMU, or CLM District shall be constructed to a height greater than thirty five
feet (35'), including the height of all roof mounted mechanical and ancillary
equipment, and including, but not limited to, towers, stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain a
building, and fire or parapet walls.
   (4)   The height of all accessory buildings shall comply with the
requirements of chapter 12 of this title.
   (5)   Maximum height of all buildings and structures shall be measured to
the highest point of the building from the natural or finished grade, whichever
is lower, unless a higher finished grade is required by the City for proper
drainage in which case it will be measured from the finished grade.
      (a)   Exception: Where there is a variation in the grade on a lot or
parcel, the building height may be measured from the "average grade" height as
measured between the "upper grade" and the "lower grade" with the following
restrictions (see illustration):
         (i)   The highest point on a building or structure, as defined in this
section, shall not exceed the maximum allowed height as measured from the
"average grade".
         (ii)   The top of the concrete foundation wall shall not exceed
eighteen inches (18") above the "upper grade" level.
         (iii)   The structure shall be limited to a maximum of one (1) story
above the foundation.
         (iv)   The rear yard setback shall be increased one hundred percent
(100%) when the rear yard is located on the perimeter of the subdivision or is
adjacent to a minor or major arterial or collector street.
         (v)   The maximum variation allowed between "upper grade" and "lower
grade" is ten feet (10') (figure 11-3 of this section).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3466.png]
 
(Ord. 2009-09, 2009; amd. Ord. 2013-09, 2013; Ord. 2014-05, 2014; Ord. 2017-06,
2017; Ord. 2020-16, 12-3-2020)
16.11.127: EXCEPTIONS TO MAXIMUM HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
The requirement for maximum building height shall not apply to:
   (1)   Flagpoles.
   (2)   All primary buildings for which a special exception to the allowed
maximum building height has been approved by the City Council, as provided by
chapter 28 of this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.128: TIME LIMITS FOR USE AND BUILDING PERMIT APPROVALS:
All use approvals, and all building permit approvals, shall be valid for a
maximum period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of approval. If
work has not commenced, or a use or building established within one hundred
eighty (180) days from date of approval, the approval, permit or license, as
required and approved, shall be void and a new application, approval, permit or
license required. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.129: TIME LIMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION:
   (1)   Within one (1) year of the commencement of any construction,
authorized by a use approval, or building permit approval, all exterior
features of buildings shall be completed and the property cleared of all
building materials, construction debris and construction equipment. All outside
surfaces of buildings, or part thereof that are constructed of wood, shall be
painted or coated with other wood preservative.
   (2)   In the event that exterior features of buildings have not been
completed and the property cleared of all building materials, construction
debris and construction equipment within one (1) year of the commencement of
any construction, the building official shall "red tag" the property and issue
a stop work order. The building official shall determine what corrective
actions are required, and identify a schedule for completion, to comply with
this section and for the stop work order to be lifted. If no action is taken
within the period identified by the building official, the City may initiate
enforcement actions as provided by this title, the Building Code, as adopted,
and may proceed with all other remedies available to the City. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.11.130: REQUIRED MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREENING:
   (1)   In all zoning districts, all at grade mounted, electrical service
equipment, air conditioning, heating, cooling and ventilating equipment,
swimming pool equipment, pumps and heaters, propane tanks and all other
mechanical equipment shall be painted the same color as the exterior color of
the adjacent building and screened from surrounding properties and streets by
landscaping materials, or enclosed within a building.
   (2)   The color of all roof mounted equipment and vents shall be the same
color as the roof. Solar energy systems shall be exempt from this requirement
if the required color would affect the efficient operation of solar energy
systems.
   (3)   No roof mounted equipment shall exceed the maximum height requirements
for the zoning district in which the building is located.
   (4)   Ground mounted solar is a permitted use in all single-family
residential zones. Ground mounts shall be screened by such things as fencing,
installing the system below grade, berming, landscaping, and/or natural
terrain. Ground mounted systems shall be built in approved setbacks and cannot
be more than six and one-half feet (6.5') tall above grade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2934.gif]
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2022-04, 2022)
16.11.131: CITY POLICY ON BASEMENTS:
Because of random subsurface water flows associated with agricultural
operations, and groundwater flow associated with extreme weather conditions,
the construction of basements is discouraged within the city. The city accepts
no responsibility to property owners who suffer any flooding damage to any
basement. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.132: FRONT YARD PARKING PROHIBITED:
In all zoning districts, no vehicle parking shall be permitted in any required
front yard setback areas, except on driveways located in residential zones that
directly access a garage or carport. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.133: REQUIRED YARDS TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED; EXCEPTIONS:
   (1)   All required setback areas shall to be open to the sky and
unobstructed, except for permitted and approved accessory buildings and
structures and for projections of sills, unenclosed steps, unwalled stoops, bay
windows, unenclosed porches and similar building features; provided, that such
features do not encroach more than three feet (3') into the required setback
area.
   (2)   Walls and fences, complying with the requirements of this title, or
approval granted by a land use authority. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.134: SITE GRADING AND DRAINAGE:
All site grading and drainage shall meet the following requirements:
   (1)   All proposed site grading for each lot shall be identified on the land
use drawings and allowed cut and fill areas shall be approved at the time of
the land use application approval.
   (2)   All cut and fill areas shall be minimized as much as practicable and
shall be recontoured to the natural, varied contour of the surrounding terrain
with a maximum tapered slope back to natural grade of two to one (2:1) or less.
   (3)   Definitions of grading terms:
      (a)   Approved Building Pad Elevation or Pad Elevation: The City approved
finished grade elevation of an approximately flat pad readied for construction
of the building.
      (b)   Finished Floor Elevation: The elevation of the finished floor of
the first story of a building. The first story shall be defined as the floor
with the main entry. For structures without basements, the finished floor
elevation shall be no more than 6-inches above the approved pad elevation.
      (c)   High Flood Risk Lots: Identified by the City Engineer as lots that
have a high risk of flood waters overtopping the curb due to any one of the
following conditions: storm water study indicates high velocity storm water
changing directions near lot, curb and gutter (or similar drainage facility)
storm water flow in the 100-year event is more than 65 percent full, lot is in
an area of known historical flooding, down stream floodway for a detention
basin spillway passes in front of lot, or other similar conditions.
   (4)   The developer of the road network shall set road centerline elevations
and pad elevations such that fill areas are minimized with the following
requirements as applicable:
      (a)   All road centerline elevations shall be generally established at
least one foot below natural existing grade, drainage and connectivity
permitting, and in many instances may be required to be lower as outlined in
the following paragraphs.
      (b)   Additional road connections may be required by the City to adjacent
properties to aid in proper grading, connectivity, and drainage.
      (c)   The developer shall make a reasonable best effort to set pad
elevations of new lots equal where possible to the pad elevations of adjacent
existing developments or the existing natural grade of adjacent undeveloped
properties as approved by the City.
      (d)   When developing on the uphill side of a property/development
boundary the developer shall apply the following requirements, see Figure 11-
6 and 11-7.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3476.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3474.png]
 
         (i)   When drainage conditions allow, the developer, as approved by
the City, shall make a best effort to set the centerline elevation of all
adjacent roadways equal to the elevation of the existing natural grade at the
new development boundary line.
         (ii)   The pad elevation of the lot adjacent to the new development
shall be set no higher than 12-inches above the lowest point of the approved
drainage facility (usually curb and gutter) unless there is a high risk of
flooding that might require a higher pad.
         (iii)   A new privacy wall may be required to be built unless the
existing wall is designed to handle additional height and soil retention.
         (iv)   Building constructed on the new lot pads must be limited to 18-
feet height above the pad, with 4:12 pitch or less hipped roofing or flat roofs
with 50 percent at no higher than 15-feet and the remaining no higher than 13-
feet. No roof top patios shall be allowed on these lots.
         (v)   These requirements also apply when a development is uphill and
adjacent to collector/arterial street.
      (e)   When drainage conditions or excessive slopes reasonably prevents
lowering the road, as per the requirements above, such that the new lot pad
elevation is more than 2-feet above the average natural existing grade at the
property boundary of the new development, then the following additional
restrictions apply (See Figure 11-8):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3472.png]
 
         (i)   If the lot is not considered to be high flood risk and has an
available location to drain properly, the pad elevation shall be lowered up to
2-feet (maximum) below the top of the curb measured at the center of the lot,
but may be less if the pad elevation is no higher than 2-feet above the average
natural existing grade elevation at the property/development boundary.
         (ii)   In the rear of the lot, the developer shall install privately
maintained underground (to handle 10-year storm events) and above ground (to
handle 100-year storm events) drainage facilities as part of the required
development improvements.
         (iii)   The developer is required to increase building setback as
follows. New setback shall be the setback as required by zoning plus the
additional setback. The additional setback shall be calculated as 5-feet plus 2
feet for every 1 foot of grade difference between the average natural existing
grade at the development boundary and the approved pad elevation of the lot.
         (iv)   A new privacy wall shall be installed at a distance equal to
the additional setback distance unless the rear yard grade is lowered to within
1-foot of the average natural existing grade elevation at the property/
development boundary.
         (vi)   Building constructed on the new lot pads must be limited to 18-
feet height above the pad, with 3:12 pitch or less hipped roofing or flat roofs
with 50 percent at no higher than 15-feet and the remaining no higher than 13-
feet. Roof top patios shall be allowed on these lots.
         (vii)   Walkout basements or daylight out basements are allowed if it
meets the same height restrictions identified above and finished floor
elevation of the main floor is no higher than 6-inches above the approved pad
elevation.
      (f)   When designing grades of lot pads and roads adjacent to undeveloped
property on the uphill side, the following requirements apply, (see Figure 11-
9).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3470.png]
 
         (i)   The privacy wall shall be required as part of the subdivision
improvements and shall be set at existing natural grade and shall not retain
any soil unless otherwise approved by the City. It shall be constructed and
engineered to retain up to 3-feet of soil by a future development unless the
developer can show that that much soil retention is unlikely.
         (ii)   The developer shall evaluate whether there is a need to collect
run-on drainage that may be interrupted by the privacy wall. If the
interruption of run-on drainage for any reason could cause harm or damage to
the undeveloped property, then the privacy wall must be offset from the
property line to create space for a drainage facility. Alternatively, the
developer may coordinate obtaining a drainage easement so that the privacy wall
may be placed on the property line.
         (iii)   The adjacent building pads shall be set at an elevation to
minimize the future difference. It may be necessary, where reasonable, to raise
new lot pads up to 4-feet above the adjacent roadway curb to minimize this
difference as approved by the City.
   (5)   All grading design shall consider drainage as follows:
      (a)   Drainage shall be directed away from structures and directly
discharged to an approved public drainage facility (i.e., public street, public
storm drain).
      (b)   Whenever possible drainage should be directed to the front of the
lot.
      (c)   To minimize the height of retaining walls between lots when
developing on steep slopes, the developer should increase pad elevations on the
uphill side of a street and decrease pad elevations on the downhill side of a
street as much as possible as shown in Figure 11-10.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3468.png]
 
         (i)   Maximum pad height is 4-feet above curb on driveway side of the
lot unless the lot is wide enough to accommodate a side garage for which case
the maximum driveway slope is 18 percent.
         (ii)   Minimum pad height for lots that drain to the street is 1-foot
above the curb (or similar approved drainage facility) at the lowest point in
the street frontage.
         (iii)   Pad heights may need to be raised above minimum in areas with
high flood risk as determined by the City Engineer.
         (iv)   When grade difference between two adjacent lots is greater than
4 feet. The building setback on the downhill lot shall be increased in
accordance with the following table:
 
Table 11-1 Increased Setback for Development in Steep Slopes
Difference in Pad Elevations in Feet Additional Setback to be added to setback
                                     required by zoning
0 to 4 feet                          None
4.1 to 5 feet                        5 feet
5.1 to 10 feet                       10 feet
10.1 to 15 feet                      15 feet
> 15 feet                            Determined by City Council
 
      (d)   Drainage across property lines is prohibited except in extreme
situations and may not in any case exceed that which existed prior to grading.
      (e)   In a development where a fence or wall that would interrupt surface
drainage is allowed but not installed with the development improvements, all
drainage and grading must be designed as if such fencing were existing.
   (6)   If the pad elevations for two (2) adjacent eleven thousand (11,000)
square foot or smaller lots vary more than two feet (2'), a retaining wall
shall be required.
      (a)   If retaining wall is to be constructed on the property line, the
retaining wall shall be constructed of masonry or concrete. and designed so
that a privacy wall up to 6-feet in height may be constructed on top of the
retaining wall by drilling in reinforcement dowels.
      (b)   Gravity rock retaining wall shall not be allowed on side lots
unless the lot width is wider than 110-feet.
         (i)   The rock retaining wall shall be offset from property lines so
that there is enough space for a proper footing for a privacy wall, as per a
geotechnical engineer's recommended design.
   (7)   Cut and fill areas shall be protected from erosion during the period
of construction and shall be permanently planted or otherwise protected from
erosion in accordance with state and federal laws.
   (8)   All cut and fills proposed on any sensitive land areas shall comply
with the requirements of chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. 2006-32, 2006; amd.
Ord. 2020-16, 12-3-2020)
16.11.135: REQUIREMENTS FOR FENCES AND WALLS:
   (1)   Setback Area Defined: The term "front setback area" for the purpose of
this title shall refer to the setback area (as required by this title) along
any street frontage.
   (2)   Interior Lot Requirements (See Figure 11-11):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3484.png]
 
      (a)   A wall or fence not to exceed six feet (6') in height measured from
finish grade, may be erected along side and rear property lines, except within
the front setback area.
      (b)   Within the front setback area, no wall, fence or hedge shall exceed
three feet six inches (3'6") in height and shall not be located within 1-foot
of the property line, back of a street curb or sidewalk, whichever is most
restrictive, to allow for landscaping to soften the appearance of the fence.
      (c)   A fence, wall or retaining wall located on an interior property
line separating two (2) residential lots with differing elevations, the maximum
height of the fence, wall, or retaining wall shall not exceed six feet (6')
above grade on either side of the fence, wall or retaining wall unless:
         (i)   The property owners adjoining the fence, wall or retaining wall
agree in writing to a greater height; and
         (ii)   A retaining wall is placed against a cut area to retain the
natural grade, in which case the fence, wall, and retaining wall combined shall
not exceed nine feet (9'). Fences may not be bermed for the purpose of
increasing the allowable height.
      (d)   For situations where there is more than four feet (4') of grade
difference, or where a lot owner desires a taller privacy wall such that the
combination privacy/retaining wall would exceed nine feet (9') as prohibited
above, the privacy wall must be set back from the retaining by a minimum of
three feet (3') as measured face of retaining wall to face of privacy wall. See
Figure 11-12.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3486.png]
 
   (e)   When an uphill lot is installing a privacy fence/wall on the side
property line and desires to set the base of the fence/wall at the same
elevation at its approved pad elevation, the installer shall also install a
retaining wall, down to the approved pad elevation of the downhill lot, not to
exceed four feet (4'). See Figure 11-13.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3480.png]
 
   (3)   Corner Lots:
      (a)   Requirements (See Figure 11-14):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3478.png]
 
         (i)   On all corner lots, a fence or wall not to exceed six feet (6')
in height may be erected along the rear and interior side lot line, but a fence
or wall shall not be erected in the front yard or street side yard setback
areas to a height in excess of three feet six inches (3'6").
         (ii)   In all zones requiring a front yard setback, no obstruction in
excess of three feet six inches (3'6") in height shall be placed on any corner
lot within the triangular area formed by the property lines adjacent to the
streets and a line connecting them at points thirty feet (30') from the
intersection of the property lines.
      (b)   Exceptions To Corner Lot Requirements:
         (i)   In a side yard setback that fronts on a public street, a wall or
fence height of up to six feet (6') is allowed provided such wall or fence is a
minimum of ten feet (10') behind the front building line and provided that such
wall or fence is set back at least five feet (5') from the property line where
there is sidewalk or ten feet (10') from the property line where no sidewalk
exists.
         (ii)   A fence, which does not obstruct view (e.g., chainlink fence or
wrought iron) may be erected to a height of five feet (5') in any yard abutting
a street within the setback area. The fence shall in no way be closed in with
adjacent plant materials, or strips of material inserted into the fence to
obstruct vision.
   (4)   Front Yard Courtyard Walls: "Front yard courtyard walls" or "courtyard
walls" is defined as a walled area within the front yard which is open to the
sky for use as a private, outdoor patio. (See Figures 11-11 and 11-14)
      (a)   Front Yard Setbacks:
         (i)   Courtyard walls located in the front yard shall be located not
less than ten feet (10') from the back of the sidewalk or ten feet (10') from
the property line where no sidewalk exists and shall comply with subsection (4)
(h)(i) of this section, clear view restriction.
         (ii)   Courtyard walls located in the front yard in controlled access
developments (gated developments) shall be located not less than seven feet six
inches (7'6") from the back of the sidewalk or seven feet six inches (7'6")
from the property line where no sidewalk exists.
         (iii)   The courtyard wall setback may be reduced by as much as 25
percent for short distances if the average distance of the wall setback for its
length along a single frontage still meets the distances indicated above.
      (b)   Side Yard Setbacks:
         (i)   Courtyard walls shall be located not less than five feet (5')
from the side yard property line and shall comply with subsection (4)(h)(ii) of
this section, clear view restriction.
         (ii)   Courtyard walls located in the front yard in controlled access
developments (gated developments) may be located on the side yard property
line.
      (c)   Height:
         (i)   Front yard facing courtyard walls located ten feet (10') to
fifteen feet (15') from the front property line shall not exceed four feet six
inches (4'6") excepting undulating walls (entrada type walls) may have fifty
percent (50%) of the wall at five feet (5') maximum height.
         (ii)   Side yard facing courtyard wall located fifteen feet (15') or
greater from the front property line shall not exceed five feet six inches
(5'6").
         (iii)   Courtyard walls located in the front yard in controlled access
developments (gated developments) shall not exceed six feet (6').
      (d)   Columns:
         (i)   Courtyard wall columns shall be no higher than twelve inches
(12") above the immediately adjacent courtyard wall but shall not exceed six
feet (6').
      (e)   Entrance Archway And Gates:
         (i)   Archway: A maximum of one courtyard entrance archway is allowed.
Entrance archways shall be located a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the
back of the sidewalk or fifteen feet (15') from the property line where no
sidewalk exists. Archways shall have a maximum ten foot (10') height and ten
foot (10') width.
         (ii)   Gates: Gates are allowed in any area of the courtyard wall.
Gate height shall not exceed six feet six inches (6'6"). Gate side column
height shall not exceed six feet (6').
      (f)   Permit And Plans Required:
         (i)   Front yard courtyards shall require a building permit with the
following plans:
            (A)   A plot plan showing all property lines, structures, setbacks;
            (B)   Front and side design elevations of courtyard incorporating
primary residence.
      (g)   Additional Requirements:
         (i)   Front yard areas outside the courtyard wall shall be landscaped.
         (ii)   Courtyard design, color, and materials shall complement and
blend with the primary residence.
      (h)   Clear View Restrictions:
         (i)   Front yard courtyards shall not be placed within a triangle area
formed by a driveway line, the front yard property line, and a line connecting
them at points twelve feet (12') along the driveway line and twelve feet (12')
along the front yard property line.
         (ii)   Side yard courtyards shall not be placed within a triangle area
formed by the front yard property line, the side yard property line, and line
connecting them at points twenty feet (20') along the front yard property line
and twenty feet (20') along the side yard property line.
   (5)   Tennis/Sports Court: On side and rear property lines, an appropriately
colored chainlink fence may be erected to a height of twelve feet (12') for the
purpose of enclosing a tennis court or other sports court area. Said fence may
not be located within the required setback area of required front or street
facing side yards.
   (6)   Swimming Pools:
      (a)   A fence not less than four feet (4') shall be erected around all
private swimming pools, hot tubs, or other similar pools not otherwise enclosed
(or covered for hot tubs).
      (b)   A fence not less than six feet (6') shall be erected around all
public or commercial swimming pools.
   (7)   Fences On Public Right Of Way: No fence approved under this chapter
shall be erected beyond the property line or on the public right of way,
without the issuance of a special permit by the city.
      (a)   No fence shall be erected within three feet (3') of an existing or
future sidewalk.
      (b)   No fence shall be erected within a four foot (4') radius of a fire
hydrant.
      (c)   The city shall retain the right to remove any fence on the public
right of way for any purpose it deems necessary. Removal shall be at the sole
expense of the property owner.
   (8)   Fences Required In Certain Areas: In all commercial, industrial, or
multi-family zones having a common lot line with single-family residential
zones a six foot (6') high solid masonry or similar fence shall be required
(reduced to 3 feet in height inside the front yard setback area).
   (9)   Fencing And Wall Materials: It is the intent of this subsection to
identify wall and fence materials that are preapproved or prohibited or that
may be approved as part of a land use application approval.
      (a)   The following consistent wall design is required for use in wall
and fence installations adjacent to all major and minor arterial and collector
streets including, but not limited to, Snow Canyon Parkway, Old Highway 91, 400
East, 200 East, 400 South, 400 West, Tuacahn Drive, and Snow Canyon Drive:
         (i)   Concrete Masonry Unit (CMU) block shall be used colored
"Sandstone" except on Old Highway 91 which shall be colored "Geneva".
         (ii)   All fencing walls shall have one split faced textured row of
block set on a row beneath the capstone block, except for Center Street from
200 East eastward and Snow Canyon Parkway which shall have all fence block be
split faced textured.
         (iii)   Capstones shall always be 4-inches tall and overhang the wall
front by 1-inch, except on Old Highway 91 which shall be 2-inches tall with no
overhang.
         (iv)   CMU Pilasters with smooth faced block shall be set at each
change in wall direction.
         (v)   Fencing/walls shall be segmented horizontally with the
appearance of randomness in variable lengths with no straight unbroken wall
segments longer than 40' and no intermediary pilasters in any one segment.
         (vi)   Short horizontal offset distances between the longer wall
segments should have an appearance of randomness in variable lengths between
24-inches up to 72-inches. In some limited cases where the available space is
constricted due to issues that are not in the control of the developer, the
offset maybe reduced to as low as 10-inches.
         (vii)   Each adjacent wall segment shall be at least one block higher
or lower than an adjacent segment, preferably segments that are closer to the
street are lower than segments that are further away.
         (viii)   If due to excessive grade change, the wall needs to increase
in height at a faster rate than one block per long segment than a height change
may be allowed in the middle of the long segment.
         (ix)   Gates to rear yards are not encouraged but are allowed when
requested. They must be at least 50-percent screened and placed in a
perpendicular orientation to the street in offset space between the longer
segment walls.
         (x)   Fencing/walls, generally, when possible, should be centered on
property lines. Maintenance of the wall is shared between both property owners.
Responsibility of repair of walls depends on which side the wall damage or
blemish occurred. Gates are maintained by the individual private property owner
that has the sole use of the gate.
         (xi)   If a developer can provide an acceptable justification that the
design is not compatible to a proposed development and a different
architectural design is proposed that does not use any prohibited materials
given in the following paragraph, exceptions to this consistent design may be
evaluated and approved on a case by case basis as part of a subdivision
preliminary plan approval or a conditional use permit approval by the City
Council.
         (xii)   A landscape buffer width identified by the Transportation
Master Plan in its approved cross-sections shall be considered an average width
that shall be allowed to be narrowed by no more than 25 percent if the average
meets the requirement.
      (b)   The following types of materials may be allowed for use in wall and
fence installations on other public and private streets:
         (i)   Native stone.
         (ii)   Wood.
         (iii)   Textured block or stucco surfaced walls compatible with
adjacent buildings.
         (iv)   Wrought iron.
         (v)   Colored concrete block.
         (vi)   Chainlink with interlaced vegetation.
         (vii)   Other materials consistent with the materials specifically
listed.
      (c)   The following types of materials are prohibited for use in wall and
fence installations:
         (i)   Used materials.
         (ii)   Corrugated metal.
         (iii)   Barbed wire (except in the agriculture and residential
agriculture districts).
         (iv)   Plywood and wafer weld.
         (v)   Wood pallets.
         (vi)   Lightweight trellis materials.
         (vii)   Bright colored plastic (except white).
         (viii)   Unfinished concrete, excepting retaining walls.
         (ix)   Untextured concrete.
         (x)   Other materials not manufactured for or typically used for
fences or walls.
      (10)   Compatible Design: All walls and fences shall be compatible with
the surrounding landscape and the architecture and building materials of
buildings on and adjacent to the property.
      (11)   Quality Of Construction: All walls and fences shall be constructed
in a workmanlike manner according to industry standards.
      (12)   Maintenance Of Fences And Walls: All fences and walls shall be
maintained in good repair. Areas adjacent to the wall or fence shall be
maintained by the property owner.
      (13)   Retaining Walls Used In Association With Fences: Retaining walls
used in association with any fence shall be constructed of materials, or be
finished to blend the wall with the surrounding landscape colors and features.
All exposed portions of any retaining wall(s) shall be constructed using
decorative materials or finished in such a way that no untreated concrete,
concrete block or similar materials are visible. (Ord. 2013-04, 2013; amd. Ord.
2020-16, 12-3-2020)
16.11.136: REQUIREMENTS FOR RETAINING WALLS:
   (1)   Consistent with the requirements of section
16.11.134 of this chapter, no retaining wall higher than four feet (4') above
existing grade within ten feet (10') of the property line boundary of a
development shall be authorized unless the adjacent property owner provides
written approval.
   (2)   Retaining wall height is restricted as follows:
      (a)   No retaining wall higher than four feet (4') shall be allowed if
the exposed face of the retaining wall faces a public or private street.
      (b)   Retaining walls higher than four feet (4') are allowed if the
retaining wall is obscured by a building, structure or fencing.
      (c)   Retaining walls higher than four feet (4') must be terraced with
minimum three foot (3') offset from measured from face of wall to face of wall.
   (3)   Retaining walls shall be constructed of materials, or be finished to
blend the retaining wall with the surrounding landscape colors and features.
All exposed portions of any retaining wall(s) shall be treated and finished and
be a color so that no untreated concrete, concrete block or similar materials
are visible.
   (4)   Any retaining wall used in association with any wall or fence located
on a property line shall comply with the requirements of section
16.11.135 of this chapter and subsection (3) of this section.
   (5)   Retaining walls shall be moisture proofed on the retaining side of the
wall below grade. (Ord. 2006-32, 2006; amd. Ord. 2020-16, 12-3-2020)
16.11.137: CONSTRUCTION SUBJECT TO GEOLOGIC, FLOOD OR OTHER NATURAL HAZARDS:
To protect the public health, welfare and safety from geologic, flood or other
natural hazards, all applications for any approval, permit or license, and
located in any area identified to be a "sensitive lands" area, as defined
herein, shall comply with all requirements of the sensitive lands overlay
district, as provided by chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.138: EFFECT OF OFFICIAL MAPS:
When a required front yard faces on a road or street, the depth of such front
yard shall be measured from the mapped street line, as identified on the
official map. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.139: REQUIRED PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
All buildings, uses, lots and parcels located within the city shall be
maintained and operated in a manner to enhance community pride and
beautification. No junk, rubbish, weeds or other unsightly material or
conditions shall be permitted on any lot, right of way or easement, or as part
of any building or use. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.11.140: NOXIOUS WEEDS:
All property owners shall comply with the requirements of the Utah noxious
weeds act, Utah Code Annotated, as amended. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 12
SUPPLEMENTARY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
16.12.101: Purpose
16.12.102: Written Text Requirements
16.12.103: Accessory Buildings And Accessory Uses; General Requirements
16.12.104: Limitations On Height, Size And Location Of Garages And Other
Accessory Buildings In Residential Zones
16.12.105: Smaller Accessory Buildings; Exemption From Building Permit
Requirements
16.12.106: Accessory Dwelling Units For An Owner Or Employee
16.12.107: Rental Of Accessory Dwelling Units In Single-Family Residential
Zones
16.12.108: Supplementary Requirements For Residences For Persons With A
Disability
16.12.109: Supplementary Requirements For Residences For Persons With A
Disability That Are Substance Abuse Facilities And Are Located Within Five
Hundred Feet Of School
16.12.110: Supplementary Requirements For Residential Facilities For Elderly
Persons
16.12.111: Parking Restrictions In Residential Zones
16.12.112: Household Pets (Noncommercial)
16.12.113: Domestic Livestock And Fowl
16.12.114: Prohibited Animals
16.12.115: Commercial Kennels
16.12.116: Requirements For Bed And Breakfast Inn
16.12.117: Home Occupations (Rep. by Ord. 2017-17, 2017)
16.12.118: Sale, Distribution And Consumption Of Alcoholic Beverages And
Alcoholic Products
16.12.119: Swimming Pool Enclosures
16.12.120: Residential Patio Covers
16.12.121: Location Of Drive-Through Facilities
16.12.122: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
16.12.123: Short Term Leases Of Residential Properties
16.12.124: Chickens In Residential Zones
16.12.101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of supplementary development standards is to further the purposes
of the General Plan, this title and all other land use ordinances.
Supplementary development standards address the use, location, construction and
operation of particular uses and activities. Compliance with supplementary
development standards, as applicable, as well as all other requirements of this
title and all other land use ordinances, and all other Federal, State and local
requirements, are required for any land use application approval required by
this title, or any other approval, permit or license required by other land use
ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.12.102: WRITTEN TEXT REQUIREMENTS:
The City provides certain development standards and requirements, with
application limited to identified residential subdivision areas, by way of
"Written Text" documents. Written Text documents may provide standards related
to allowed uses, the establishment of uses and/or the construction,
reconstruction, restoration, extension, alteration, expansion or enlargement of
buildings or structures. Residential subdivisions with Written Text documents
are:
   (1)   Chancel Cliffs.
   (2)   Citadel Estates.
   (3)   Copper Canyon.
   (4)   Eagle Rock at Snow Canyon.
   (5)   Padre Canyon Estates Phases 1, 2 and 3.
   (6)   Red Mountain West.
Appendix A herein provides a summary of the Written Text documents. Unless
specifically amended by the provisions of the Written Text documents, and
expressly applicable to the identified subdivision, the requirements of this
title and all other land use ordinances shall apply. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.12.103: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND ACCESSORY USES; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Accessory buildings and accessory uses may be authorized in
association with a primary building or primary use.
   (2)   Accessory buildings and accessory uses shall only be authorized
concurrently with, or following, the establishment of the primary building or
primary use.
   (3)   An accessory garage may be attached to, or detached from, the primary
building.
      (a)   An accessory garage that is attached to a primary building shall
meet all requirements for the location of the primary building.
         (i)   All garages and other accessory buildings located within ten
feet (10') of the primary building shall be considered attached and part of the
primary building and the setback requirements applicable to the primary
building shall apply.
         (ii)   See also section
16.12.104 of this chapter.
      (b)   An accessory garage that is detached from a primary building shall
meet all requirements for the location of a detached accessory building, as
provided herein.
      (c)   All garages and other accessory buildings located ten feet (10') or
more away from the primary building shall have setbacks from the rear and side
property lines and maximum wall height limitations in accordance with table 16-
1 of this subsection:
      TABLE 16-1
 
Setback Maximum     Maximum
        Wall Height Building Height
3'      8'          12'
5'      10'         15'
10'     16'         20'
 
Note: Accessory buildings located closer than five feet (5') to the property
line shall be one hour fire resistant construction or shall be less than two
hundred (200) square feet as required by the International Residential Code.
      (d)   No stormwater runoff from any accessory building shall be allowed
to run onto adjacent property.
   (4)   Accessory buildings, located on corner lots, shall meet the required
corner side yard setback, applicable in the zoning district in which the
accessory building is located.
   (5)   Accessory buildings, except for agricultural use accessory buildings,
shall be constructed of similar materials and colors and be an architectural
style designed to blend with the primary building.
   (6)   Agricultural use accessory buildings, including barns and stables,
shall be constructed of materials and colors designed to blend with the primary
building.
   (7)   Accessory buildings shall comply with the requirements of the most
recently adopted Building Code, as applicable.
   (8)   No mobile home, travel trailer, boat or similar recreational vehicle
shall be used as an accessory building.
   (9)   No shipping container, cargo container, shipping crate, box, trailer
or similar movable piece of equipment or object shall be used as an accessory
building.
   (10)   No utility connections or meters, separate from the primary building,
shall be allowed for accessory buildings.
   (11)   No accessory buildings shall be rented, leased or sold separately
from the rental, lease or sale of the primary building.
   (12)   No accessory building shall be used as a permanent dwelling unit.
   (13)   Accessory buildings used for the housing of domestic livestock or
fowl shall comply with the requirements of section
16.12.113 of this chapter, and specifically subsection
16.12.113(8) of this chapter.
   (14)   All accessory buildings associated with a commercial kennel shall
comply with the requirements of section
16.12.115 of this chapter.
   (15)   Accessory carports are allowed in those areas identified in figure
12-2 of this section provided they comply with the following:
      (a)   Definition: A carport is a shelter structure open on at least three
(3) sides used generally for covering an automobile or recreational vehicle. It
may be attached to the house or freestanding. Freestanding carports shall be
open on four (4) sides. The floor surface can be concrete, gravel or asphalt.
There can be no enclosed use above a carport. Any structure which does not
comply with the above definition must comply with all regulations relating to a
garage.
      (b)   Maximum Size: Twelve feet (12') in width by fifty feet (50') in
length or calculated by the following formulas:
         (i)   The total square footage of any attached carport shall not be
greater than fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the footprint of the
primary structure excluding the attached garage on lots less than one-half (1/
2) acre, sixty percent (60%) on lots one-half (1/2) but less than one acre and
seventy percent (70%) on lots one acre or larger.
         (ii)   The total square footage of any detached carport shall not be
greater than fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the footprint of the
primary structure including the attached garage on lots less than one-half (1/
2) acre, sixty percent (60%) on lots one-half (1/2) acre to less than one acre,
and seventy percent (70%) on lots one acre or larger.
      (c)   Maximum Entry Height: Thirteen feet, six inches (13'6").
      (d)   Materials: Carports may be constructed of materials to match the
architectural style of the existing residence or shall be an engineered metal
building. Poles supporting a metal carport shall be of a color compatible with
the exterior of the primary structure.
      (e)   Minimum Setbacks: Comply with the minimum setback requirements for
the zoning district in which it is located.
      (f)   Front Of Carport: The front of the carport shall be located at
least three feet (3') back from the front of the structure on the side that it
is located on.
      (g)   Conformance With Building Code: Engineered to resist wind and
seismic loads in conformance with the most recently adopted edition of the
Building and/or Residential Code.
      (h)   Number Allowed: No more than one carport shall be permitted for
each dwelling unit.
      (i)   Materials Prohibited: Carports constructed of corrugated metal,
fiberglass panels, and fabric materials are expressly prohibited.
      (j)   Height: Carports may be up to the height of the primary residence
or up to fifteen feet (15') tall, whichever is lower. The carport may have a
flat roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2936.gif]
(Ord. 2018-04, 2018)
16.12.104: LIMITATIONS ON HEIGHT, SIZE AND LOCATION OF GARAGES AND OTHER
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
In an effort to avoid the appearance of commercial style buildings in
residential zones, and to protect the character and stability of residential
neighborhoods, the following requirements for garages and other accessory
buildings located in residential zones are provided:
   (1)   Maximum Garage Height:
      (a)   No detached garage shall be higher than twenty feet (20'), measured
from finish grade to the highest point of its roof, or higher than the highest
point of the roof of the primary building, whichever is less. Exception:
Detached garages located a minimum of forty feet (40') from the primary
building may be twenty feet (20') maximum height regardless of the height of
the primary building.
      (b)   No attached garage shall be higher than the primary building.
   (2)   Number Of Garages: A maximum of one attached and one detached garage
may be allowed on each lot in association with a primary residential dwelling
unit. All other structures shall be considered accessory buildings.
   (3)   Maximum Accessory Building Height: No accessory building, including
agricultural use accessory buildings, shall be higher than fifteen feet (15'),
measured from average finish grade, unless a higher finished grade is required
by the City for proper drainage in which case it will be measured from the
finished grade.
   (4)   Size, Location, And Construction Of Attached And Detached Garages And
Other Accessory Buildings In Residential Zones:
      (a)   Size Of Attached Garages:
         (i)   The total square footage of any attached garage shall not be
greater than fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the footprint of the
primary structure excluding the attached garage on lots less than one-half
(0.5) acre, however, that percentage may increase up to sixty percent (60%)
provided the garage frontage is less than fifty-five percent (55%);
         (ii)   Sixty percent (60%) on lots one-half (0.5) acre but less than
one acre; and
         (iii)   Seventy percent (70%) on lots one acre or larger.
      (b)   The total square footage of any detached garage or other accessory
building including agricultural use accessory buildings shall not be greater
than fifty percent (50%) of the footprint of the primary structure including
the attached garage on lots less than one-half (1/2) acre, sixty percent (60%)
on lots one-half (1/2) acre to less than one acre, and seventy percent (70%) on
lots one acre or larger. Note: Habitable space located in the attic areas of
detached garages shall be included in the total square footage.
      (c)   Agricultural use accessory buildings constructed prior to the
primary building as allowed in the agriculture (A) zone and residential
agriculture (RA) zone shall be a maximum of two thousand five hundred (2,500)
total square footage and shall be constructed of materials and colors that
blend with the natural environment.
      (d)   Agricultural use accessory buildings larger than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet shall require a Class III conditional use permit.
      (e)   The cumulative total square footage of all attached garages,
detached garages and all other accessory buildings, including agricultural use
accessory buildings, shall not be greater than twenty five percent (25%) behind
the rear wall line of the primary structure.
      (f)   All garages and other accessory buildings located within ten feet
(10') of the primary building shall be considered attached and part of the
primary building and the setback requirements applicable to the primary
building shall apply.
      (g)   No detached garage or other accessory buildings shall be located in
any required front yard. (Ord. 2018-04, 2018; amd. Ord. 2021-14, 2021)
16.12.105: SMALLER ACCESSORY BUILDINGS; EXEMPTION FROM BUILDING PERMIT
REQUIREMENTS:
An accessory building with a maximum height of ten feet (10') and a maximum
size less than two hundred (200) square feet shall not require a building
permit, provided all setback requirements for the zoning district in which the
accessory building is located are met. (Ord. 2013-04, 2013)
16.12.106: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS FOR AN OWNER OR EMPLOYEE:
   (1)   An accessory dwelling unit for an owner or employee shall not be
rented, leased or sold separately from the rental, lease or sale of the primary
building located on the same lot.
   (2)   A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit for an owner or employee may
be established on each individual, separate lot, such lot meeting all
requirements, including minimum lot size, for the zoning district in which the
lot is located.
   (3)   The lot proposed for an accessory dwelling unit for an owner or
employee shall already have an existing primary structure provided, or
approved, prior to the consideration of an application to allow an accessory
dwelling unit.
   (4)   Accessory dwelling units shall meet the required setbacks for attached
or detached accessory buildings and uses as required by the zoning district in
which they are located.
   (5)   An accessory dwelling unit for an owner or employee shall be connected
to, and served by, the same water, sewer, electrical, and gas meters that serve
the primary building. No separate utility lines, connections or meters shall be
allowed for an accessory dwelling unit for an owner or employee.
   (6)   An accessory dwelling unit for an owner or employee shall provide a
minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces, located as determined necessary
and appropriate for approval of the accessory dwelling unit for an owner or
employee.
   (7)   The construction of an accessory dwelling unit for an owner or
employee shall meet all requirements of the adopted Building Code, as
applicable.
   (8)   The architectural style, building materials and building colors of an
accessory dwelling unit for an owner or employee shall be found to be
compatible and consistent with the architectural style, materials and color of
the primary building.
   (9)   Mobile homes, travel trailers, boats or similar recreational vehicles
shall not be used as an accessory dwelling unit for an owner or employee.
   (10)   The land use application approval for an accessory dwelling unit for
an owner or employee shall be received before a building permit is issued.
   (11)   As a condition of approval required to establish an accessory
dwelling unit for an owner or employee, the property owner shall record against
the deed of the subject property, a deed restriction, in a form approved by the
City, running in favor of the City, which shall prohibit the rental, lease or
sale of the accessory dwelling unit for an owner or employee separately from
the rental, lease or sale of the primary use or building. Proof that such deed
restriction has been recorded shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator
prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the accessory
dwelling unit for an owner or employee. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.12.107: RENTAL OF ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS IN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
ZONES:
The purpose and intent of requirements for allowing accessory dwelling units is
to provide additional housing opportunities.. For purposes of this section,
"accessory dwelling unit" means a dwelling unit that is located on a single-
family residential lot in addition to the primary dwelling unit. An accessory
dwelling unit can be either an "internal accessory dwelling unit" or an
"external accessory dwelling unit." "Internal accessory dwelling unit" means an
accessory dwelling unit that is located within the footprint of the primary
dwelling unit. "External accessory dwelling unit" means an accessory dwelling
unit that is located in a structure other than the primary dwelling unit.
References herein to an "accessory dwelling unit" without designating either
external or internal is a reference to both internal and external dwelling
units.
   (1)   Authorized: Accessory dwelling units may be authorized on all lots
located in medium density and low density single-family residential zones,
provided all requirements of this title, all other land use ordinances and the
Building Code are met.
   (2)   Maximum Number: A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit may be
established on each individual, separate legal lot, such lot meeting all
requirements, including minimum lot size, for the zoning district in which the
lot is located.
   (3)   Permanent Structure: An accessory dwelling unit shall be located in a
permanent structure on the lot. No mobile homes, travel trailers, boats or
similar recreational vehicles shall be used as an accessory dwelling unit.
   (4)   Single-Family Dwelling; Lot: The lot proposed for an accessory
dwelling unit shall have an existing single-family dwelling unit established,
or approved, prior to the consideration of the use application to allow
accessory dwelling unit.
   (5)   Square Footage: The square footage of an external accessory dwelling
unit shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the footprint of the primary
dwelling, excluding the garage, or six hundred (600) square feet, whichever is
larger.
   (6)   Setbacks: All external accessory dwelling units shall meet and comply
with the minimum setbacks required for the primary dwelling by the zoning
district in which they are located, except the rear setback may be reduced to
match the side setbacks.
   (7)   Parking: All accessory dwelling units shall provide a minimum of one
additional off street parking space.
   (8)   Construction: The construction of all accessory dwelling units shall
meet all requirements of the adopted building code.
   (9)   Style, Materials, Colors: The architectural style, building materials
and colors of all external accessory dwelling units shall be found to be
compatible and consistent with the architectural style, materials and color of
the primary dwelling unit.
   (10)   Height And Size Restrictions: All external accessory dwelling units
shall be limited to one story, with a maximum height of fifteen feet (15') for
a pitched roof and thirteen feet (13') for a flat roof, but in no event
exceeding the height of the existing dwelling. The city council may approve a
special exception to the height and size restrictions for guesthouses and
casitas, as provided by chapter 28 of this title, with consideration given to
larger lots than required by the minimum lot size of the applicable residential
zone and the architecture and style of the primary building.
   (11)   Occupancy: Accessory dwelling units shall only be provided for the
occupancy of one family.
   (12)   Owner Must Occupy: The owner of the lot must live full-time in either
the primary dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit.
   (13)   Deed Restriction: As a condition of approval required to establish an
accessory dwelling unit, the property owner shall record against the deed of
the subject property, a deed restriction, in a form approved by the city,
running in favor of the city, which shall prohibit the sale of the accessory
dwelling unit separately from the primary dwelling unit. Proof that such deed
restriction has been recorded shall be provided to the zoning administrator
prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the accessory
dwelling unit.
   (14)   Permits Required:
      (a)   A Casita Agreement for an external accessory dwelling unit shall be
received before a building permit is issued.
      (b)   The zoning administrator is authorized to approve a class II use
application for an accessory dwelling unit that is not part of the original
construction of the single-family dwelling unit to which it is associated,
provided all requirements of this section, and all other applicable
requirements of all land use ordinances, and all other regulations are met.
      (c)   The zoning administrator is authorized to approve a class II use
application for an accessory dwelling unit that is part of construction
associated with a new single-family dwelling, provided all requirements of this
section, and all other applicable requirements of all land use ordinances, and
all other regulations are met.
   (15)   Legalizing Existing Guesthouses And Casitas: Owners of accessory
dwelling units existing on the effective date hereof, and that have not been
approved as required herein, shall apply for an approval within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the effective date hereof.
   (16)   Noncomplying Guesthouses And Casitas: All owners of accessory
dwelling units, determined to be noncomplying structures, shall be subject to
the provisions for noncomplying structures, as provided herein by Chapter 25 of
this Title.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2006-32, 2006; Ord. 2007-35, 2008; Ord. 2016-06,
2016; Ord. 2021-21, 2021)
16.12.108: SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENCES FOR PERSONS WITH A
DISABILITY:
   (1)   Compliance: No residence for persons with a disability shall be
established unless:
      (a)   It is proposed in a building that complies with all adopted land
use ordinances and building code, and applicable to similar structures in the
zoning district in which the residence for persons with a disability is
proposed.
      (b)   The residence for persons with a disability proposes no fundamental
change in the character of the residential neighborhood.
   (2)   Maximum Number Of Occupants (Consumers And Staff): Any building
proposed to be used as a residence for persons with a disability, the existing
building, or building plans, shall be reviewed by the building official,
considering the categorical standards for physical facilities, as established
by the state department of human services. Following this review, the building
official shall determine and establish the maximum number of persons allowed to
reside within the facility, which shall not exceed six (6) occupants.
   (3)   State Department Of Human Services License: At the time of use
application to establish a residence for persons with a disability, or within
forty five (45) days following approval, the owner or provider shall provide to
the zoning administrator evidence that the residence is licensed by the state
department of human services for the type of facility being considered, or
authorized, by the city. Any approval for a residence for persons with a
disability shall be conditioned on the presentation of evidence that the
facility is licensed by the state department of human services, as required by
this section. Failure to provide such evidence shall automatically invalidate
and terminate any existing or pending approvals.
   (4)   Continued Compliance With Licensure Requirements Of Department Of
Human Services: The responsibility to license programs, or owners or providers
that operate a residence for persons with a disability, as well as require and
monitor the provision of adequate services to consumers residing in these
facilities, shall rest with the state department of human services. Failure to
maintain continued compliance with the licensure requirements of the state
department of human services shall automatically invalidate and terminate any
existing or pending approvals.
   (5)   Approval To Operate Residence For Persons With Disability
Nontransferable: An approval for a residence for persons with a disability, as
authorized by this section, is nontransferable and shall only be valid to the
owner or provider identified on the application authorizing the operation of
the facility, and as identified as the owner or provider as licensed by the
state department of human services.
   (6)   Reasonable Dispersion: No residence for persons with a disability
shall be approved that would be located closer than three-fourths (3/4) of a
mile to any other residence for persons with a disability.
   (7)   Limit On Number Of Occupants: No residence for persons with a
disability shall be approved that would allow more than six (6) occupants.
   (8)   Reasonable Accommodations: The land use authority, in reviewing an
application to establish a residence for persons with a disability, may to the
extent necessary, modify the requirements of this section, if such
modifications are necessary to make a reasonable accommodation to afford
persons residing in such facilities equal opportunity in the use and enjoyment
of the facility. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.12.109: SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENCES FOR PERSONS WITH A
DISABILITY THAT ARE SUBSTANCE ABUSE FACILITIES AND ARE LOCATED WITHIN FIVE
HUNDRED FEET OF SCHOOL:
   (1)   All requirements applicable to a residence for persons with a
disability shall apply.
   (2)   In addition to the requirements for a residence for persons with a
disability, the following requirements shall apply to all residences for
persons with a disability that are substance abuse facilities and proposed
within five hundred feet (500') of a school:
In accordance with the rules established by the department of human services
under Utah Code Annotated title 62A, chapter 2, licensure of programs and
facilities, shall provide:
      (a)   A security plan satisfactory to the police department;
      (b)   Twenty four (24) hour supervision for residents; and
      (c)   Other twenty four (24) hour security measures. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.12.110: SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY
PERSONS:
   (1)   A residential facility for elderly persons shall be reviewed as a
class III use application.
   (2)   The approval of a residential facility for elderly persons is
nontransferable and terminates if the structure is devoted to a use other than
a residential facility for elderly persons, or if the structure fails to comply
with the requirements of this section.
   (3)   No residential facility for elderly persons shall be established
unless:
      (a)   It is proposed in a building that complies with all land use
ordinances and adopted Building Code, and is applicable to similar structures
in the zoning district in which the residential facility for elderly persons is
proposed.
      (b)   The residential facility for elderly persons proposes no
fundamental change in the character of the residential neighborhood.
   (4)   No residential facility for elderly persons shall be approved that
would allow more than six (6) occupants.
   (5)   The Land Use Authority, in reviewing an application to establish a
residential facility for elderly persons, may, to the extent necessary, modify
the requirements of this section, if such modifications are necessary to make a
reasonable accommodation to afford persons residing in such facilities equal
opportunity in the use and enjoyment of the facility. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.12.111: PARKING RESTRICTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
   (1)   Private Recreational Vehicles (RVs) In Residential Zones: Generally,
RVs may be parked or stored on any legal lot in a residential zone subject to
the restrictions set forth herein. As used herein, "private recreational
vehicle" (RV) includes motor homes, travel trailers, boats, camping trailers,
truck campers, enclosed cargo trailers with no business name or logo visible,
flatbed trailers, ATVs/motorcycles with associated trailers and other
recreational vehicles and equipment.
      (a)   Occupiable And Nonoccupiable RVs:
         (i)   Occupiable RVs: As used herein, "occupiable RV" includes RVs
equipped with habitable areas such as sleeping area, kitchens, bathrooms, but
does not include tent trailers, small van conversions, and campers that are not
subject to the restrictions set forth herein.
         (ii)   Nonoccupiable RVs: As used herein "nonoccupiable RV" includes
any RV not defined as occupiable.
      (b)   RV Parking:
         (i)   A maximum of one occupiable RV and two (2) nonoccupiable RVs
shall be allowed to be parked or stored in the side or rear yard areas on any
legal residential lot with an occupied home without a solid screen fence.
         (ii)   If the number of RVs exceeds the number allowed in subsection
(1)(b)(i) of this section, they shall be parked in the side or rear yard areas
and screened from view by a solid five foot (5') fence or behind the primary
residence.
         (iii)   RVs parked in the side yard may be parked in the required side
setback area.
         (iv)   Occupiable RVs parked in the rear yard shall not be parked in
the required rear setback area.
         (v)   RVs shall not be parked or stored on any vacant lot prior to the
beginning of construction of the primary residence.
         (vi)   All RVs shall be kept in reasonable repair and operable
condition.
         (vii)   There is no limit to the number of nonoccupiable RVs when
screened from view by a solid five foot (5') fence or parked behind the primary
residence.
      (c)   Exceptions:
         (i)   A maximum of one occupiable or one nonoccupiable RV shall be
allowed to be parked in the front setback area when lot constraints prevent it
from being parked in the side or rear yards. RVs stored in the front yard shall
be parked on a hard surface (concrete, asphalt, or gravel) and shall provide
clear views at driveways pursuant to section
16.11.117 of this title. RVs stored in front yard areas shall not be parked or
stored on driveways (including circular) that front the primary residence
except to load and unload.
         (ii)   An occupiable RV may be occupied temporarily by family members
or guests of the owner for a period of not greater than thirty (30) days in any
consecutive one hundred eighty (180) day period.
         (iii)   One occupiable RV may be parked on a residential lot during
the construction of the primary residence.
         (iv)   There shall be no limit to the number of RVs stored in an
enclosed garage.
         (v)   An RV may be parked in the front yard for a maximum of seventy
two (72) hours for loading and unloading purposes.
         (vi)   A motor home, or a travel trailer attached to a tow vehicle,
may be temporarily parked up to ten (10) days on a public road fronting the lot
by special permit. See subsection
9.08.103(7)(c) of this Code.
         (vii)   A maximum of one RV is allowed to be parked in the front yard
area when the front yard area extends behind the minimum required front setback
line, provided the RV is parked behind the required front setback line.
   (2)   Commercial Vehicles In Residential Zones: Generally, commercial
vehicles are prohibited from being parked or stored on legal lots (including
vacant lots) in all residential zones. As used herein, the term "commercial
vehicle" includes trucks exceeding two (2) tons and all construction equipment
such as backhoes, graders, skid loaders, Bobcats, trailers, and other similar
equipment. (Ord. 2008-02, 2008)
      (a)   Exceptions:
         (i)   Up to two (2) vehicles used in association with a licensed home
based business that are capable of being parked in the garage and limited to a
maximum size of one ton gross vehicle weight. (Ord. 2017-17, 2017)
         (ii)   One service type truck not exceeding two (2) tons shall be
allowed to be parked on a legal lot in a residential zone, provided it is
parked on a hard surface (concrete, asphalt, or gravel), clear views are
maintained pursuant to section
16.11.117 of this title, it is parked in the side or rear yard when feasible,
and it is eight feet (8') or less in height. When lot constraints prevent
parking in the side or rear yard, the service truck may be parked in the front
yard area, including the driveway fronting the garage.
         (iii)   Commercial vehicles used in a business may be parked in a
residential zone when making pick ups or deliveries or when being used in
conjunction with the performance of a service on a property within a
residential zone.
         (iv)   Commercial vehicles may be parked on property in a residential
zone when such is being used in conjunction with a current construction/
building permit.
         (v)   Commercial vehicles owned and operated by Ivins City and private
contractors performing services for Ivins City during the performance of such
services.
         (vi)   Commercial vehicles owned and operated by utility companies or
their contractors performing services within the residential zone during the
performance of such services.
         (vii)   Agricultural vehicles and equipment, including commercial
vehicles, used in conjunction with an allowed agricultural use.
         (viii)   Commercial vehicles used for personal, noncommercial use,
provided they are parked in an enclosed garage and limited in size to a Case M
Series 2 loader class backhoe or comparable and/or a skid loader Case 400
series or comparable. (Ord. 2008-02, 2008)
16.12.112: HOUSEHOLD PETS (NONCOMMERCIAL):
The keeping of household pets for noncommercial purposes shall comply with the
following requirements:
   (1)   All household pets shall be kept in such a manner that they do not
disturb the peace, comfort or health of any person or animal.
   (2)   Yards, shelters, cages, areas, places and premises where they are kept
shall be maintained so that flies or odors do not disturb the peace, comfort or
health of any person or animal.
   (3)   The keeping and maintenance of all household pets shall be conducted
in compliance with all other requirements of this Code, as applicable.
   (4)   "Household pets (noncommercial)" is identified as a class II use in
the tables of uses, chapter 33 of this title, but shall be exempt from the
requirement to receive a class II use approval if household pets
(noncommercial) are kept in the manner required by this section. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.12.113: DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK AND FOWL:
As used within the Ivins City zoning ordinance, domestic livestock and fowl
shall be limited to the following: domesticated horse (Equus caballus);
domesticated cattle (Bos taurus and Bos indica); domesticated sheep (Ovis
aries); domesticated goat (Capra hircus); weaner pigs raised by 4-H and FFA
participants as defined and restricted herein; and domestic fowl. Excluded from
domestic livestock and fowl are: all other pigs (Suidae); peacocks; guinea
fowl; emus; and ostriches. The keeping of domestic livestock and fowl shall be
subject to the following regulations: (Ord. 2010-04, 2010)
   (1)   The keeping of domestic livestock and fowl may be allowed in the RA-5,
RA-1, RE-37.0 and RE-12.5 zoning districts, subject to the provisions of this
section; weaner pigs shall be restricted to agricultural zoning districts.
(Ord. 2010-04, 2010; amd. Ord. 2016-06, 2016)
   (2)   No domestic livestock or domestic fowl shall be kept on any lot
smaller than one acre (43,560 square feet) except as may be provided by
subsections (4) and (5) of this section.
   (3)   The number of domestic livestock or fowl that may be kept on lots of
one acre (43,560 square feet) or larger shall be as follows:
      (a)   Limited to a maximum of one domestic animal for each one- half (1/
2) acre (21,780 square feet).
      (b)   Fowl may be kept on lots equal to or larger than one acre (43,560
square feet), provided the number of fowl maintained does not exceed twenty
five (25) fowl for each acre.
   (4)   Domestic livestock may be kept on lots of thirty seven thousand
(37,000) square feet or larger and located in the RE-12.5 zoning district in
the area of the city bounded by 200 East, 200 West, 200 South and 200 North,
subject to the following:
      (a)   Limited to a maximum of one domestic animal for each one- half (1/
2) acre (21,780 square feet).
      (b)   Fowl may be kept on lots equal to or larger than one acre (43,560
square feet), provided the number of fowl maintained does not exceed ten (10)
fowl for each acre. (Ord. 2010-04, 2010)
   (5)   Domestic livestock may be kept on lots of thirty seven thousand
(37,000) square feet, or larger, and located in the RE-37.0 zoning district in
the area of Padre Canyon phases 1, 2, 3 and 4, subject to the following:
      (a)   Limited to a maximum of two (2) domesticated horses (Equus
caballus). If two (2) adjoining lot owners each have horses, the common
boundary between the adjoining lots may be opened by using a gate in a fence
along the common boundary to allow the commingling of horses on the two (2)
adjoining lots, so long as the average number of horses per lot does not exceed
the maximum of two (2). (Ord. 2012-05, 2012)
   (6)   Domestic livestock and other animals, but excluding all prohibited
animals, may be kept on lots of five (5) acres or larger, and located in the
RA-5 or RA-1 zones, without restriction on the type or number of domestic
livestock or animals kept. (Ord. 2010-04, 2010; amd. Ord. 2016-06, 2016)
   (7)   Residents who have kept domestic livestock on legal lots smaller than
one acre (43,560 square feet) and who have those animals legally on the
effective date hereof, shall not be in violation of this section. However, the
number of animals being kept shall not be increased, and the nonconforming use
shall be deemed to have ceased when the keeping of domestic animals has been
discontinued for a minimum period of one year.
   (8)   No barn, stable, shelter, corral, coop, pen or run in which domestic
livestock or fowl are maintained shall be closer than one hundred feet (100')
to any residential structure located on adjacent lots.
   (9)   The required minimum side yard and rear yard setbacks for the zone in
which a barn, stable, shelter, corral, coop, pen or run is located shall be
met, or twenty foot (20') side and rear yard setbacks shall be provided,
whichever is greater.
   (10)   When domestic livestock or fowl are maintained on lots of one acre
(43,560 square feet) or less, a barn, stable, coop or other cover sufficient to
provide shade and protection from the weather for the domestic livestock and
fowl kept shall be provided.
   (11)   When domestic livestock are maintained on any lot or parcel located
in an RE-37.0 or RE-12.5 zoning district, a perimeter fence, capable of
withstanding the movements and habits of domestic livestock, shall be provided
for that area where the livestock are kept.
   (12)   All yards, barns, shelters, cages, areas, places and premises where
domestic livestock, animals or fowl are kept shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition so that flies, dust or odors do not disturb the health of
any person or animal or create a nuisance to any adjoining property.
   (13)   All pens, yards, shelters, cages, areas and premises where animals
are held or kept shall be maintained so that no flies, insects or vermin,
rodent harborage, odors, ponded water, the accumulation of manure, garbage or
other noxious materials do not disturb health and safety of any person or
animal.
   (14)   The keeping and raising of weaner pigs by 4-H and FFA participants
shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
      (a)   "Weaner pig" is defined as and limited to a pig that is less than
one year old, weaned from its mother, and will not weigh more than three
hundred fifty (350) pounds at the end of the five (5) month period in which the
weaner pig is kept.
      (b)   The maximum number of weaner pigs allowed shall be one per acre.
      (c)   Each weaner pig shall be kept for five (5) months during the months
of December through April (primary period); a limited number of weaner pigs, no
more than fifty percent (50%) of the maximum number, may be kept during April
through September (secondary period). The zoning administrator is authorized to
grant up to a thirty (30) day extension of time to accommodate the scheduled
showing of a pig by the 4-H or FFA participant.
      (d)   No weaner pig shall be allowed to run loose (not in a restricted
environment, such as a pen) unless attended by the owner or keeper of the pig.
      (e)   All pens shall be cleaned regularly, a minimum of three (3) times
weekly. On a weekly basis, the pig manure shall either be removed from the
parcel on which the pig is kept or dealt with using another acceptable
agricultural waste removal practice to minimize odor, such as composting or
plowing under as fertilizer.
      (f)   To mitigate possible adverse impacts to crops, there must be at
least thirty feet (30') separation between crops and all pens and pigs.
      (g)   Except for naturally occurring rain, all pens shall be kept dry
with adequate drainage provided to keep water from pooling within the pen. No
mud bogs shall be allowed in the pens.
      (h)   To ensure compliance with these requirements, and to resolve
citizen complaints, all 4-H and FFA participants raising weaner pigs shall be
supervised by an adult advisor. (Ord. 2010-04, 2010)
16.12.114: PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
No animals that are inherently or potentially dangerous and no animals of the
Suidae family shall be kept on any lot or parcel located within the city. (Ord.
2005-13, 2005)
16.12.115: COMMERCIAL KENNELS:
All commercial kennels shall comply with the following:
   (1)   Meet all state, county and local ordinances.
   (2)   All kennels are to be kept in such a way as to not disturb the health
and safety of any person or animal.
   (3)   All enclosed pens, shelters, cages, areas and premises where animals
are held or kept shall be completely soundproofed, so that no noise is
discernable from the kennel that could create a nuisance to adjoining
properties.
   (4)   All pens, yards, shelters, cages, areas and premises where animals are
held or kept shall be maintained so that no flies, insects or vermin, rodent
harborage, odors, ponded water, the accumulation of manure, garbage or other
noxious materials do not disturb the health and safety of any person or animal.
   (5)   No pens, yards, shelters, cages, areas and premises where animals are
held or kept shall be closer than one hundred feet (100') from any residential
structure located on adjacent lots.
   (6)   The required side yard and rear yard setbacks for the zone in which
the kennel is located shall be met or twenty foot (20') side and rear yard
setbacks shall be provided, whichever is greater. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.12.116: REQUIREMENTS FOR BED AND BREAKFAST INN:
A bed and breakfast inn shall be conducted only in a single- family dwelling
and only by the owner of the dwelling that complies with the following
requirements:
   (1)   The single-family dwelling proposed as a bed and breakfast inn shall
meet all applicable requirements of this title, other land use ordinances,
adopted Building Code, and Health Code, as applicable.
   (2)   The maximum number of guestrooms provided shall not exceed three (3).
   (3)   The Fire Chief shall inspect the premises and be satisfied that the
dwelling and premises comply with all applicable fire codes, as adopted.
   (4)   A hard surfaced off street parking area of one (1) parking space for
each guestroom, in addition to the parking requirements for the single-family
dwelling, shall be provided.
   (5)   No accessory structure, motor home, travel trailer, boat or similar
vehicle or facility shall be used as guestrooms.
   (6)   Primary access to all guestrooms is provided and allowed through the
main entrance of the dwelling. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.12.117: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2017-17, 2017)
16.12.118: SALE, DISTRIBUTION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND
ALCOHOLIC PRODUCTS:
All applications for a beer and liquor licenses, as provided by State law,
shall comply with the procedures and requirements of the City alcoholic
beverage control ordinance 1 , as adopted. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 5, chapter 4 of this Code.
16.12.119: SWIMMING POOL ENCLOSURES:
   (1)   Protective Fence Requirement: All swimming pools, or other
artificially created pools more than eighteen inches (18") deep, shall be
surrounded by a protective fence. This requirement includes spas and hot tubs.
   (2)   Swimming Pools: Any structure intended for swimming or recreational
bathing that contains water more than twenty four inches (24") deep. This
includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and
spas.
      (a)   In-ground pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance
with American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/National Spa & Pool Institute
(NSPI)-5, Standards for Residential In-Ground Swimming Pools.
      (b)   Above-ground and on-ground pools shall be designed and constructed
in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-4, Standard for Above-Ground/On-Ground Residential
Swimming Pools.
      (c)   Permanently installed spas and hot tubs shall be designed and
constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-3, Standard for Permanently Installed
Residential Spas.
      (d)   Portable spas and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in
compliance with ANSI/NSPI-6, Standard for Residential Portable Spas.
   (3)   Barrier Requirements: Controls on the design of barriers are intended
to provide protection against potential drownings and near-drownings by
restricting access to swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. An outdoor swimming
pool, including an in- ground, above-ground or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa,
shall be surrounded by a barrier which shall comply with the following:
      (a)   The top of the barrier shall be at least forty eight inches (48")
above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the
swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of
the barrier shall be two inches (2") measured on the side of the barrier which
faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above
grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such
as the pool structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the
barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance
between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be
four inches (4").
      (b)   Openings in the barrier shall not allow the passage of a four inch
(4") diameter sphere.
      (c)   Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or
stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions, except for normal
construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
      (d)   Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members,
and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than forty
five inches (45"), the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool
side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed one and
three-fourths inches (13/4") in width. Where there are decorative cutouts
within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed one and
three-fourths inches (13/4") in width.
      (e)   Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members,
and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is forty five
inches (45") or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four
inches (4"). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members,
spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed one and three-fourths inches (13/
4") in width.
      (f)   Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a two and one-
fourth inch (21/4") square, unless the fence has slats fastened at the top or
the bottom which reduce the openings to not more than one and three-fourths
inches (13/4") in width.
      (g)   Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a
lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall not be
more than one and three-fourths inches (13/4").
      (h)   Access gates shall comply with the requirements of subsections
16.12.119(3)(a) through (3)(h) of this section and shall be equipped to
accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away
from the pool, and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device.
Gates, other than pedestrian access gates, shall have a self-latching device.
Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than
fifty four inches (54") from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and
openings shall comply with the following:
         (i)   The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the
gate at least three inches (3") below the top of the gate; and
         (ii)   The gate and barrier shall have no opening larger than one-half
inch (1/2") within eighteen inches (18") of the release mechanism.
      (i)   Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, one (1)
of the following conditions shall be met:
         (i)   The pool shall be equipped with a powered safety cover in
compliance with ASTM F 1346, Performance Specification for Safety Covers and
Labeling Requirements for All Covers for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs.
         (ii)   Doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be
equipped with an alarm which produces an audible warning when the door and/or
its screen, if present, are opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled in
accordance with UL 2017. The deactivation switch(es) shall be located at least
fifty four inches (54") above the threshold of the door.
      (j)   Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where
the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is
a ladder or steps:
         (i)   The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or
removed to prevent access; or
         (ii)   The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which
meets the requirements of subsections
16.12.119(3)(a) through (3)(j) of this section. When the ladder or steps are
secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of
a four inch (4") diameter sphere.
   (4)   Prohibited Barrier Locations: Barriers shall be located to prohibit
permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb
them.
   (5)   Barrier Exceptions: A swimming pool with a power safety cover or a spa
with a safety cover complying with ASTM F 1346.
   (6)   Access: Access to indoor pools shall be restricted by the surrounding
structure in a manner that is at least as secure as provided for outdoor pools
as provided above. (Ord. 2017-03, 2017)
16.12.120: RESIDENTIAL PATIO COVERS:
   (1)   Maximum Patio Cover Area: In no case shall the area of any patio
cover, or combination of patio covers, be greater than one-third (1/3) of the
total area of the rear yard, or exceed eight hundred (800) square feet,
whichever is less.
   (2)   Building Permit Required: A building permit shall be required for the
construction or installation of all patio covers, complying with the
requirements of this section and the adopted Building Code, as applicable.
   (3)   Enclosed Patios: Any enclosed patio cover (a patio cover enclosed on
more than 2 sides) shall comply with the required setbacks applicable to the
primary building.
   (4)   Location:
      (a)   Patio covers constructed completely of noncombustible materials may
be allowed in the required rear yard area, but no portion of any such patio
cover shall be closer than one foot (1') to any rear or side property line and
no stormwater runoff from any patio cover shall be allowed to run onto adjacent
property.
      (b)   Patio covers, with any portion constructed from any combustible
materials, may be allowed in the required rear yard area, but no portion of any
such patio cover shall be closer than three feet (3') to any rear or side
property line and no stormwater runoff from any patio cover shall be allowed to
run onto adjacent property. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.12.121: LOCATION OF DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES:
No drive-through facility shall be provided on any property, or included within
the features of any building, structure or exterior building wall, to be facing
or adjacent to any agricultural or residential zoning district.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2938.gif]
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.12.122: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES:
This section is provided to establish development standards for wireless
telecommunication facilities to assure their compatibility with adjoining uses
to the extent permitted by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended.
   (1)   Scope: The requirements of this section shall apply to wireless
telecommunications facilities such as "cellular" or "PCS" (personal
communications system) communications and paging systems. This section shall
not apply to radio antennas complying with the ruling of the Federal
Communications Commission in "amateur radio preemption", 101 FCC 2nd 952
(1985), or a regulation related to amateur radio service adopted under 47 CFR
part 97.
   (2)   Facility Types: The following types of wireless telecommunication
facilities shall be governed by this section:
      (a)   Stealth design antennas.
      (b)   Roof mounted antennas.
      (c)   Wall mounted antennas.
      (d)   Monopoles; monopoles with antennas and antenna support.
   (3)   Prohibited Facility Types: Unless a facility is a wireless
telecommunication facility identified by subsection (2) of this section, all
other types of facilities are hereby determined to be prohibited facilities
within the city.
   (4)   Other Laws: The requirements of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this title, this code, or
other laws, including pertinent regulations of the federal communications
commission and the federal aviation administration.
   (5)   Existing Facility Plan Required: When a carrier applies for an
approval under this section, the carrier shall submit a plan showing by
location and type of the carrier's existing and planned facilities within the
city and within one mile of the city's boundary.
   (6)   Screening: Any associated mechanical or electrical equipment shall be
completely screened from view from public rights of way, on site parking areas
and adjacent properties with a decorative screening fence and/or landscaping.
   (7)   Location: The proposed facility, including associated mechanical and
electrical equipment, shall not be located within any public right of way.
   (8)   Compliance Required: The proposed facility shall conform to the
requirements of this section and other applicable federal, state or local laws,
including pertinent regulations of the federal communications commission and
the federal aviation administration.
   (9)   Permits Required: Copies of required permits from pertinent federal
agencies establishing compliance with applicable federal regulations shall be
filed with the city prior to the approval of a land use application required to
authorize the proposed facility.
   (10)   Specific Requirements For Various Types Of Allowed Antennas:
      (a)   Stealth Design Antennas: The following provisions shall apply to
all stealth design antennas. The intent of this subsection is to allow
creativity in designing a proposed facility so that it will have essentially no
visual impact.
         (i)   Stealth designs may include, but are not limited to, the use of
one or more of the following:
            (A)   Screening, structure and/or antenna design which blend with
the architecture of the existing structure upon which the antenna will be
mounted;
            (B)   Screening, structure, antenna and/or location design which
blend with and/or take advantage of existing vegetation and/or features of a
site; and
            (C)   Color schemes that make the antenna less noticeable.
         (ii)   Any associated mechanical or electrical equipment shall be
completely screened from view from public rights of way, on site parking areas
and adjacent properties with a decorative screening fence and/or landscaping.
         (iii)   The proposed facility, including associated mechanical and
electrical equipment, shall not be located within any public right of way.
         (iv)   The proposed facility shall conform to the requirements of this
section and other applicable federal, state or local laws, including pertinent
regulations of the federal communications commission and the federal aviation
administration.
         (v)   Copies of required permits from pertinent federal agencies
establishing compliance with applicable federal regulations shall be filed with
the city prior to the issuance of a class IV use permit for the proposed
facility.
         (vi)   The proposed facility shall conform to applicable development
standards set forth in this section.
         (vii)   The commission shall have authority to determine whether a
proposed roof mounted or wall mounted wireless telecommunications facility
design will have essentially no visual impact and whether a proposed stealth
design meets the intent of this section.
      (b)   Roof Mounted Antennas: The following provisions shall apply to roof
mounted antennas:
         (i)   Roof mounted antennas may only be allowed if determined to be a
stealth design as set forth in this section.
         (ii)   The maximum height of any roof mounted antenna shall comply
with the maximum building height allowed in the zoning district in which the
roof mounted antenna is located.
         (iii)   The maximum number of roof mounted antennas shall be one roof
mounted antenna per building or structure.
      (c)   Wall Mounted Antennas: Wall mounted antennas may only be allowed if
determined to be a stealth design as set forth in this section. The following
provisions shall apply to flush and nonflush mounted wall antennas:
         (i)   Wall mounted antennas shall not:
            (A)   Extend above the wall line of the building; and
            (B)   Extend more than one foot (1') horizontally from the wall
surface.
         (ii)   Wall mounted antennas, equipment and the supporting structure
shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure or the
background against which they are most commonly seen.
         (iii)   Antennas mounted directly on walls with no portion of the
antenna extending above the wall line shall be considered wall mounted
antennas.
         (iv)   The maximum number of wall mounted antennas shall be one wall
mounted antenna per building or structure.
         (v)   All wall mounted antennas shall be approved stealth design
antennas as set forth in this section.
      (d)   Monopoles, Monopoles With Antennas And Antenna Support Structures:
Monopoles with antennas and antenna support structures shall only be permitted
if determined to be a stealth design as set forth in this section. The
following provisions shall apply to monopoles with antennas and antenna support
structures:
         (i)   The maximum height of any monopole, including antennas and
antenna support structures, shall comply with the maximum building height
allowed in the zoning district in which the monopole, including antennas and
antenna support structures, is located, measured from the natural grade at the
base of the monopole to the highest point of the pole, antennas or support
structures.
         (ii)   The location of a monopole, and its associated equipment and
facilities, shall be as follows:
            (A)   All accessory equipment not located within an accessory
building shall be completely screened from view by a decorative screening
fence.
            (B)   All monopoles and associated equipment and facilities shall
be a stealth design, as provided by this section. The commission shall have the
authority and responsibility to determine whether a proposed monopole and its
associated accessory equipment and facilities will have no visual impact.
            (C)   A monopole, and its associated equipment and facilities,
shall comply with the minimum yard setback requirements of the zoning district
in which it is located. In addition, if located in a residential or
agricultural zoning district, a minimum of four feet (4') for every foot of
pole height from the closest property line of any residential structure shall
be provided.
            (D)   A monopole shall not be located within one thousand (1,000)
linear feet from another monopole.
            (E)   All communication and power lines to or between any accessory
building, accessory equipment and antenna structures, shall be located
underground.
   (11)   Alternative Locations: In considering applications to locate wireless
telecommunications facilities, the commission shall consider whether the
location of the antenna on other existing structures in the same vicinity, such
as other towers, buildings, utility poles, athletic field lights, parking lot
lights, etc., is possible without significantly affecting antenna transmission
or reception.
   (12)   Nonmaintained And Abandoned Facilities; Letter Agreement:
      (a)   Prior to approval of an application for wireless telecommunication
facility, the applicant shall provide the commission with a letter agreeing to
the requirements of this section. The letter agreement shall state that if
technology renders the facility obsolete, the facility is not maintained, the
facility is abandoned, or the facility is vacated, the carrier will provide the
city with a copy of a "notice to abandon" to be filed with the federal
communications commission and will remove the facility.
      (b)   If the zoning administrator determines that a facility is not
maintained, is abandoned, or is vacated, the zoning administrator shall send
the carrier a notice of nonmaintenance or abandonment by certified mail. If a
facility subject to the foregoing notice requirement has not been repaired, put
into use, or removed within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice, the
zoning administrator may send the carrier a certified notice to remove, which
shall give the carrier thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to
remove the facility. In the event a facility is not removed as required, the
city may undertake legal action to enforce removal as set forth in this title,
or other applicable ordinances of the city.
   (13)   Prohibited Uses:
      (a)   A lattice tower shall be prohibited, unless otherwise required to
comply with applicable state or federal law.
      (b)   All other types of wireless telecommunication facilities not
expressly provided for herein, unless otherwise required to comply with state
or federal law. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.12.123: SHORT TERM LEASES OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES:
   (1)   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is to promote the
health, safety and general public welfare of the residents of the city by
establishing zoning regulations and zoning standards for short term leases of
residential properties in Ivins City to ensure:
      (a)   Protection of the environment of the city, including compatibility
with existing residences;
      (b)   Preserving the existing character and property values of the
community by assuring appropriate uses; and
      (c)   Promoting peace and safety within neighborhoods of the city.
   (2)   Applicability:
      (a)   This section shall apply to leases and rentals of all properties
within residential zones of the city.
      (b)   This section shall apply to "short term leases" as defined in
subsection (3) of this section.
   (3)   Definitions:
    REMUNERATION: Compensation, money, rent or other bargained for
consideration in return for occupancy, possession or use of real property.
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT: A single-family or multi- family dwelling unit
located within a residential zoning district.
   SHORT TERM RESIDENTIAL LEASE: The use, occupancy, rent or lease, for direct
or indirect remuneration, of a residential dwelling unit or portion thereof for
an effective term of less than thirty (30) days.
   (4)   Short Term Residential Lease Prohibited: Short term residential leases
shall be prohibited in all residential zones, except:
      (a)   A legal bed and breakfast inn (see section 16.12.116 of this
chapter); and
      (b)   A mixed use overlay zone that includes RC resort commercial as its
commercial component (see chapter 8, part 1 of this title). (Ord. 2008-10,
2008)
16.12.124: CHICKENS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
   (1)   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is to authorize the
keeping of chickens in certain residential zones and establish requirements
intended to minimize problems associated with keeping chickens in populated
areas.
   (2)   Applicability: Subject to compliance with the requirements hereinafter
set forth, hen chickens (and no roosters) regardless of age, may be kept on a
lot or parcel of land in a residential zone district for the production of food
for the sole use of the family occupying the premises.
   (3)   Lot Sizes And Allowed Number Of Chickens: The number of hen chickens
(no roosters) which may be kept shall be limited based on the size of the lot
or parcel (single-family dwelling only), as follows:
      (a)   Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet and larger: Up to
twelve (12).
      (b)   Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet: Up to ten (10).
      (c)   Ten thousand (10,000) square feet: Up to eight (8).
      (d)   Nine thousand (9,000) square feet: Up to seven (7).
      (e)   Eight thousand (8,000) square feet: Up to six (6).
      (f)   Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet: Up to five (5).
   (4)   Requirements For Coops/Pens, Allowed Location, Sanitation:
      (a)   The chickens shall be confined in a secure outdoor enclosed pen
which shall include a covered, ventilated, and predator resistant chicken coop.
      (b)   The coops shall be a maximum size of one hundred twenty (120)
square feet, with a maximum height of eight feet (8'), coops shall have a
minimum floor area of three (3) square feet per chicken. Provided, however, if
chickens are not allowed to roam within an enclosed area outside the coop, the
coop shall have a minimum floor area of six (6) square feet per chicken.
      (c)   The coop and pen shall be located in the rear yard area of the
dwelling and maintain a minimum of five feet (5') from property lines and
twenty feet (20') from any neighboring dwelling.
      (d)   The coop, pens, cages and surrounding areas shall be maintained in
such a way as to avoid unreasonable accumulation of debris or waste or
conditions that cause an unreasonable odor that affect the health, safety, and
comfort of adjoining properties.
      (e)   No chicken shall be allowed to roam outside the coop or enclosed
pen.
      (f)   Chicken feed shall be stored and dispensed in a rodent and predator
proof container. (Ord. 2013-09, 2013)
CHAPTER 13
LAND USE APPLICATIONS
SECTION:
16.13.101: Purpose
16.13.102: Applicability
16.13.103: Application Forms And Procedures
16.13.104: Permits Required
16.13.105: Development Application; Initiation
16.13.106: Determination Of Application Completeness
16.13.107: Remedying Application Deficiencies (Rep. by Ord. 2006-32, 2006)
16.13.108: Payment Of Taxes And Charges Required
16.13.109: Withdrawal Of Application
16.13.110: Amendment Of An Existing Approval
16.13.111: Reapplication Following Application Denial
16.13.112: Inspections
16.13.113: Fees
16.13.101: PURPOSE:
Land use applications and application review procedures are provided to achieve
the purposes of the general plan and all land use ordinances, including this
title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.13.102: APPLICABILITY:
A land use application or building permit application, as applicable, shall be
required for the establishment of all uses, expansion of uses, and construction
or modifications for all buildings and structures located within the city,
unless exempt, as provided by the land use ordinances or building code, as
adopted. All use and building permit applications shall be presented to the
city on the applicable application forms provided by the city. The type of
application presented is at the sole discretion of the applicant. (Ord. 2005-
13, 2005)
16.13.103: APPLICATION FORMS AND PROCEDURES:
The city council and/or city manager shall provide application forms and may
identify submittal requirements and processing procedures for the acceptance
and filing of all applications required by the land use ordinances and building
code, as adopted. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.13.104: PERMITS REQUIRED:
The requirements of all land use ordinances and building code, as applicable,
shall apply to all uses, buildings or structures located or proposed within the
city. No use, building or structure shall be commenced or occupied unless and
until all necessary approvals, permits and licenses have been issued in
accordance with all requirements of the land use ordinances and building code,
as applicable. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.13.105: DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION; INITIATION:
The procedures for any required approval, permit or license shall be initiated
by submitting the appropriate land use application to the zoning administrator.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.13.106: DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION COMPLETENESS:
Before a land use application is accepted, the zoning administrator, or his
designee, shall determine if the application is complete on its face, i.e., all
items listed on the application checklist have been submitted with the
application. Only if the application is complete will the application be
accepted for review. If the zoning administrator determines that the
application is incomplete, the zoning administrator shall identify the
application deficiencies and advise the applicant that no action will be taken
by the land use authority, as applicable, until all application deficiencies
have been corrected. (Ord. 2006-32, 2006)
16.13.107: REMEDYING APPLICATION DEFICIENCIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2006-32, 2006)
16.13.108: PAYMENT OF TAXES AND CHARGES REQUIRED:
All approvals, permits or licenses may be conditioned by the land use
authority, as applicable, so that no approval, permit or license is issued, or
becomes effective, until all delinquent taxes and charges have been paid to the
date of approval. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.13.109: WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATION:
An applicant may withdraw a land use application at any time prior to a land
use authority decision on the application. Application fees shall not be
refundable if either of the following has occurred:
   (1)   A review of the application by the zoning administrator or technical
review committee has commenced; or
   (2)   Required notice of a public hearing or public meeting to consider the
application with the land use authority has been provided. (Ord. 2006-32, 2006)
16.13.110: AMENDMENT OF AN EXISTING APPROVAL:
Proposed amendments to any existing approval, permit or license issued under
the authority of all land use ordinances and building code shall be reviewed in
accordance with the procedures established for the review of the approval,
permit or license in the first instance. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.13.111: REAPPLICATION FOLLOWING APPLICATION DENIAL:
If a land use application is denied for failure to meet the requirements of the
land use ordinances and building code, a land use application for all or any
part of the same property shall not be considered by a land use authority for a
period of at least one year from the date of denial, unless the subsequent land
use application is substantially different from the previously denied
application, the prior denial was based upon a mistake of fact, or on a motion
duly passed by the city council to act immediately and identifying a valid
public purpose. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.13.112: INSPECTIONS:
In order to review information relevant to an application, a land use
authority, the zoning administrator and/or other city staff may enter upon any
land at reasonable times to make examinations and surveys related to the
application. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.13.113: FEES:
The city council shall establish, by resolution, a fee schedule for the
processing and review of all land use applications required by all land use
ordinances, and designed to recover the actual or anticipated costs for the
processing of the land use application. The fee schedule may be included in the
city consolidated fee schedule, which schedule may be amended from time to time
by resolution of the city council. The fee schedule for the processing and
review of all land use applications may include a processing fee and an
application fee. Fees shall not be required for land use applications initiated
by a land use authority. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
   FIGURE 13-1
   PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION COMPLETENESS
 Application filed with zoning administrator  
 Application filed with zoning administrator   
                                               
 Application reviewed by zoning administrator  
  for completeness
                                               
                                           
Application determined complete     Application determined incomplete
                                             
Land use application review         Application not accepted and applicant
procedures commenced                notified of deficiencies in writing
 
(Ord. 2006-32, 2006)
CHAPTER 14
CLASS I USE APPLICATIONS
SECTION:
16.14.101: Purpose
16.14.102: Approval Authority
16.14.103: Application Initiation And Completeness
16.14.104: Class I Use Application Requirements, Except Those Proposed On Any
Sensitive Lands Areas
16.14.105: Class I Use Application Requirements Proposed On Any Sensitive Lands
Areas
16.14.106: Class I Use Application Review Procedures And Approval Standards,
Except Those Proposed On Any Sensitive Lands Areas
16.14.107: Class I Use Application Review Procedures And Approval Standards
Proposed On Any Sensitive Lands Areas
16.14.108: Approved Class I Use Applications To Be On File
16.14.109: Effect Of Approval
16.14.110: Appeal
16.14.111: Class I Use Approval Amendments
16.14.112: Revocation
16.14.113: Continuing Validity And Expiration
16.14.101: PURPOSE:
This chapter identifies and provides the procedures, decision standards, and
other matters for the review of class I use applications. Class I uses are
hereby determined to be temporary uses for the purposes of this title, and all
other land use ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.102: APPROVAL AUTHORITY:
   (1)   The zoning administrator is authorized to approve, approve with
requirements necessary for compliance with all applicable land use ordinance
provisions, or deny class I use applications, except class I use applications
proposed on any sensitive lands areas.
   (2)   The sensitive lands committee is authorized to approve, approve with
requirements necessary for compliance with all applicable land use ordinance
provisions, or deny class I use applications proposed on any sensitive lands
areas. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.103: APPLICATION INITIATION AND COMPLETENESS:
   (1)   Requests to establish a class I use shall be made on a class I use
application.
   (2)   A property owner may present a class I use application for review and
decision. An agent of the property owner, or a lessee of the property, may
present a class I use application for review and decision, provided such
application is accompanied by a property owner affidavit of authorization.
   (3)   Class I use applications shall be determined complete by the zoning
administrator, as provided by chapter 13 of this title. For class I use
applications determined to be incomplete, the zoning administrator shall comply
with the requirements of chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.104: CLASS I USE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPT THOSE PROPOSED ON ANY
SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
The following class I use application information shall be provided:
   (1)   A complete class I use application.
   (2)   Three (3) copies of a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals
forty feet (1" = 40'), or as required by the zoning administrator, identifying
the following:
      (a)   The location and dimension of the property and all proposed uses
and buildings, all existing buildings or structures located on the property,
and existing buildings and structures located within one hundred feet (100') of
the property. Existing property lines and existing fence lines shall be shown.
      (b)   The location of all roads and streets adjoining the site, and
including any permits as required by Washington County or the state department
of transportation, as applicable.
      (c)   The location and dimension of all proposed ingress and egress
points, off street parking and loading areas, including the total number of
parking and loading spaces.
   (3)   Other information, as may be required by the zoning administrator,
necessary to review the class I use application. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.105: CLASS I USE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS PROPOSED ON ANY SENSITIVE LANDS
AREAS:
Class I use applications proposed on any sensitive lands areas shall provide
the same information required by section
16.14.104 of this chapter, and other information required by chapter 8 of this
title, as determined necessary by the sensitive lands committee to review the
class I use application. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.106: CLASS I USE APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL STANDARDS,
EXCEPT THOSE PROPOSED ON ANY SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
   (1)   The procedures for review of a class I use application, except those
proposed on any sensitive lands areas, are identified by figure 14-1 in this
chapter.
   (2)   The zoning administrator shall review the application and determine if
the application:
      (a)   Is a class I use within the zoning district, as identified in the
tables of uses (chapter 33 of this title).
      (b)   Complies with all requirements applicable to the zoning district,
including minimum area, setbacks, height, and all other requirements.
      (c)   Does not propose any use, building or structure on any sensitive
lands areas.
      (d)   The use is proposed for a maximum period of forty five (45) days,
such use being discontinued after the expiration of forty five (45) days.
   (3)   Upon a finding by the zoning administrator that the proposed class I
use complies with the requirements of this chapter, and the proposed use can be
adequately serviced by the existing public facilities (see section
16.11.111 of this title), the class I use application shall be approved, with
or without requirements.
   (4)   Upon a finding by the zoning administrator that the proposed class I
use does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, or the proposed use
cannot be adequately serviced by the existing public facilities, the class I
use application shall be denied. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.107: CLASS I USE APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL STANDARDS
PROPOSED ON ANY SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
   (1)   The procedures for the approval or denial of a class I use application
proposed on any sensitive lands areas are identified by figure 14-2 in this
chapter.
   (2)   The sensitive lands committee shall review the application and
determine if the application:
      (a)   Is a class I use within the zoning district, as identified in the
tables of uses (chapter 33 of this title).
      (b)   Complies with all requirements applicable to the zoning district,
including minimum area, setbacks, height, and all other requirements.
      (c)   Complies with all requirements of chapter 8 of this title, as
applicable.
      (d)   The use is proposed for a maximum period of forty five (45) days,
such use being discontinued after the expiration of forty five (45) days.
   (3)   Upon a finding by the sensitive lands committee that the proposed
class I use application complies with the standards and requirements of this
chapter, and the proposed use can be adequately serviced by the existing public
facilities (see section
16.11.111 of this title), the class I use application shall be approved, with
or without requirements.
   (4)   Upon a finding by the sensitive lands committee that the proposed
class I use does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, or the
proposed use cannot be adequately serviced by the existing public facilities,
the class I use application shall be denied. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.108: APPROVED CLASS I USE APPLICATIONS TO BE ON FILE:
   (1)   The zoning administrator shall maintain all class I use application
approvals on file.
   (2)   The zoning administrator or sensitive lands committee recording
secretary shall maintain all class I use application approvals on sensitive
lands areas on file. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.109: EFFECT OF APPROVAL:
   (1)   Approval of a class I use application by the zoning administrator
shall authorize the establishment of the approved use, subject to any
requirements of approval.
   (2)   Approval of a class I use application by the sensitive lands committee
shall authorize the establishment of the approved use, subject to any
requirements of approval. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.110: APPEAL:
   (1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator
regarding a class I use application may appeal the decision to the commission,
as provided by chapter 30 of this title.
   (2)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the sensitive lands committee
regarding a class I use application proposed on any sensitive lands areas may
appeal the decision to the city council, as provided by chapter 30 of this
title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.111: CLASS I USE APPROVAL AMENDMENTS:
No class I use application approval shall be amended. The procedure for
amending any class I use application approval shall be the same procedure to
approve the class I use application in the first instance (see section
16.13.110 of this title). (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.112: REVOCATION:
A class I use application approval shall be revoked upon a finding of
noncompliance, as provided by sections
16.03.116 and
16.03.117 of this title, by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.14.113: CONTINUING VALIDITY AND EXPIRATION:
See section
16.03.115 of this title.
   FIGURE 14-1
   CLASS I USE APPLICATION PROCEDURES
   (EXCEPT THOSE PROPOSED ON SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS)
  Class I use application filed with zoning administrator
    Class I use application filed with
    zoning administrator
                                           
 Zoning administrator determines             
  application completeness (see chapter 13)
                                           
                                         
Application determined complete (see     Application determined incomplete (see
chapter 13)                              chapter 13)
                                      
    Complete application reviewed by
    zoning administrator for compliance
    with requirements of all land use
    ordinances, including this title
                                         
Application found to comply with         Application found to not comply with
requirements of all land use             requirements of all land use
ordinances, including this title.        ordinances, including this title.
Application approved by zoning           Application denied by zoning
administrator, with or without           administrator
requirements
 
   FIGURE 14-2
   CLASS I USE APPLICATION PROCEDURES PROPOSED ON
   SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS
  Class I use application filed with zoning administrator
    Class I use application filed with
    zoning administrator
                                         
  Zoning administrator determines
 application completeness (see chapter     
  13)
                                         
                                       
Application determined complete (see   Application determined incomplete (see
chapter 13)                            chapter 13)
     
    Complete application reviewed by
    sensitive lands committee for
    compliance with requirements of all
    land use ordinances, including this
    title
                                       
Application found to comply with       Application found to not comply with
requirements of all land use           requirements of all land use
ordinances, including this title.      ordinances, including this title.
Application approved by sensitive      Application denied by sensitive lands
lands committee, with or without       committee
requirements
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 15
CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATIONS
SECTION:
16.15.101: Purpose
16.15.102: Approval Authority
16.15.103: Application Initiation And Completeness
16.15.104: Class II And Class III Use Application Requirements, Except Class II
And Class III Use Applications Proposed On Any Sensitive Lands Areas
16.15.105: Class II And Class III Use Application Requirements Proposed On Any
Sensitive Lands Areas
16.15.106: Class II And Class III Use Application Review Procedures And
Approval Standards, Except Class II And Class III Use Applications Proposed On
Any Sensitive Lands Areas
16.15.107: Class II And Class III Use Application Review Procedures And
Approval Standards For Class II And Class III Use Applications Proposed On Any
Sensitive Lands Areas
16.15.108: Approved Class II And Class III Applications To Be On File
16.15.109: Effect Of Approval
16.15.110: Appeal
16.15.111: Class II And Class III Use Application Approval Amendments
16.15.112: Revocation
16.15.113: Continuing Validity And Expiration
16.15.101: PURPOSE:
This chapter identifies and provides the procedures, decision standards, and
other matters for the review of class II and class III use applications. Class
II and class III uses are hereby determined to be permitted uses for the
purposes of this title, and all other land use ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.15.102: APPROVAL AUTHORITY:
   (1)   The zoning administrator is authorized to approve, approve with
requirements necessary for compliance with all applicable land use ordinance
provisions, or deny class II use applications, except class II use applications
proposed on any sensitive lands areas.
   (2)   The commission is authorized to approve, approve with requirements
necessary for compliance with all applicable land use ordinance provisions, or
deny class III use applications, except class III use applications proposed on
any sensitive lands areas.
   (3)   The sensitive lands committee is authorized to approve, approve with
requirements necessary for compliance with all applicable land use ordinance
provisions, or deny class II use applications proposed on any sensitive lands
areas.
   (4)   The sensitive lands committee is authorized to approve, approve with
requirements necessary for compliance with all applicable land use ordinance
provisions, or deny class III use applications proposed on any sensitive lands
areas. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.15.103: APPLICATION INITIATION AND COMPLETENESS:
   (1)   Requests to establish a class II or class III use shall be made on the
applicable application, which may include a building permit application for a
class II use.
   (2)   A property owner may present a class II or class III use application
for review and decision. An agent of the property owner, or a lessee of the
property, may present a class II or class III use application for review and
decision, provided such application is accompanied by a property owner
affidavit of authorization.
   (3)   A class II or class III use application shall be determined complete
by the zoning administrator, as provided by chapter 13 of this title. For class
II or class III use applications determined to be incomplete, the zoning
administrator shall comply with the requirements of chapter 13 of this title.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.15.104: CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPT CLASS II
AND CLASS III USE APPLICATIONS PROPOSED ON ANY SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
Class II and class III use applications, except class II and class III use
applications proposed on any sensitive lands areas, shall provide the following
information and materials, and the application requirements for a building
permit, as applicable:
   (1)   Requirements For Class II Uses: The following minimum information
shall be provided:
      (a)   A complete class II use application.
      (b)   All information and materials required by the adopted building
code, for a complete building permit application.
      (c)   Other information, as may be required by the zoning administrator,
necessary to review the class II use application.
   (2)   Requirements For Class III Uses: The following minimum information
shall be provided:
      (a)   A complete class III use application.
      (b)   Eight (8) copies of a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch
equals forty feet (1" = 40'), or as required by the zoning administrator, and
prepared by a licensed engineer or architect, plus twenty (20) copies of an
eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduced copy of the site plan set
identifying the following:
         (i)   The location and dimension of the property and all proposed uses
and buildings, all existing buildings or other structures located on the
property, and existing buildings and structures located within one hundred feet
(100') of the property. Existing property lines and existing fence lines shall
be shown.
         (ii)   The location of all zoning district boundaries.
         (iii)   The location and dimension of all existing natural features,
including, but not limited to, rock and lava outcrops, views, existing
vegetation, wetlands, drainageways, floodplains, water bodies, and threatened
or endangered species habitat areas.
         (iv)   Existing site grade, and the proposed finished grade, shown at
a maximum contour interval of two feet (2'), or as required by the zoning
administrator.
         (v)   The proposed setbacks and exterior dimensions of all proposed
buildings and structures.
         (vi)   The location of all roads and streets adjoining the site, or
proposed to serve the site, and including any permits as required by Washington
County or the state department of transportation, as applicable.
         (vii)   The location and dimension of all proposed ingress and egress
points, off street parking and loading areas, including the total number of
parking and loading spaces.
         (viii)   The location and dimension of all pedestrian and biking
facilities, including sidewalks and trails, if any.
         (ix)   All public and private rights of way and easements located on,
or adjacent to, the property, proposed to be continued, created, relocated or
abandoned, shall be shown.
      (c)   Located on the site plan sheets, or on separate sheets, as may be
proposed by the applicant, or required by the zoning administrator for
readability, the following information shall be provided:
         (i)   Line And Facility Location And Size: The location and sizes of
all existing water, sewer, storm drainage, power, gas and telephone lines, and
facilities (see sections
16.11.112 and
16.11.113 of this title).
         (ii)   Design Plans: The design plans for all new water, sewer, storm
drainage, power, gas and telephone lines, and facilities, as applicable. Access
points to all utilities and locations of utility connections shall be shown
(see sections
16.11.112 and
16.11.113 of this title).
         (iii)   Road And Street Design: The design and cross section of all
new roads and streets proposed, meeting the design and construction
requirements of the city, or other agencies, as applicable, and prepared by a
licensed engineer, at a scale acceptable to the zoning administrator (see
section
16.11.114 of this title).
         (iv)   Landscape Plan: Landscape plans shall be included, prepared by
a registered landscape architect, identifying all proposed landscape, screening
and buffering features, including all proposed plant materials, including their
locations and sizes. All proposed plant materials shall be drought tolerant
(see chapters 19 and 22 of this title).
         (v)   Fences And Walls: The location of all fences and walls,
identifying proposed height, materials and colors shall be shown (see chapter
19 and section
16.11.135 of this title).
         (vi)   Building Plans: The exterior elevations of every side of all
proposed buildings and structures shall be provided, clearly showing building
materials and colors proposed for all exterior building facades. This
information shall include a proposed building materials and colors board,
including color chips and material samples. The location of all associated
mechanical and ancillary equipment, if any, shall be provided, including any
screening treatments proposed (see chapter 19 of this title).
         (vii)   Site And Building Signage Plans: Information and plans shall
be provided identifying all proposed site and building signage, including the
design, height, size, materials and colors of all building and site
identification signs (see chapter 21 of this title).
         (viii)   Site And Building Lighting Plans: Information and plans shall
be provided identifying all proposed site and building lighting identifying the
type, design, location, intensity, height and direction of all site and
building lighting. The commission may require a photometric plan of the site,
including all site and building lighting (see chapters 19 and 22 of this
title).
         (ix)   Waste Collection: The location and dimensions of all proposed
solid waste collection areas and storage areas, including the proposed methods
of screening (see chapter 19 of this title).
         (x)   Erosion Control Plan: Information and plans identifying proposed
temporary and permanent erosion control measures.
         (xi)   Construction Plan: A plan identifying the phases of
construction, a construction schedule, and a list of all permits necessary for
the proposed use, as applicable.
      (d)   A narrative, accompanied by necessary tables and other information,
describing the proposed site plan and proposed uses, to assist the commission
review of the proposed site plan, and including:
         (i)   A calculation, identifying all pervious and impervious areas.
         (ii)   A description of all proposed uses and buildings, including the
total site area and building square footage, by building.
         (iii)   Projected increase in traffic trips.
         (iv)   Projected water and sewer demand.
      (e)   Other information, as may be required by the zoning administrator
or commission, necessary to review the class III use application. (Ord. 2005-
13, 2005)
16.15.105: CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS PROPOSED ON ANY
SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
Class II and class III use applications proposed on any sensitive lands areas
shall provide the information required by section
16.15.104 of this chapter, and other information required by chapter 8 of this
title, as determined necessary by the sensitive lands committee to review the
class II or class III use application. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.15.106: CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND
APPROVAL STANDARDS, EXCEPT CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATIONS PROPOSED ON
ANY SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
   (1)   The procedures for the review of a class II use application, except
those proposed on any sensitive lands areas, are identified by figure 15-1 in
this chapter.
   (2)   The procedures for the review of a class III use application, except
those proposed on any sensitive lands areas, are identified by figure 15-2 in
this chapter.
   (3)   The zoning administrator for class II use applications, and the
commission for class III use applications, shall review the application and
determine if the application:
      (a)   Is a class II or class III use within the zoning district, as
identified in the tables of uses (chapter 33 of this title).
      (b)   Complies with all requirements applicable to the zoning district,
including minimum area, setbacks, height, and all other requirements applicable
in the zoning district.
      (c)   Complies with all requirements of chapter 19 of this title.
      (d)   Does not propose any use, building or structure on any sensitive
lands.
      (e)   Complies with all applicable dedication requirements of the city
and provides the necessary infrastructure, as required.
   (4)   Upon a finding by the zoning administrator for class II use
applications, or the commission for class III use applications, that the
proposed use, building or structure complies with the standards and
requirements of this chapter, and the proposed use, building or structure can
be adequately serviced by the existing, or proposed public facilities (see
section
16.11.111 of this title), the application shall be reviewed for compliance with
the adopted building code. If the application for a class II or class III use
complies with the requirements of all land use ordinances, the adopted building
code, and all other applicable requirements, the class II or class III use
application shall be approved, with or without requirements, and a building
permit issued.
   (5)   Upon a finding by the zoning administrator for class II use
applications, or the commission for class III use applications, that the
proposed use, building or structure does not comply with the requirements of
this chapter, or the proposed use, building or structure cannot be adequately
serviced by the existing, or proposed public facilities (see section
16.11.111 of this title), or any other applicable requirement, as adopted, the
zoning administrator or commission, as applicable, shall deny the application
and no building permit shall be issued. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.15.107: CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND
APPROVAL STANDARDS FOR CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATIONS PROPOSED ON ANY
SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
   (1)   The procedures for the review of a class II use application proposed
on any sensitive lands areas are identified by figure 15-3 in this chapter.
   (2)   The procedures for the review of a class III use application proposed
on any sensitive lands areas are identified by figure 15-4 in this chapter.
   (3)   The sensitive lands committee for class II and class III use
applications proposed on sensitive lands areas shall review the application and
determine if the application:
      (a)   Is a class II or class III use within the zoning district, as
identified in the tables of uses (chapter 33 of this title).
      (b)   Complies with all requirements applicable to the zoning district,
including minimum area, setbacks, height, and all other requirements applicable
in the zoning district.
      (c)   Complies with all requirements of chapter 8 of this title, as
applicable.
      (d)   Complies with all requirements of chapter 19 of this title.
      (e)   Complies with all applicable dedication requirements of the city
and provides the necessary infrastructure, as required.
   (4)   Upon a finding by the sensitive lands committee that the proposed
class II or class III use application that the proposed use, building or
structure complies with the standards and requirements of this chapter, and the
proposed use, building or structure can be adequately serviced by the existing,
or proposed public facilities (see section
16.11.111 of this title), the application shall be reviewed for compliance with
the adopted building code. If the application for a class II or class III use
complies with the requirements of all land use ordinances, the adopted building
code, and all other applicable requirements, the class II or class III use
application shall be approved, with or without requirements, and a building
permit issued.
   (5)   Upon a finding by the sensitive lands committee that the proposed
class II or class III use application that the proposed use, building or
structure does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, or the
proposed use, building or structure cannot be adequately serviced by the
existing, or proposed public facilities (see section
16.11.111 of this title), or any other applicable requirement, as adopted, the
sensitive lands committee shall deny the application and no building permit
shall be issued. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.15.108: APPROVED CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATIONS TO BE ON FILE:
   (1)   The zoning administrator shall maintain all class II use application
approvals on file, which may be included within the building permit files of
the city.
   (2)   The zoning administrator or commission recording secretary shall
maintain all class III use application approvals on file.
   (3)   The zoning administrator or sensitive lands committee recording
secretary shall maintain all class II and class III use application approvals
on sensitive lands areas on file. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.15.109: EFFECT OF APPROVAL:
   (1)   Approval of a class II use application by the zoning administrator, or
a class III use application by the commission, shall authorize the
establishment of the approved use, building or structure, subject to any
requirements of approval.
   (2)   Approval of a class II use application or a class III use application
proposed on any sensitive lands areas by the sensitive lands committee shall
authorize the establishment of the approved use, building or structure, subject
to any requirements of approval. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.15.110: APPEAL:
   (1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator
regarding a class II use application may appeal the decision as provided by
chapter 30 of this title.
   (2)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the commission regarding a class
III use application may appeal the decision as provided by chapter 30 of this
title.
   (3)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the sensitive lands committee
regarding a class II or class III use application proposed on any sensitive
lands areas may appeal the decision as provided by chapter 30 of this title.
(Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
16.15.111: CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATION APPROVAL AMENDMENTS:
The procedure for amending any class II or class III use application approval
shall be the same procedure to approve the use application in the first
instance (see section
16.13.110 of this title). (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.15.112: REVOCATION:
A class II or class III use application approval shall be revoked upon a
finding of noncompliance, as provided by sections
16.03.116 and
16.03.117 of this title, by the zoning administrator for class II use
approvals, the commission for class III use approvals, or the sensitive lands
committee for class II use and class III use application approvals on any
sensitive lands areas. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.15.113: CONTINUING VALIDITY AND EXPIRATION:
See section
16.03.115 of this title.
   FIGURE 15-1
   CLASS II USE APPLICATION PROCEDURES
   (EXCEPT THOSE PROPOSED ON SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS)
  Class II use application filed with zoning administrator
    Class II use application filed with
    zoning administrator
                                           
 Zoning administrator determines             
  application completeness (see chapter 13)
                                           
                                         
Application determined complete (see     Application determined incomplete (see
chapter 13)                              chapter 13)
     
    Complete application reviewed by
    zoning administrator for compliance
    with requirements of all land use
    ordinances, including this title, and
    building code
                                         
Application found to comply with         Application found to not comply with
requirements of all land use             requirements of all land use
ordinances, including this title,        ordinances, including this title,
building code, and all other             building code, and all other
applicable codes. Application approved   applicable codes. Application denied
by zoning administrator, with or         by zoning administrator
without requirements
 
   FIGURE 15-2
   CLASS III USE APPLICATION PROCEDURES
   (EXCEPT THOSE PROPOSED ON SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS)
  Class III use application filed with zoning administrator
    Class III use application filed with
    zoning administrator
                                           
 Zoning administrator determines             
  application completeness (see chapter 13)
                                           
                                         
Application determined complete          Application determined incomplete (see
(see chapter 13)                         chapter 13)
     
                                            
  Zoning administrator distributes complete
 application to TRC and schedules meeting    
  with TRC for technical review
                                             
  With a minimum of 10 days' notice
 following TRC review, the zoning            
  administrator schedules meeting with the
  commission
                                             
  The commission considers the complete
  application, report provided by the TRC,
 and all other relevant information for      
  compliance with requirements of all land
  use ordinances, including this title and
  building code
                                           
                                         
Application found to comply with         Application found to not comply with
requirements of all land use             requirements of all land use
ordinances, including this title,        ordinances, including this title,
building code, and all other             building code, and all other
applicable codes. Application approved   applicable codes. Application denied
by commission, with or without           by commission
requirements
 
   FIGURE 15-3
   CLASS II USE APPLICATION PROCEDURES
   PROPOSED ON SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS
  Class II use application filed with zoning administrator
    Class II use application filed with
    zoning administrator
                                           
 Zoning administrator determines             
  application completeness (see chapter 13)
                                           
                                         
Application determined complete (see     Application determined incomplete (see
chapter 13)                              chapter 13)
     
    Complete application reviewed by
    sensitive lands committee for
    compliance with requirements of all
    land use ordinances, including this
    title and building code
                                         
Application found to comply with         Application found to not comply with
requirements of all land use             requirements of all land use
ordinances, including this title,        ordinances, including this title,
building code, and all other             building code, and all other
applicable codes. Application approved   applicable codes. Application denied
by sensitive lands committee, with or    by sensitive lands committee
without requirements
 
   FIGURE 15-4
   CLASS III USE APPLICATION PROCEDURES
   PROPOSED ON SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS
  Class III use application filed with zoning administrator
    Class III use application filed with
    zoning administrator
                                           
 Zoning administrator determines             
  application completeness (see chapter 13)
                                           
                                         
Application determined complete          Application determined incomplete (see
(see chapter 13)                         chapter 13)
     
                                            
  Zoning administrator distributes complete
 application to TRC and schedules meeting    
  with TRC for technical review
                                             
  With a minimum of 10 days' notice
 following TRC review, the zoning            
  administrator schedules meeting with the
  sensitive lands committee
                                             
  The sensitive lands committee considers
  the application, report provided by the
 TRC, and all other relevant information     
  for compliance with requirements of all
  land use ordinances, including this title
  and building code
                                           
                                         
Application found to comply with         Application found to not comply with
requirements of all land use             requirements of all land use
ordinances, including this title,        ordinances, including this title,
building code, and all other             building code, and all other
applicable codes. Application approved   applicable codes. Application denied
by sensitive lands committee, with or    by sensitive lands committee
without requirements
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 16
CLASS IV AND CLASS V USE APPLICATIONS
SECTION:
16.16.101: Purpose
16.16.102: Approval Authority
16.16.103: Application Initiation And Completeness
16.16.104: Class IV And Class V Use Application Requirements, Except Class IV
And Class V Use Applications Proposed On Any Sensitive Lands Areas
16.16.105: Class IV And Class V Use Application Requirements Proposed On Any
Sensitive Lands Areas
16.16.106: Review Procedures And Approval Standards
16.16.107: Applicable Standards For Determining Reasonable Conditions
16.16.108: Approved Class IV And Class V Use Applications To Be On File
16.16.109: Effect Of Approval
16.16.110: Appeal
16.16.111: Class IV Or Class V Use Application Approval Amendments
16.16.112: Revocation
16.16.113: Continuing Validity And Expiration
16.16.101: PURPOSE:
This chapter identifies and provides the procedures, decision standards, and
other matters for the review of Class IV and Class V use applications. Class IV
and Class V uses are hereby determined to be conditional uses for the purposes
of this title, and the City's other land use ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.16.102: APPROVAL AUTHORITY:
   (1)   The commission is authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or
deny Class IV use applications.
   (2)   The City Council is authorized to approve, approve with conditions, or
deny Class V use applications. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.16.103: APPLICATION INITIATION AND COMPLETENESS:
   (1)   Requests to establish a Class IV or Class V use shall be made on the
applicable application.
   (2)   A property owner may present a Class IV or Class V use application for
review and decision. An agent of the property owner, or a lessee of the
property, may present a Class IV or Class V use application for review and
decision, provided such application is accompanied by a property owner
affidavit of authorization.
   (3)   A Class IV or Class V use application shall be determined complete by
the Zoning Administrator, as provided by chapter 13 of this title. For Class IV
or Class V use applications determined to be incomplete, the Zoning
Administrator shall comply with the requirements of chapter 13 of this title.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.16.104: CLASS IV AND CLASS V USE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPT CLASS IV
AND CLASS V USE APPLICATIONS PROPOSED ON ANY SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
Class IV and Class V use applications, except Class IV and Class V use
applications proposed on any sensitive lands areas, shall provide the following
information and materials, and the application requirements for a building
permit, as applicable:
   (1)   A complete Class IV or Class V use application.
   (2)   Stamped, addressed envelopes for all owners of property located within
three hundred feet (300') of the property that is the subject of the
application. (A list of property owners is available from the Washington County
Recorder's Office.)
   (3)   Fourteen (14) copies of a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch
equals forty feet (1" = 40'), or as required by the Zoning Administrator,
prepared by a licensed engineer or architect, plus twenty (20) copies of an
eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduced copy of the site plan set
identifying the following:
      (a)   The location and dimension of the property and all proposed uses
and buildings, and existing buildings or other structures located on the
property, and existing buildings and structures located within one hundred feet
(100') of the property. Existing property lines and existing fence lines shall
be shown.
      (b)   The location of all zoning district boundaries.
      (c)   The location and dimension of all existing natural features,
including, but not limited to, rock and lava outcrops, scenic views, existing
vegetation, wetlands, drainageways, floodplains, water bodies, and endangered
species and wildlife habitat areas, as applicable.
      (d)   Existing site grade, and the proposed finished grade, shown at a
maximum contour interval of two feet (2'), or as required by the zoning
administrator.
      (e)   The proposed setbacks and exterior dimensions of all proposed
buildings and structures.
      (f)   The location of all roads and streets serving the site, or proposed
to serve the site, and including any permits as required by Washington County
or the state department of transportation, as applicable.
      (g)   The location and dimensions of all proposed ingress and egress
points, off street parking and loading areas, including the total number of
parking and loading spaces.
      (h)   The location and dimensions of all pedestrian and biking
facilities, including sidewalks and trails, if any.
      (i)   All public and private rights of way and easements located on, or
adjacent to the property, proposed to be continued, created, relocated or
abandoned shall be shown.
   (4)   Located on the site plan sheet, or on separate sheets, as may be
proposed by the applicant, or required by the zoning administrator for
readability, the following information shall be provided:
      (a)   Lines And Facilities: All existing and proposed water, sewer, storm
drainage, power, gas and telephone lines, and facilities (see sections
16.11.112 and
16.11.113 of this title).
      (b)   Design Plans: The design plans for all new water, sewer, storm
drainage, power, gas and telephone lines, and facilities, as applicable. Access
points to all utilities and locations of utility connections shall be shown
(see sections
16.11.112 and
16.11.113 of this title).
      (c)   Road And Street Design: The design and cross section of all new
roads and streets proposed, meeting the design and construction requirements of
the city, or other agencies, as applicable, and prepared by a licensed
engineer, at a scale acceptable to the zoning administrator (see section
16.11.114 and chapter 8 of this title, as applicable).
      (d)   Landscape Plans: Landscape plans shall be included, prepared by a
registered landscape architect, identifying all proposed landscape, screening
and buffering features, including all proposed plant materials, including their
locations and sizes. All proposed plant materials shall be drought tolerant
(see chapters 19 and 22 of this title).
      (e)   Fences And Walls: The location of all fences and walls, identifying
proposed height, materials and colors, shall be shown (see chapter 19 and
section
16.11.135 of this title).
      (f)   Building Plans: The exterior elevations of every side of all
proposed buildings and structures shall be provided, clearly showing building
materials and colors proposed for all exterior building facades. This
information shall include a proposed building materials and colors board,
including color chips and material samples. The location of all associated
mechanical and ancillary equipment, if any, shall be provided, including any
screening treatments proposed (see chapter 19 of this title).
      (g)   Site And Building Signage Plans: Information and plans shall be
provided identifying all proposed site and building signage, including the
design, height, size, materials and colors of all building and site
identification signs (see chapter 21 of this title).
      (h)   Site And Building Lighting Plans: Information and plans shall be
provided identifying all proposed site and building lighting identifying the
type, design, location, intensity, height and direction of all site and
building lighting. The sensitive lands committee and/or commission and/or city
council, may require a photometric plan of the site, including all site and
building lighting (see chapters 19 and 22 of this title).
      (i)   Waste Collection: The location and dimensions of all proposed solid
waste collection areas and storage areas, including the proposed methods of
screening (see chapter 19 of this title).
      (j)   Erosion Control Plan: Information and plans identifying proposed
temporary and permanent erosion control measures.
      (k)   Construction Plan: A plan identifying the phases of construction, a
construction schedule, and a list of all permits necessary for the proposed
use, as applicable.
   (5)   A narrative, accompanied by necessary tables and other information,
describing the proposed site plan and proposed uses, to assist the commission
review the proposed site plan, and including:
      (a)   A calculation, identifying all pervious and impervious areas.
      (b)   A description of all proposed uses and buildings, including the
total site area and building square footage, by building.
      (c)   Projected increase in traffic trips.
      (d)   Projected water and sewer demand.
   (6)   Other information, as may be required by the zoning administrator,
commission or city council necessary to review the class IV or class V use
application. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.16.105: CLASS IV AND CLASS V USE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS PROPOSED ON ANY
SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
Class IV and class V use applications proposed on any sensitive lands areas
shall provide the information required by section
16.16.104 of this chapter, and other information required by chapter 8 of this
title, as determined necessary by the sensitive lands committee, commission or
city council to review the class IV or class V use application. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.16.106: REVIEW PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL STANDARDS:
   (1)   The procedures for the review of a class IV use application, except
those proposed on any sensitive lands areas, are identified by figure 16-1 in
this chapter.
   (2)   The procedures for the review of a class V use application, except
those proposed on any sensitive lands areas, are identified by figure 16-2 in
this chapter.
   (3)   The procedures for the review of a class IV use application proposed
on any sensitive lands areas are identified by figure 16-3 in this chapter.
   (4)   The procedures for the review of a class V use application proposed on
any sensitive lands areas are identified by figure 16-4 in this chapter.
   (5)   The commission for class IV use applications, and the city council for
class V use applications shall review the application and determine if the
application:
      (a)   Is a class IV or class V use within the zoning district, as
identified in the tables of uses (chapter 33 of this title).
      (b)   Complies with all requirements applicable to the zoning district,
including minimum area, setbacks, height, and all other requirements applicable
in the zoning district.
      (c)   Complies with all requirements of chapter 19 of this title.
      (d)   Complies with all requirements of chapter 8 of this title if the
class IV use application or class V use application is proposed on any
sensitive lands areas.
      (e)   Complies with all applicable dedication requirements of the city
and provides the necessary infrastructure, as required.
   (6)   Upon a finding by the commission for class IV use applications, or the
city council for class V use applications, that the proposed use, building or
structure complies with the requirements of this chapter, and the proposed use,
building or structure can be adequately serviced by the existing or proposed
public facilities (see section
16.11.111 of this title), and reasonable conditions are proposed, or can be
proposed to mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the
proposed use in accordance with the applicable standards of section
16.16.107 of this chapter, the application shall be reviewed for compliance
with the adopted building code. If the application for a class IV or class V
use complies with the requirements of all land use ordinances, the adopted
building code, and all other applicable requirements, the class IV or class V
use application shall be approved, with or without reasonable conditions, and a
building permit issued.
   (7)   Upon a finding by the commission for Class IV use applications, or the
City Council for Class V use applications, that the proposed use, building or
structure does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, or the
proposed use, building or structure cannot be adequately serviced by the
existing or proposed public facilities (see section
16.11.111 of this title), or reasonable conditions are not proposed, or cannot
be proposed to mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the
proposed use in accordance with the applicable standards of section
16.16.107 of this chapter, the application shall be denied and no building
permit shall be issued. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.16.107: APPLICABLE STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING REASONABLE CONDITIONS:
As may be necessary for determining reasonable conditions that could be imposed
to mitigate reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the proposed use at
the proposed location, the commission for Class IV use applications, and the
City Council for Class V use applications, should consider applicable standards
which include, but may not necessarily be limited to, the following: (Ord.
2017-17, 2017)
   (1)   Size, configuration and location of the site, and proposed site plan
layout.
   (2)   Proposed site ingress and egress to existing and proposed roads and
streets.
   (3)   The provision of public facilities and amenities, including, but not
limited to, roads and streets, water, sewer, storm drainage, public safety and
fire protection, and other utilities.
   (4)   Location and amount of off street parking and loading areas.
   (5)   Site circulation pattern for vehicular and pedestrian traffic and
traffic controls.
   (6)   Building size and location, building design and exterior building
features, building materials and building colors.
   (7)   The location and design of all site features, including proposed
signage, lighting and refuse collection.
   (8)   The provision of usable open space, public features and recreational
amenities.
   (9)   Fencing, screening and landscape treatments and other features
designed to increase the attractiveness of the site and protect adjoining
property owners from noise and visual impacts.
   (10)   Measures directed at minimizing or eliminating possible nuisance
factors, including, but not limited to, operation and maintenance, construction
schedules, noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, noxious matter,
heat, glare, electromagnetic disturbances and radiation.
   (11)   Measures designed to protect the natural features of the site,
including wetlands and drainageways, protection of views, ground water
protection, cut and fill limitations, wildlife habitat and historic and
archeological site protection, and other natural site features.
   (12)   The regulation of operating hours for activities affecting normal
schedules and functions.
   (13)   Identifying a time for regular review and monitoring, as determined
necessary, to ensure the use continues to operate in compliance with all
conditions and requirements of approval.
   (14)   Such other conditions determined reasonable by the commission or City
Council to allow the operation of the use, at the proposed location in
compliance with the requirements of all land use ordinances, including this
title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.16.108: APPROVED CLASS IV AND CLASS V USE APPLICATIONS TO BE ON FILE:
   (1)   The Zoning Administrator or Commission Recording Secretary shall
maintain all Class IV use application approvals on file.
   (2)   The City Recorder shall maintain all Class V use application approvals
on file. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.16.109: EFFECT OF APPROVAL:
Approval of a Class IV use application by the commission or a Class V use
application by the City Council shall authorize the establishment of the
approved use, building or structure, subject to any conditions of approval.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.16.110: APPEAL:
   (1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the commission regarding a class
IV use application may appeal the decision as provided by chapter 30 of this
title.
   (2)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city council regarding a
class V use application may appeal the decision as provided by chapter 30 of
this title. (Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
16.16.111: CLASS IV OR CLASS V USE APPLICATION APPROVAL AMENDMENTS:
The procedure for amending any class IV or class V use application approval
shall be the same procedure to approve the use application in the first
instance (see section
16.13.110 of this title). (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.16.112: REVOCATION:
A class IV or class V use approval shall be revoked upon a finding of
noncompliance, as provided by sections
16.03.116 and
16.03.117 of this title, by the commission for class IV use application
approvals, or the city council for class V use application approvals. (Ord.
2005-13, 2005)
16.16.113: CONTINUING VALIDITY AND EXPIRATION:
See section
16.03.115 of this title.
   FIGURE 16-1
   CLASS IV USE APPLICATION PROCEDURES
   (EXCEPT THOSE PROPOSED ON SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS)
  Class IV use application filed with zoning administrator
    Class IV use application filed with
    zoning administrator
                                           
 Zoning administrator determines             
  application completeness (see chapter 13)
                                           
                                         
Application determined complete (see     Application determined incomplete (see
chapter 13)                              chapter 13)
     
    Zoning administrator distributes
    complete application to TRC and
    schedules meeting with TRC for
    technical review. TRC transmits
    recommendation to commission
    With a minimum of 10 days' notice
    following TRC review, the zoning
    administrator schedules public hearing
    with the commission
                                           
 Commission conducts public hearing on       
  application
                                             
  Following the close of the public hearing,
  or at a subsequent meeting(s), the
  commission considers the application,
 recommendation of TRC and all other         
  relevant information received for
  compliance with requirements of all land
  use ordinances, including this title and
  building code
                                           
                                         
Application found to comply with         Application found to not comply with
requirements of all land use             requirements of all land use
ordinances, including this title and     ordinances, including this title and
building code, and all other             building code, and all other
applicable codes. Application approved   applicable codes. Application denied
by commission, with or without           by commission
conditions
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
   FIGURE 16-2
   CLASS V USE APPLICATION PROCEDURES
   (EXCEPT THOSE PROPOSED ON SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS)
  Class V use application filed with zoning administrator
    Class V use application filed with
    zoning administrator
                                          
  Zoning administrator determines
 application completeness                   
  (see chapter 13)
                                        
Application determined complete        Application determined incomplete
(see chapter 13)                       (see chapter 13)
     
Zoning administrator distributes complete application to TRC and schedules
meeting with TRC for technical review. TRC transmits recommendation to
commission and council
With a minimum of 10 days' notice following TRC review, the zoning
administrator schedules public hearing with the commission providing notice as
required (chapter 10)
                                            
  Commission conducts public hearing on
  application, considers application,
 recommendation of TRC and all other        
  relevant information received. Commission
  formulates and transmits recommendation
  to council
                                            
The council considers the application, recommendations of commission and TRC,
and all other relevant information received for compliance with requirements
to all land use ordinances, including this title and building code
                                       
Application found to comply with
requirements of all land use           Application found to not comply with
ordinances, including this title,      requirements of all land use
building code, and all other           ordinances, including this title,
applicable codes. Application          building code, and all other applicable
approved by council, with or without   codes. Application denied by council
conditions
 
(Ord. 2016-06, 2016)
   FIGURE 16-3
   CLASS IV USE APPLICATION PROCEDURES
   PROPOSED ON SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS
  Class IV use application filed with zoning administrator
    Class IV use application filed with
    zoning administrator
                                           
  Zoning administrator determines
 application completeness                    
  (see chapter 13)
                                           
                                         
Application determined complete          Application determined incomplete
(see chapter 13)                         (see chapter 13)
     
                                            
  Zoning administrator distributes complete
  application to TRC and schedules meeting
 with TRC for technical review. TRC          
  transmits recommendation to sensitive
  lands committee and commission
                                             
With a minimum of 10 days' notice following TRC review, the zoning
administrator schedules public meeting with the sensitive lands committee
providing notice as required (chapter 10). Committee formulates and transmits
recommendation to commission
With a minimum of 10 days' notice following sensitive lands committee review,
zoning administrator schedules public hearing with commission providing
notice as required (chapter 10)
                                             
 Commission conducts public hearing on       
  application
                                             
Following the close of the public hearing, or at a subsequent meeting(s), the
commission considers the application, recommendations of TRC and sensitive
lands committee, and all other relevant information received for compliance
with requirements of all land use ordinances, including this title and
building code
                                         
Application found to comply with         Application found to not comply with
requirements of all land use             requirements of all land use
ordinances, including this title and     ordinances, including this title,
building code, and all other             building code, and all other
applicable codes. Application approved   applicable codes. Application denied
by commission, with or without           by commission
conditions
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
   FIGURE 16-4
   CLASS V USE APPLICATION PROCEDURES
   PROPOSED ON SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS
 Class V use application filed with zoning administrator  
 Class V use application filed with zoning    
  administrator
                                              
 Zoning administrator determines application  
  completeness (see chapter 13)
                                          
Application determined complete        Application determined incomplete
(see chapter 13)                       (see chapter 13)
     
Zoning administrator distributes complete application to TRC and schedules
meeting with TRC for technical review. TRC transmits recommendation to
sensitive lands committee, commission and council
With a minimum of 10 days' notice following TRC review, the zoning
administrator schedules public meeting with the sensitive lands committee
providing notice as required (chapter 10). Committee formulates and transmits
recommendation to commission and council
With a minimum of 10 days' notice following sensitive lands committee review,
zoning administrator schedules public hearing with commission providing notice
as required (chapter 10)
                                              
  Commission conducts public hearing on
  application, considers the application,
 recommendations of TRC and sensitive lands   
  committee, all other relevant information
  received. Commission formulates and
  transmits recommendation to council
                                              
The council considers the application, recommendations of TRC, sensitive lands
committee, and commission, and all other relevant information received for
compliance with requirements of all land use ordinances, including this title
and building code
                                       
Application found to comply with
requirements of all land use           Application found to not comply with
ordinances, including this title,      requirements of all land use ordinances,
building code, and all other           including this title, building code, and
applicable codes. Application          all other applicable codes. Application
approved by council, with or without   denied by council
conditions
 
(Ord. 2016-06, 2016)
CHAPTER 17
RESORT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
Part 1. Resort Mixed Use Requirements
16.17.101: Requirements
Part 2. Recreational Vehicle Resort Requirements
16.17.201: Purpose
16.17.202: Definitions
16.17.203: RV Resort Application
16.17.204: General Standards For RV Resorts
16.17.205: Prohibitions
16.17.206: RV Resort Management
16.17.207: Time Limit On Occupancy
16.17.208: Utilities
16.17.209: Landscaping And Recreation
16.17.210: Individual RV Site Design Standards
16.17.211: Accessory Facilities
PART 1. RESORT MIXED USE REQUIREMENTS
16.17.101: REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   A buffer is required when any property in the resort mixed use
district abuts residential property.
      (a)   This buffer shall consist of a reasonably compatible residential
use, i.e., a single-family residential buffer is required where the abutting
property has a single-family use.
      (b)   The residential buffer shall extend to properties immediately
adjacent and be one unit in depth.
   (2)   An area of open space is required and shall be thirty five percent
(35%) of the remaining total square footage of the property after the square
footage of the buffer required in subsection (1) of this section has been
deducted.
   (3)   As an integral part of the resort mixed use district, an additional
residential component notwithstanding the buffer is required for the remaining
total square footage of the property.
      (a)   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the commercial structures must
have a residential component.
      (b)   If any structure containing a residential use is two (2) or more
stories, there will be no residential on the ground floor.
      (c)   The residential component required in subsection (3)(a) of this
section shall be a minimum of forty percent (40%) of the total building square
footage and shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the total building square
footage. (Ord. 2012-08, 2012)
PART 2. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE RESORT REQUIREMENTS
16.17.201: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this part is to direct the development of facilities for a
recreational vehicle (RV) resort in the RV resort zoning district, to set forth
development requirements necessary to ensure that the RV resort is developed as
a "resort", rather than as an RV park or campground, providing guests with a
relatively higher quality experience than found in an RV park or campground,
and to protect the integrity, characteristics and values of the districts and
land uses contiguous to or near the location of the RV resort, and to ensure
that the city collects transient room tax on the rental of spaces within the RV
resort. (Ord. 2016-07, 2016)
16.17.202: DEFINITIONS:
CABIN: A living space equipped with sleeping area, kitchen area and full
bathroom facilities connected to a sewer system, with electricity and culinary
water available inside the cabin. The cabin must be constructed in compliance
with applicable building codes, be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square
feet but not more than four hundred (400) square feet. No more than eighteen
percent (18%) of the total sites in an RV resort may be cabin sites.
CABIN SITE: An area within an RV resort that contains a short term rental cabin
as well as one paved/concrete automobile parking space within the site. Cabin
sites must be a minimum of one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet in size
and cabins must be separated from one another by at least the distance (or type
of firewall) required by the international fire code as adopted by the city.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, limited
liability company, firm, company, trust, or any other legal entity (public or
private).
RV RESORT: A parcel of land under the control of any person wherein two (2) or
more RV sites, along with the amenities, facilities, and services designed to
provide guests with a higher quality experience than found in an RV park or
campground, are offered for short term rental to the public and complies with
the requirements of this chapter. RV resorts shall not consist of more than 7.5
sites for RVs, cabins, and tents per gross usable acre.
RV SITE: An area within an RV resort that may be rented to place an RV and
parking for the towing vehicle if not a self- propelled RV.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): (1) Dependent: An RV not containing sanitary
facilities and/or devices for connecting said facilities to a community waste
disposal system. Dependent RV sites are only allowed adjacent to tent sites. No
more than ten percent (10%) of the total sites in an RV resort may be dependent
RV sites.
   (2)   Independent: A motor home, travel trailer or fifth wheel trailer
containing sanitary facilities and devices for connecting said facilities to a
community waste disposal system. This type of RV may also be referred to as a
self-contained recreational vehicle.
TENT: A portable shelter for one or more individuals, consisting of synthetic
fabrics or natural skins attached to any type of framework, including tent
trailers (a.k.a. "pop ups"). No more than ten percent (10%) of the total sites
in an RV resort may be tent sites.
TENT SITE: An area within an RV resort that may be rented to place one tent on
an improved, but not paved/concrete, tent pad. The site must also provide one
automobile parking space within the site that is paved or concrete. Tent sites
shall be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet. (Ord. 2016-07, 2016)
16.17.203: RV RESORT APPLICATION:
   (1)   An applicant shall submit a written application for approval for the
development of an RV resort on an application form provided by the city.
Accompanying the RV resort application shall be the following:
      (a)   Application fee;
      (b)   Property address, acreage, boundary and tax identification number;
      (c)   Proposed name of the project;
      (d)   Property owner of record and developer;
      (e)   Vicinity map showing the project location relative to city
boundaries, major roads and minor roads that serve the property;
      (f)   Date, scale and north arrow;
      (g)   Existing streets, rights of way widths, major utilities, easements,
fencing, parks, trails, open space and infrastructure on or adjacent to the
property;
      (h)   Site layout including, proposed open space, amenities, space sizes
and gross density;
      (i)   Traffic impact study, as required by the transportation master
plan, in both paper copy and electronic format;
      (j)   Geotechnical report in accordance with the standard specifications,
in both paper copy and electronic format;
      (k)   Preliminary hydrology report in accordance with the standard
specifications, in both paper copy and electronic format;
      (l)   Preliminary title report verifying ownership;
      (m)   Recent list of names and addresses, and two (2) sets of address
labels and postage, for owners of record at the Washington County recorder's
office of the subject property and properties within three hundred feet (300')
of the boundary line of the subject property;
         (i)   List must be no older than thirty (30) days from date of
submission.
         (ii)   Developer is responsible for the completeness and accuracy of
the list of owners of record but is entitled to rely upon the records in the
Washington County recorder's office.
         (iii)   Failure to provide an accurate list may delay the approval of
the project;
      (n)   Plan for continued maintenance of the project amenities;
      (o)   Proposed site plan: Provide two (2) twenty four inch by thirty six
inch (24" x 36") or larger copies of the proposed project, ten (10) eleven inch
by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduced copies of the proposed project, and one
copy of the proposed project in electronic format, including the names,
addresses and phone numbers of applicant, engineer, surveyor and/or architect;
      (p)   Existing streets (with names) and right of way widths, buildings,
culverts, bridges, waterways, irrigation ditches and systems, wells, springs,
utilities, fencing, easements, rights of way, flood boundary, surface
watercourse features, geologic hazards, parks, trails, open space, storm drain
and sanitary sewer systems, topography (contours at maximum 2 foot intervals),
survey monuments, section lines, other features and infrastructure on or
adjacent to the property or as requested by the city engineer or other
appropriate city staff member;
      (q)   Proposed grading plan in accordance with the standard
specifications;
      (r)   Proposed landscaping plan that meets the requirements of chapter 22
of this title;
      (s)   Proposed lighting plan that meets the lighting standards set forth
in title 14, chapter 10 of this code;
      (t)   Proposed traffic circulation and parking plan within the RV resort;
      (u)   All property lines of adjacent properties within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of the boundary of the proposed subdivision with the names of the
owners and the parcel tax identification numbers. (Ord. 2016-07, 2016)
16.17.204: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR RV RESORTS:
   (1)   Any application for a recreational vehicle (RV) resort shall be
processed as a class V conditional use as set forth in chapter 16 of this
title.
   (2)   Once a property has been developed as an RV resort it may not be
subdivided. It must remain as a single parcel for property tax purposes and to
continue to meet all the requirements of this chapter.
   (3)   The minimum parcel size on which an RV resort may be developed is
twenty (20) acres.
   (4)   RV resorts shall not consist of more than 7.5 RV sites per gross
usable acre.
   (5)   All streets within an RV resort shall be paved and all pads on RV
sites shall be concrete.
   (6)   All RV resorts are considered lodging facilities for tourists and are
subject to the transient room tax.
   (7)   RV resorts shall be designed by appropriate licensed professionals,
such as architects, landscape architects, engineers, or land use planners, All
plans and drawings for buildings, structures, grading, utilities, etc., shall
be signed and stamped by the professional who prepared them.
   (8)   All exterior boundaries shall be screened from surrounding streets and
abutting uses by a solid six foot (6') colored masonry or colored stucco
covered concrete/block privacy wall, unless it is a portion of property that
due to topography is not used for RV sites, tent sites, cabins or is not
visible from surrounding streets and abutting uses. Whatever material is used
for the front wall must be used for the side walls as well. The privacy wall
along a public street shall be modulated by 1.5 to four feet (4') every forty
(40) linear feet; if the public street is Highway 91, it must be consistent
with the wall installed on Center Street.
   (9)   A minimum buffer of thirty feet (30') shall be required between any RV
site and any property boundary. The minimum buffer for cabin sites, however,
may be reduced to twenty feet (20') if they are located along boundaries
abutting private property.
   (10)   RV resorts shall provide streets in such a pattern as to provide
convenient and safe traffic circulation and emergency access within the RV
resort. Two-way streets shall be a minimum of twenty four feet (24') and one-
way streets shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide.
   (11)   Due to the large size and slow speeds of most RVs, and the dangers
created thereby, in addition to any other required right of way improvements,
if the street used for RV resort access and egress is classified as an arterial
(major or minor) street, then the developer of the RV resort shall install, and
dedicate any additional right of way necessary to install paved deceleration/
acceleration lanes for all vehicles entering and exiting the RV resort in both
directions of the arterial street. The minimum length of the deceleration lanes
shall be three hundred twenty five feet (325'), which may include the taper
zone, plus one hundred twenty feet (120') for queuing. The minimum length of
the acceleration lane shall be four hundred feet (400'), which may include the
taper zones. Asphalt shoulders shall be extended in accordance with arterial
cross sectional requirements for the accommodation of bicycle lanes. Pavement
thickness shall be in accordance with the geotechnical recommendations for
asphalt thickness for an arterial street.
   (12)   RV sites, tent sites and cabin sites shall each provide one paved
space suitable for automobile parking, which may either be a separate parking
space within the site or may be added to the minimum dimensions for an RV pad.
Additional parking spaces shall be placed throughout the park at a ratio of one
parking space per every ten (10) RV, tent and cabin sites. All parking spaces
must be at least nine feet (9') wide and twenty feet (20') long.
   (13)   Pets (dogs/cats) traveling with guests shall be kept inside the RV
overnight. If kept outside during daytime hours they shall be kept on a leash
or tethered. No more than two (2) pets shall be allowed per guest site. No
other animals are allowed to be brought onto the RV resort premises by any
guest of the RV resort.
   (14)   The RV resort shall include a designated storage area for utility
trailers (tow dollies, "toy haulers", etc.), motorized vehicles (excluding
primary car/truck), bicycles, etc. This storage area shall occupy no more than
five percent (5%) of the gross area of the resort. Such storage shall be for
the exclusive use of registered guests only during the period the guest is a
registered and paying occupant of an RV site. Storage areas shall be fully
screened.
   (15)   Equestrian RV sites are allowed when the RV resort is directly
adjacent to BLM managed property with equestrian use permitted and the RV
resort has written permission to access BLM property. Equestrian RV sites shall
be located a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from any property line other
than abutting BLM equestrian use property. All equestrian stalls shall be
cleaned daily. No more than five percent (5%) of the total sites in an RV
resort may be equestrian RV sites. (Ord. 2016-07, 2016)
16.17.205: PROHIBITIONS:
The following are prohibited within an RV resort:
   (1)   No separate mailboxes, street address designations, or other similar
accessories which could give the appearance of permanence to occupants within
the resort.
   (2)   No freestanding fuel tanks permitted within an RV site, tent site or
cabin site. All fuel tanks within any site must be securely mounted upon or
attached to the RV they serve, unless used solely for cooking purposes.
   (3)   No open storage of personal property, accessory building, shed or
cabinet within any RV site, tent site or cabin site.
   (4)   No campfires within any RV site, tent site or cabin site. Propane or
natural gas firepits are allowed with approval of the Ivins City fire chief.
   (5)   Other than operating the RV resort itself, no employee or guest of the
RV resort may operate any type of business within the RV resort.
   (6)   Camping outside of an RV or cabin is only allowed on a tent site.
   (7)   Removal of axles, wheels or tires from an RV within the RV resort,
except in the case of an emergency repair. If the repair cannot be completed
within twenty four (24) hours, then the RV shall be removed from the RV resort.
   (8)   Parking RVs anywhere within the RV resort other than a designated RV
space is prohibited. No on street parking is permitted for any vehicle.
   (9)   RVs shall not be stored, displayed for sale, or sold within the RV
resort. (Ord. 2016-07, 2016)
16.17.206: RV RESORT MANAGEMENT:
   (1)   A resort manager, or another employee of the resort, must be on duty
within the resort at all times. RV resort management shall maintain a patron
log consisting of names, dates of occupancy, and number of spaces used. Upon
request, patron logs shall be made available to inspection by representatives
of the city during reasonable business hours. Representatives of the city shall
also be allowed to drive through the RV resort during reasonable business hours
to verify compliance with this chapter.
   (2)   RV resort management shall, at all times, maintain the resort and its
facilities in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. Management shall only
allow independent RVs that are in good condition to stay at the RV resort,
i.e., no visible rust, no leaking fluids, visible license plate with current
registration sticker, no significant damage, no visible patching material or
primer paint, no chipping paint, and no paint that appears to have been applied
by spray can or brush. Management shall enforce quiet times between the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., although arriving
guests may be allowed to check into the RV resort up until twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight.
   (3)   RV resort management shall be responsible for the regular and proper
collection and disposal of all refuse, garbage, and litter accumulated within
the RV resort. Collection shall be no less than once a week. Garbage shall be
placed in central dumpsters only that are set back from public streets and
neighboring properties by at least fifty feet (50') from inside the buffer.
Dumpsters shall be screened so they are not visible from public streets or
neighboring properties. (Ord. 2016-07, 2016)
16.17.207: TIME LIMIT ON OCCUPANCY:
Seventy percent (70%) of the total RV resort sites will be limited to a maximum
occupancy period of twenty nine (29) consecutive days or the time period
specified by Utah statutes to qualify for transient room tax, whichever period
is shorter. Thirty percent (30%) of the total RV resort sites may be occupied
up to a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days in a one year
period beginning on the initial date of occupancy. Note: Only independent RVs
are allowed occupancy longer than twenty nine (29) days. (Ord. 2016-07, 2016)
16.17.208: UTILITIES:
   (1)   RV resorts shall be connected to Ivins City utilities for water, sewer
(wastewater), storm drain (if applicable). For utilities not provided by Ivins
City, RV resorts shall be connected to the applicable utility having a
franchise agreement with the city.
   (2)   RV resorts shall provide adequate water supply hookups to each RV
site. Culinary water shall also be provided to all tent sites and cabins. All
water supply lines shall be installed with an approved backflow prevention
device per code.
   (3)   RV resorts shall provide wastewater disposal hookup to each RV site
and shall also provide a sanitary dumping station for RV resort users.
Traditional septic systems are prohibited in RV resorts.
   (4)   RV resorts shall provide electrical outlets of appropriate voltage to
each RV site, tent site, and cabin sites. The use of a generator within the RV
resort is prohibited.
   (5)   All lighting within the RV resort shall comply with the city's outdoor
lighting chapter. (Ord. 2016-07, 2016)
16.17.209: LANDSCAPING AND RECREATION:
   (1)   The following landscape requirements shall apply to RV resorts:
      (a)   Provide a minimum of one tree for each RV site, tent site and cabin
site.
      (b)   Provide a minimum of three (3) trees clustered every thirty (30)
linear feet along all property boundaries of the RV resort. Each cluster of
trees shall include a mixture of trees so that each cluster provides adequate
screening year round.
      (c)   All open areas, except undisturbed sensitive lands, driveways,
parking areas, walking paths, utility areas or patios shall be improved and
maintained with landscaping with plants that are approved by the parks and
recreation director.
   (2)   RV resorts shall provide a minimum of five percent (5%) of the
developable acreage as common recreational/open space. This excludes any
required landscape buffer areas, recreational facilities, offices, storage
facilities, garbage areas, bathrooms, laundry facilities, guest parking areas,
or other structures. At a minimum, an RV resort must also provide the following
recreational amenities:
      (a)   Clubhouse;
      (b)   Pool; and
      (c)   Playground. (Ord. 2016-07, 2016)
16.17.210: INDIVIDUAL RV SITE DESIGN STANDARDS:
   (1)   Each RV site shall be plainly marked and numbered for identification.
   (2)   Each RV site shall be an average of forty feet by eighty feet (40' x
80') in size.
   (3)   RVs shall be separated from each other and from other structures by at
least twenty feet (20'). Any accessory, such as attached awnings, steps or pop
outs, shall be considered part of the RV.
   (4)   No more than one RV shall be placed on an individual RV site. (Ord.
2016-07, 2016)
16.17.211: ACCESSORY FACILITIES:
   (1)   Office: RV resorts shall include a permanent building for office use.
The building may also include a small store and/or a live/work area for the
exclusive use of the owner or manager. The building must comply with the design
guidelines set forth in chapter 19 of this title. The live/work area shall not
exceed 4,200 square feet of floor space.
   (2)   Laundry Room: RV resorts shall have one or more laundry rooms
providing sufficient washing machines and dryers for the number of sites
developed within the RV resort. The use of laundry drying lines is prohibited.
   (3)   Restroom And Shower Facilities: Communal restrooms, including toilets,
showers, and lavatories, shall be provided to conveniently and adequately serve
the number of sites developed within the RV resorts. The following are the
minimum requirements for these facilities:
 
Number Of Toilets Urinals Lavatories Showers
RV Sites  M F     M       M F        M F
1 - 40    1 2     1       1 1        1 1
41 - 80   2 4     2       2 2        2 2
81 - 120  3 6     3       3 3        3 3
121 - 160 5 8     3       4 4        4 4
161 - 200 6 10    4       4 4        4 4
 
(Ord. 2016-07, 2016; amd. Ord. 2023-20, 2023)
CHAPTER 18
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS
SECTION:
16.18.101: General
16.18.102: Site Planning
16.18.103: Site Layout And Development Pattern
16.18.104: Parking And Pedestrian Access
16.18.105: Building Design
16.18.106: Building Materials
16.18.107: Landscape
16.18.108: Lighting
16.18.109: Fencing
16.18.110: Equipment And Service Area Screening
16.18.111: Redevelopment Of Multi-Family
16.18.101: GENERAL:
The general intent of these multi-family residential design guidelines and
standards is to improve the overall quality of multi-family development in
Ivins City, to ensure the compatibility of multi-family development with
surrounding land uses. These multi-family design guidelines and standards shall
apply to all new multi-family development within Ivins City. (Ord. 2018-05,
2018)
16.18.102: SITE PLANNING:
These guidelines and standards are intended: to improve site planning, to
enhance the image of the City, reflect unique site characteristics, and provide
strong neighborhood environments; to protect natural site features, open space
and use and incorporate such features and areas as community amenities; and to
provide usable open space and maintain significant natural areas for the use
and enjoyment by residents of the multi-family development.
   (1)   Lot Coverage And Density:
      (a)   Density Calculation: In all multi-family High Density Residential
zoning districts, densities shall be calculated as a percentage of the total
square footage of the horizontal cross section of all residential structures at
their largest point as compared to the total square footage of the parcel(s)
included in the multi-family development. In addition to structures intended
for human habitation, residential structures include but are not limited to
garages, storage units, covered patios, and any similar structures. In no
event, shall a property owner be allowed a base density that is less than the
density that would be achieved using an R-1-5 zoning district.
      (b)   Maximum Density With No Density Bonus: The maximum allowed base
densities with no bonus improvements are as follows:
         (i)   Fifteen percent (15%) for multi-family developments with
standard height restrictions.
         (ii)   Twenty percent (20%) for multi-family developments limiting the
height of all structures located within fifty feet (50') of the outside
boundary of the multi-family development to eighteen feet (18').
         (iii)   Twenty-five percent (25%) for multi-family development
limiting the height of all structures to eighteen feet (18').
   (c)   Maximum Density With Density Bonus: The maximum allowed base densities
with bonus improvements are as follows:
      (i)   An additional ten percent (10%) for multi-family developments with
standard height restrictions.
      (ii)   An additional fifteen percent (15%) for multi-family developments
limiting the height of all structures located within fifty feet (50') of the
outside boundary of the multi-family development to eighteen feet (18').
      (iii)   An additional twenty percent (20%) for multi-family development
limiting the height of all structures to eighteen feet (18').
For purposes of this section, the ten percent (10%), fifteen percent (15%), and
twenty percent (20%) respective bonuses are referred to as the "Density Bonus".
   (2)   Open Space: The intent of this section is to create areas of usable
open space for passive and active recreation that are easily accessed by
residents, provide focal points for community recreation and interaction, and
add to the overall quality of life for residents. Usable open space should be
integrated purposefully into the overall design of the development and not
merely be residual areas left over after buildings and parking lots are sited.
      (a)   Minimum Usable Open Space Required:
         (i)   All new multi-family developments shall set aside at least a
minimum area of site acreage as usable open space for the passive and active
recreational use and enjoyment of the development's residents. The usable open
space shall be aggregated into meaningful, quality open spaces. Clustering of
buildings is encouraged to minimize small, narrow, unassigned strips in front
of and between buildings. Open space shall be clearly identified on the
development plan.
         (ii)   The minimum amount of usable open space shall be eight hundred
(800) square feet for the first two (2) units and two hundred (200) square feet
for each additional unit.
      (b)   Areas Not Allowed As Part Of Usable Open Space: The following shall
not count toward usable open space set aside requirements:
         (i)   Private lots, yards, balconies and patios dedicated for use by a
specific unit;
         (ii)   Public right-of-way or private streets and drives;
         (iii)   Open parking areas and driveways for dwellings;
         (iv)   Land covered by structures, except for ancillary structures
associated with the use of open space such as gazebos, picnic shelters and
approved recreational amenities;
         (v)   Designated outdoor storage areas;
         (vi)   Required perimeter setback areas;
         (vii)   Land and area between buildings and parking lots of less than
twenty feet (20'); or
         (viii)   Detention/retention areas, including drainage swales except
when accessible and usable, as determined by the City, for use by residents
(e.g., picnic areas, passive recreation areas, playgrounds, etc.).
      (c)   Design Criteria For Usable Open Space: Usable open space may
include:
         (i)   Planting areas and trees;
         (ii)   Water features;
         (iii)   Grass areas;
         (iv)   Seating;
         (v)   Pedestrian scaled lighting;
         (vi)   Walkways/paths;
         (vii)   Gazebos/covered picnic;
         (viii)   Play structures for children; and
         (ix)   On site community recreation amenities.
      (d)   Preservation Of Natural Features: On a case by case basis, the
preservation of significant natural features or areas may be considered as open
space for density bonus purposes.
   (3)   Bonus Improvements:
      (a)   Density Bonus Calculations: To qualify for a Density Bonus, or any
portion thereof, a multi-family development may include any of the improvements
listed below. Any Density Bonuses will be awarded proportionally based on the
square footage of the improvements compared to the recommended size indicated,
but in no event will qualify for a bonus higher than the maximum percentage of
the Density Bonus indicated. Any single multi-family development may include
any combination of the improvements listed below but in no event will be
awarded a Density Bonus in excess of the maximum bonus listed in subsection (1)
(c) above.
      (b)   Outdoor Activity Improvements: A multi-family development may
qualify for up to forty percent (40%) of its allowable Density Bonus by
including outdoor activity improvements, such as a basketball court, volleyball
court, pickleball court, or other amenity intended to be used for active,
organized activities, with a recommended size of seventy five (75) square feet
of outdoor activity improvements per unit in the multi-family development.
   (c)   Outdoor Recreation Improvements: A multi-family development may
qualify for up to thirty percent (30%) of its allowable Density Bonus by
including outdoor recreation improvements, such as a children's play area,
barbeque area, picnic area, or other amenity intended to be used for simple
recreation, with a recommended size of seventy five (75) square feet of outdoor
recreation improvements per unit in the multi-family development.
   (d)   Swimming Pool Improvements: A multi-family development may qualify for
up to thirty percent (30%) of its allowable Density Bonus by including a
swimming pool, with a recommended size of forty (40) square feet of swimming
pool, and related amenities, per unit in the multi-family development. At least
half of the square feet per unit must be surface area of the swimming pool.
   (e)   Indoor Improvements: A multi-family development may qualify for up to
twenty five percent (25%) of its allowable Density Bonus by including indoor
improvements, such as a weight room, exercise room, pickle ball court, meeting
room or other amenity intended to be used indoors, with a recommended size of
forty (40) square feet of indoor improvements per unit in the multi-family
development. (Ord. 2008-21, 2009; Ord. 2019-08, 2020)
16.18.103: SITE LAYOUT AND DEVELOPMENT PATTERN:
It is the intent of this section to ensure that buildings relate appropriately
to surrounding developments and streets; to create a cohesive identity for the
neighborhood and attractive street scene; promote efficient site layout in
terms of vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns.
   (1)   Site layout guidelines:
      (a)   Multi-family buildings shall be clustered or grouped to form
neighborhoods and shall be oriented or arranged in a manner to enclose required
common open spaces, recreation amenities and parking areas.
      (b)   The minimum setbacks for multi-family dwelling units shall be
twenty five feet (25') front setback, ten feet (10') side setback, ten feet
(10') rear setback, twenty five feet (25') side setback on street side corner.
      (c)   The minimum separation between multi-family buildings, including
accessory buildings, on the same lot or development shall be twenty feet (20').
(Ord. 2013-09, 2013)
      (d)   For multi-family buildings with walls greater than sixty feet (60')
in length adjacent to interior property lines, the building setback shall be
increased by one hundred percent (100%) from such interior property lines when
adjacent properties are zoned for single-family dwellings.
         (i)   Twinhome Zoning District: Single story twinhomes may have a
maximum building wall length of eighty feet (80') before increasing setbacks.
For single story twinhomes with walls greater than eighty feet (80'), the
building setback shall be increased by fifty percent (50%). For two story
twinhomes with walls greater than sixty feet (60') in length adjacent to
interior property lines, the building setback shall be increased by fifty
percent (50%).
         (ii)   Townhouse Zoning District: Single story townhouses may have a
maximum building wall length of eighty feet (80') before increasing setbacks.
For single story townhouses with walls greater than eighty feet (80'), the
building setback shall be increased by fifty percent (50%). For two story
townhouses with walls greater than sixty feet (60') in length adjacent to
interior property lines, the building setback shall be increased by fifty
percent (50%). (Ord. 2018-05, 2018)
16.18.104: PARKING AND PEDESTRIAN ACCESS:
The following parking standards for multi-family developments are intended: to
reduce the predominance and visibility of parking lots and covered parking from
perimeter streets; to improve the appearance of parking lots, especially
through increased landscaping; and to ensure that dwelling units have
convenient access to parking.
   (1)   Parking Amount And Type:
      (a)   Parking shall be provided in the following amounts:
 
Dwelling Unit        Number Of Spaces
                     Per Dwelling Unit
Studio/efficiency    1
1 bedroom            1.5
2 - 3 bedrooms       2
More than 3 bedrooms 2.5
Guest parking        0.25
 
      (b)   Covered parking may be provided if it is not located along
perimeter public streets and is screened from view by landscaping, landscaped
berms and/or walls. (Ord. 2017-17, 2017)
   (2)   Parking Location And Layout:
      (a)   Garage Entries, Carports, Parking Areas And Structures: To the
maximum extent feasible, garage entries, carports, parking areas, and parking
structures shall be internalized in building groupings or oriented away from
street frontage.
      (b)   Location Along Perimeter Public Street: Parking areas and
freestanding parking structures (detached garages or carports) located along a
perimeter public street shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of each
perimeter public street frontage.
      (c)   Parking Blocks: The total number of required parking spaces shall
be broken up into smaller "blocks" of parking, with no more than twenty four
(24) parking spaces per parking block.
         (i)   Parking blocks shall be separated from each other by a
landscaped area no less than ten feet (10') in width.
         (ii)   Setbacks for parking blocks shall be twenty five feet (25')
from the property lines fronting streets and ten feet (10') from interior
property lines, private drives and multi-family buildings.
      (d)   Sufficient Parking: To the maximum extent practicable, each multi-
family development shall have sufficient parking that meets the standards of
subsection (1)(a) of this section (parking amount and type), plus guest parking
spaces, in a location convenient to the buildings the spaces are intended to
serve. (Ord. 2008-21, 2009)
      (e)   Carports And Detached Garages: Carports and detached garages shall
be limited to one hundred twenty feet (120') in length. No more than three (3)
detached garage structures or three (3) carport structures shall be located
adjacent to each other end to end. The minimum separation between adjacent
detached parking structures (detached garages and carports) shall be twenty
feet (20'), and such separation area shall be landscaped. Carports must be
screened from view with landscape, landscaped berms and/or walls and preferably
located within the interior of the development rather than along perimeter
public streets. (Ord. 2017-17, 2017)
   (3)   Vehicular Access:
      (a)   Vehicular access should be from minor rather than major streets.
      (b)   Vehicular access points shall be no closer to an intersection than
one-third (1/3) of the length of the adjacent property line or as specified in
the Ivins City transportation master plan, whichever is more restrictive.
   (4)   Pedestrian Access:
      (a)   Pedestrian sidewalks shall provide easy access to buildings,
parking areas, usable common areas and at multiple access points into the
development.
      (b)   Pedestrian sidewalks shall be provided to adjoining compatible land
uses, e.g., public parks, schools, churches, public trails, neighborhood
shopping and activity centers.
   (5)   Buffering Required: Parking areas located on perimeter frontages shall
be buffered with berms and landscaped features. (Ord. 2008-21, 2009)
16.18.105: BUILDING DESIGN:
These building design standards are intended: to create and add to the visual
interest of Ivins City streets; to ensure quality and consistency in building
architectural character and style; to ensure compatibility with adjacent
development as applicable; to avoid featureless building masses; to provide
visual scale of large multi-family buildings; to achieve unity of design
through the use of similar materials and colors; and to ensure accessory
structures are compatible with the primary buildings they serve.
   (1)   Building Height:
      (a)   Maximum building height within sixty feet (60') of any property
line shall not exceed twenty five feet (25').
      (b)   Maximum building height beyond sixty feet (60') shall not exceed
thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 2014-13, 2014)
   (2)   Building Length: The maximum length of multi-family residential
buildings shall be one hundred twenty feet (120'). When the long side of a
multi-family residential building abuts Community Commercial (C-1), Multi-
Family Residential (R-M) or mixed use zoning districts, or when the buildings
are within the interior of a multi-family (R-M) project, the total length of
the multi-family building may be increased up to one hundred fifty feet (150').
(Ord. 2018-11, 2018)
   (3)   Building Massing: In order to maximize the integration of manmade
structures with the natural environment and to minimize undesirable
distractions, land use applications shall demonstrate the incorporation of
techniques for reducing the apparent size and bulk of proposed buildings and
structures. At a minimum, the following techniques shall be utilized,
recognizing that other techniques may be incorporated as well:
      (a)   Coherent Building Design: All sides of a building may have a visual
or other impact, and shall be coherently designed and treated. A consistent
level of detail and finish on all sides of a building shall be provided;
however, a lesser degree of detail is allowed on non-street facing sides.
      (b)   Wall Variations: Continuous building wall surfaces shall be
relieved with variations of wall planes or overhangs that create shadow areas
and add visual interest.
All sides of a building visible from a public street or other significant
public views shall have variation in wall planes in order to provide
articulation and shadow areas. Offsets in wall planes shall be required as
follows: buildings eighty feet to one hundred twenty feet (80' - 120') in
length shall have a minimum of three (3) faces, with each face plane separated
by at least a two foot (2') offset, although two (2) nonadjoining faces could
be on the same plane; buildings forty feet to eighty feet (40' - 80') in length
shall have a minimum of two (2) faces with each face plane separated by at
least a two foot (2') offset; and buildings less than forty feet (40') in
length shall not be required to have an offset but shall be required to have a
minimum of two (2) architectural features that provide articulation and
shadowing. The length of required offset planes shall be twenty percent to
fifty percent (20% - 50%) of the total building length, with said percentages
reduced by ten percent (10%) each if one additional wall plane is provided. If
two (2) or more additional wall planes are provided beyond the minimum
requirement, the minimum length of any face shall be eight feet (8').
Architectural features may include covered porches, balconies, window pop outs,
inset windows, bays, etc., and shall be spread out over the length of the
building.
      (c)   Roof Variations: Roofs shall also provide variation in a manner
similar to wall variations. The same lengths used for determining the minimum
number of wall offsets shall also apply in determining the minimum number of
roof variations. However, the minimum roof offset of parapets (flat roofs) or
eve lines (pitched roofs) shall be twelve inches (12") or five percent (5%) of
the overall building height, whichever is greater. The use of front facing
gables, dormers, hip roof formations, etc., may be regarded as the required
offset for pitched roofs.
   (4)   Architectural Detail:
      (a)   Each building in a multi-family development should have a
definitive, consistent style.
      (b)   A consistent level of detail and finish on all sides of a building
shall be provided; however, a lesser degree of detail is allowed on non-street
facing sides.
      (c)   All buildings shall incorporate a minimum of three (3) additional
architectural features or repetitive details such as covered porches,
balconies, window pop outs, inset windows, bays, etc., and shall be spread out
over the length of the building. (Ord. 2014-13, 2014)
16.18.106: BUILDING MATERIALS:
This section is intended to achieve unity of design through the use of similar
materials and colors throughout multi- family developments. Building materials
shall be compatible with those predominantly used in the surrounding area and
shall blend with the natural desert environment.
   (1)   Exterior Building Materials:
      (a)   Approved materials include natural or cultured stone, stucco,
masonry (colored and split face), and concrete (exposed aggregate or colored
stamped, pitted and textured).
      (b)   Disapproved materials include unfinished gray block or concrete,
metal and vinyl siding, hardboard or plywood siding.
   (2)   Sound Transmission Coefficients:
      (a)   Walls and floors/ceilings between units shall have a sound
transmission coefficient greater than fifty (50).
      (b)   Walls bordering hallways shall have a sound transmission
coefficient of forty five (45) or greater.
   (3)   Roofing Materials:
      (a)   Approved visible roofing materials include nonreflective concrete
or clay tile, wood shingles or shakes (fire retardant only), patina copper,
architectural grade composition shingles, nonreflective colored metal.
      (b)   Disapproved visible roofing materials include corrugated metal
roofs, any white/brightly colored or reflective materials.
   (4)   Building Material Colors:
      (a)   Each individual building shall display a minimum of two (2) wall
surface colors or a combination of two (2) approved materials (e.g., stone and
stucco).
      (b)   Colors or materials shall not be excessive in their contrast with
each other or the natural surroundings.
      (c)   Other subtle "accent" colors are encouraged.
   (5)   Accessory Structures:
      (a)   Detached garages, carports, and other accessory structures,
including, but not limited to, mailboxes, storage/maintenance facilities,
recreational facilities, picnic shelters, and gazebos, shall incorporate
similar materials, scale, colors, architectural details, and roof slopes as the
primary multi-family buildings.
      (b)   Rear walls of detached garages and carports that back onto the
perimeter street shall be articulated with windows, variety of roof planes,
etc., or shall be made to appear as a perimeter wall with landscaping and
berming being used to further screen them from view from perimeter streets.
(Ord. 2008-21, 2009)
16.18.107: LANDSCAPE:
Landscaping is a visible indicator of quality development and shall be an
integral part of every multi-family project, not merely located in leftover
portions of the site. Landscaping is intended to visually tie the entire
development together, define major entryways and circulation (both vehicular
and pedestrian) and parking patterns, and, where appropriate, help buffer less
intensive adjacent land uses.
   (1)   Landscaping Required:
      (a)   Landscaping is required in all setback areas and open space areas.
      (b)   Undisturbed natural areas incorporated within a landscape plan will
be considered on a case by case basis.
      (c)   All landscape plans shall be prepared and stamped by a registered
landscape architect.
   (2)   Streetscape And Parking Area Landscape:
      (a)   Streetscape and parking area landscaping shall incorporate
xeriscape principles which include drought tolerant plants and trees, boulders
and hardscape with intermittent outcroppings of grass (limited) and ground
cover.
      (b)   Large areas of gravel, rock, or bare ground are prohibited.
   (3)   Open Space: Usable open space shall incorporate user friendly
materials such as grass, synthetic turf, sand or wood chip play areas and shall
be bordered by xeriscape. (Ord. 2008-21, 2009)
16.18.108: LIGHTING:
This section is intended to: eliminate adverse impacts of light spillover;
provide attractive lighting fixtures and layout patterns that contribute to a
unified lighting design; and provide exterior lighting that promotes safe
vehicular and pedestrian access to and within a development, while minimizing
the impacts on adjacent properties.
   (1)   Outdoor Lighting: All outdoor lighting shall conform with title 14,
chapter 10, "Outdoor Lighting", of this Code. (Ord. 2008-21, 2009)
16.18.109: FENCING:
While fencing is required to buffer uses, it can create a visually monotonous
streetscape. These standards provide fencing and wall standards that are
visually appealing, complement the overall design of the development and
surrounding properties, and provide visual interest to pedestrians and
motorists.
   (1)   Fencing And Walls: All fencing and walls shall conform to section
16.11.135 of this title, and sections
15.05.502 and
15.05.503 of this Code. (Ord. 2008-21, 2009)
16.18.110: EQUIPMENT AND SERVICE AREA SCREENING:
Service areas, trash collection areas, and mechanical/utility equipment create
visual and noise impacts on surrounding uses and neighbors. These standards
provide visual and noise buffers from public rights-of-way and adjacent uses.
   (1)   Service And Trash Collection Areas:
      (a)   To the maximum extent feasible, trash containers and collection
areas shall be oriented toward rear or interior service corridors.
      (b)   Trash collection areas and containers shall be located a minimum of
twenty feet (20') from any public street, public sidewalk or property line
adjacent to a residential use.
      (c)   Trash collection areas shall be enclosed by a six foot (6') solid
masonry wall. The entrance into the service area shall be a closable gate that
provides screening.
   (2)   Mechanical/Utility Equipment:
      (a)   Mechanical equipment including HVAC units, swamp coolers, AC
condensers, shall not be located on pitched roofs or attached to the sides of
structures.
      (b)   Mechanical equipment may be located on flat roofs when fully
screened by appropriate parapet walls that blend with the architecture of the
structure. Parapet screening walls shall be included in the original
architectural drawings and not installed as an afterthought. Parapet walls
shall be constructed and designed to reduce noise from mechanical equipment.
      (c)   Ground mounted mechanical/utility equipment screening shall be an
integral part of the building structure and architecture and shall not give the
appearance of being "tacked on" to the structure. (Ord. 2008-21, 2009)
16.18.111: REDEVELOPMENT OF MULTI-FAMILY:
   (1)   Density: Up to six (6) units of existing density may be replaced with
the same or less density in townhouses.
   (2)   Parking: A minimum of two (2) parking spaces per unit is required;
however, no covered parking is required.
   (3)   Setbacks: The setbacks applicable to the Townhouse Zoning District
shall apply, i.e., ten feet (10').
   (4)   Open Space: The open space requirements of this chapter are not
applicable. (Ord. 2017-06, 2017)
CHAPTER 19
SITE PLAN AND BUILDING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
16.19.101: Purpose
16.19.102: Site Planning Requirements
16.19.103: Building Design Requirements
16.19.101: PURPOSE:
The desert setting of the city is both a spectacular and fragile environment.
It is worthy of preservation and requires careful stewardship. The magnificent
setting of the city requires that all uses and buildings complement and be in
harmony with the natural environment. The purpose of this chapter is to promote
a level of building and site design consistency, sensitivity to the natural
environment of the city, and to protect and promote the unique community
identity of the city. This chapter is intended to:
   (1)   Assist all land use authorities in land use and development decision
making.
   (2)   Provide information and direction to all property owners intending to
build or develop land located within the city.
   (3)   Promote compatibility between the natural and manmade environments.
   (4)   Promote high quality site planning and building, lighting and signage
design.
   (5)   Promote continuity of streetscape design.
   (6)   Promote drought tolerant landscaping in harmony with the desert
environment of the city.
   (7)   Achieve a high level of community design and achieve the community
design qualities of a resort destination community. (Ord. 2012-08, 2012)
16.19.102: SITE PLANNING REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Design Standards And Guidelines: To meet the purposes of this chapter,
this title, and all other land use ordinances, the following design standards
and design guidelines are provided as follows:
      (a)   Design Standards: Design standards are required in addition to
other standards set forth in this title and all other land use ordinances and
are indicated by the verb "shall".
      (b)   Design Guidelines: Design guidelines indicate additional actions
that may be taken to enhance site design and achieve greater compatibility with
adjacent land uses. Guidelines use the verb "should", signifying that the
guidelines are desirable objectives.
         Application of the guidelines (see chapters 15 and 16 of this title)
will depend on the nature of the proposed uses or buildings and the surrounding
area, as may be determined by the zoning administrator.
         All class I, class II, class III, class IV and class V use application
approvals shall balance the proportion and scale of all proposed uses,
buildings and structures to the project site, adjacent properties and streets
from which the project will be accessed or viewed.
   (2)   Building Location: The location of all new buildings and structures
shall incorporate the following building design principles:
      (a)   Sensitivity To Adjacent Buildings: All site plans shall demonstrate
design sensitivity to adjoining structures. New buildings shall not overpower
existing buildings. Attention to building height, rooflines and grade changes
will help provide continuity with adjacent and neighboring buildings.
      (b)   Site Plans: All site plans shall provide for the integration of the
existing, or planned, pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns, protect
views and complement and be harmonious with the adjacent building designs,
styles and size. (Ord. 2012-08, 2012)
      (c)   Pedestrian Areas: All buildings shall have an orientation to the
street to encourage a pedestrian relationship. Building placement shall allow
interconnected walkways and shared site accesses for increased convenience,
accessibility and enhanced safety for pedestrians. (Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
   (3)   Mix Of Scales: A mixture of building scales is desired, particularly
in the case of larger buildings, with some elements scaled for appreciation
from the adjoining street and others for the enjoyment by pedestrians within
the development.
   (4)   Site Design And Layout: All site plans shall recognize and preserve,
as much as practicable, the natural features and sensitive areas occurring on
the site. Areas of sensitive lands occur throughout the city, including areas
of historic value, scenic beauty, unusual or hazardous topography, lands
subject to flooding, or lands possessing exceptional views (see also chapter 8
of this title). Site design and planning shall include the following:
      (a)   Arrangement: Recognizing that all views cannot be protected, all
buildings and structures should be arranged to preserve and provide open space
and to protect views as much as practicable. The locations of all buildings and
structures shall recognize the existing topography and natural features of the
site, including lava rock, rock outcroppings and drainageways. All natural
features shall be preserved, as much as practicable, and integrated into the
site plan design.
      (b)   Open Space: Provide an interconnected system of open space areas.
The locations of all buildings and structures shall allow and provide areas of
open space and landscaping to connect with similar open spaces and landscaping
areas existing or planned to be located on adjacent properties.
      (c)   Site Access: The location and number of access points to the site,
the interior circulation pattern, and the separation between pedestrians and
vehicles shall be designed to maximize safety and convenience, and should be
harmonious with proposed and neighboring buildings.
      (d)   Trash And Refuse Collection Areas: All solid waste and refuse
collection areas shall be located to minimize the impact on adjacent property
owners or users. Such areas, including the dumpsters, shall be screened from
view. All dumpster and refuse enclosures shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
high, constructed of materials to match the main buildings on the site, and
provide latching gates for screening the opening to the enclosure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3025.png]
All solid waste and refuse collection areas shall be screened as required by
subsection (4)(d) of this section.
      (e)   Noise Impact: Site design shall include provisions for limiting
noise, particularly to adjacent property. Efforts should be made to mitigate
noise from both outside and within the site through screening, setbacks and
building materials. Noise generating equipment shall be located and buffered to
mitigate on site and off site impacts.
      (f)   Off Street Parking Areas And Loading Bays: Landscaped areas and/or
walls shall screen off street parking and loading docks/bays. Loading bays and
docks shall be separated from customer parking where possible. Loading bays
shall be oriented so as not to face public streets, plazas or trails. The
number and dimensions of required off street parking spaces and loading bays
shall be in accordance with the requirements of chapter 20 of this title.
      (g)   Pedestrian Egress: Safe and convenient pedestrian egress from each
street where main entrances to buildings are located shall be provided. It
shall consist of:
         (i)   Walkway: A continuously defined five foot (5') minimum width
walkway from the public sidewalk to the building front walkway. This feature
may be included as part of the required fifteen percent (15%) landscaping so
long as it incorporates landscaping as part of the walkway that enhances the
project.
         (ii)   Landscaping Requirements: The walkway shall count as
landscaping for the parking lot landscaping requirements. Landscaping next to
the walkway shall have a ten percent (10%) area bonus in landscaping
requirements. Said bonus shall not accrue to the point where it reduces the
parking lot edge buffer.
         (iii)   Exceptions: Businesses that do not typically generate
pedestrian access shall not be required to comply with this subsection. (Ord.
2012-08, 2012)
   (5)   Views, Openness And Massing: Due to the economic value and community
quality and character created by the surrounding scenic beauty, it is essential
that the city preserve general access to significant views, openness and
minimize massing. These views include the Red Mountain, the red rock formations
north of Kayenta, Snow Canyon, Pine Valley Mountain, Land Hill, the lava flows,
and other unique features.
      (a)   The following streets have been identified as those corridors which
are significant to pedestrians, cyclists and motorists. Properties adjacent to
these streets shall be limited to setbacks and building heights to the extent
reasonably feasible as per figures 2-A and 2-B of this section, or to the
actual view angle if determined to be greater than fifteen degrees (15°) using
methods similar to those used in said figures 2-A and 2-B to preserve
significant views. Where none of the above stated views are compromised or when
the view angle to such views is less than fifteen degrees (15°), then the
minimum setback shall be thirty feet (30'). If the view angle calculation
determines a setback greater than thirty feet (30'), then up to one-third (1/3)
of a building, or cluster of buildings, can extend to the minimum setback.
Architectural features on the building such as balconies, awnings, trellises,
pop outs, etc., may encroach to a minimum twenty five foot (25') setback.
Architectural features of the type considered to be single level extensions,
such as covered patios, entryways or eating areas with a maximum height of
twelve feet (12') for a flat roof or fifteen feet (15') for a pitched roof may
encroach to a minimum twenty foot (20') setback.
   FIGURE 2-A
   PITCHED ROOF
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3027.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3029.png]
   FIGURE 2-B
   FLAT ROOF
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3031.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3033.png]
         (i)   Snow Canyon Parkway/Center Street - Beginning at 800 West thence
eastward to the Ivins City & St George City Boundary Line, excluding
residential lots in the Old Township Overlay.
         (ii)   Highway 91 - Along its entire length.
         (iii)   600 West/Kwavasa Dr. - Beginning at Highway 91 thence
northward to Kayenta Parkway.
Note: Maximum building heights shall not exceed those listed in sections
16.11.126 and
16.11.127 of this title. Minimum setbacks shall not be less than those listed
in sections
16.33.103,
16.33.104,
16.33.105, and
16.33.106 of this title.
      (b)   Site plans shall demonstrate that the following two (2) important
view elements have been considered:
         (i)   Views From Within The Site: Site plans shall demonstrate the
views available at locations within the proposed development site.
         (ii)   Views Into And Through The Site: Site plans shall demonstrate
the views available to adjacent properties with the construction of the
proposed site plan. See the development standards nonresidential in section
16.33.105, table 33-5 of this title. (Ord. 2014-13, 2014)
   (6)   Landscaping Design Standards: Landscape improvements shall meet all
minimum standards set forth in the zone. Landscaping should be designed to
preserve and complement the desert character of the natural landscape, mitigate
building and parking lot impact, add aesthetic charm, interest and character,
and conserve water.
Landscaping is an integral element of site development. Landscaping complements
the architecture of all proposed buildings and structures and provides visual
interest and variety, provides screening elements, provides year round site
beautification, blends with the natural landscape and highlights building
design features. Landscape designers shall recognize the following landscape
design principles with landscape plans:
      (a)   Landscape Buffers: Landscape buffers between dissimilar or
conflicting land uses shall be provided to soften the effects of any adjacent
commercial building and/or service area.
      (b)   Transitional Landscaped Areas: Where new development adjoins areas
of dedicated open space, an appropriate landscape buffer shall be provided to
create a gradual transition. (Ord. 2012-08, 2012)
      (c)   Parking Lot Landscaping: Off street parking areas shall be screened
or buffered by landscaped areas that include a minimum twelve foot (12') wide
by three foot (3') high berm or incorporating screening walls or other devices
with a height of three feet (3') which may reduce the landscape area to six
feet (6') in width. (See figure 19-2 of this section.) Landscaped islands,
large enough to include trees and low shrubs, shall be located at the ends of
parking rows, frequently within long parking rows and between opposing rows of
parked cars. Tree canopies providing shade within parking rows are encouraged
(see section
16.20.108 of this title). (Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2950.gif]
      (d)   Landscape Materials: All proposed plantings and site materials
should be consistent with (but not uniform) and of a similar scale with
existing natural landscape, or neighboring landscape, and adjacent streetscape
areas. Drought tolerant desert landscaping is encouraged. Landscaping
improvements may also include berming, contouring, rocks and boulders.
      (e)   Native Vegetation Materials: All landscape should incorporate
vegetation native to southern Utah or desert environments.
      (f)   Plant Size, Spacing And Scale: The size and spacing of landscape
elements shall be consistent and establish a coordinated relationship to any
existing or proposed streetscape plantings. The size and spacing of landscape
elements shall also be of appropriate scale and character to all proposed
buildings, structures and features.
      (g)   Streetscape Buffer Areas: Streetscape buffers are intended to
provide an area of landscape materials located on the perimeter of all proposed
site plans. All streetscape buffer areas shall meet the same requirements as
parking lot landscaping.
      (h)   Nonvegetative Ground Cover: Nonvegetative ground cover treatments
shall be harmonious in color and reflectivity to the natural surroundings and
may include rocks and small stones, bark and natural red earth. Areas of
nonvegetative ground cover materials shall be broken up and interspersed with
vegetative ground cover.
      (i)   Water Features: Water conservation concerns require the
minimization of water use in landscape areas. Appropriate use of manmade water
features, such as waterfalls, fountains, streams and small ponds, is permitted.
Spray features are discouraged. Mechanical equipment for water features shall
be screened in the same manner as building mechanical equipment.
      (j)   Landscape Maintenance: All landscape plans shall demonstrate that
long term maintenance factors have been considered in the landscape design. For
example, irrigation systems shall be designed to achieve low maintenance and
efficient water consumption.
   (7)   Lighting: See title 14, chapter 10, "Outdoor Lighting", of this code.
   (8)   Signage: See chapter 21, "Signs", of this title. (Ord. 2012-08, 2012)
16.19.103: BUILDING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   Structures To Blend With Environment: It is the vision of the city
that all buildings and their associated facilities and improvements will blend
with the forms, colors and textures of the city's desert setting. The city
encourages creative and varied architecture reflecting its desert character,
avoiding extremes and uncharacteristic themes, styles and color. The goal is
for all manmade structures to blend harmoniously with the natural environment.
To preserve and protect a desert setting and to preserve and increase property
values, all proposed uses shall incorporate building and site design elements
as follows:
      (a)   Horizontal Emphasis: Building designs and elements with a
horizontal emphasis are preferred. Vertical design elements exaggerating
building height shall be avoided.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2952.gif]
      (b)   View Protection: Care shall be taken to control the proportion and
massing of buildings to minimize the obstruction of all views.
      (c)   Building Massing: In order to maximize the integration of manmade
structures with the natural environment and to minimize undesirable
distractions, land use applications shall demonstrate the incorporation of
techniques for reducing the apparent size and bulk of proposed buildings and
structures. At a minimum the following techniques shall be utilized,
recognizing that other techniques may be incorporated as well:
         (i)   Coherent Building Design: All sides of a building may have a
visual or other impact, and shall be coherently designed and treated. A facade
occupying a single wall of a building, not related to the rest of the building
sides (false front or storefront) shall be prohibited. A consistent level of
detail and finish on all sides of a building shall be provided; however, a
lesser degree of detail is allowed on non-street facing sides.
         (ii)   Wall Variations: Continuous building wall surfaces shall be
relieved with variations of wall planes or overhangs that create shadow areas
and add visual interest. All sides of a building visible from a public street
or other significant public views shall have variation in wall planes of at
least two feet (2') or five percent (5%) of the longest adjacent wall,
whichever is greater. In order to provide articulation and shadow areas,
offsets in wall planes shall be required as follows: buildings less than fifty
feet (50') in length shall not be required to have an offset but shall be
required to have a minimum of two (2) architectural features; buildings that
are fifty feet to one hundred feet (50' - 100') shall have a minimum of two (2)
face planes; and buildings greater than one hundred feet (100') shall provide
one additional offset per one hundred feet (100') of building length. Two (2)
nonadjoining faces may be on the same plane. A minimum of two (2) architectural
features shall be provided for each one hundred feet (100') of building length.
The length of required offset planes shall be fifteen percent to fifty percent
(15% - 50%) of the total building length, with said percentages reduced to ten
percent to forty percent (10% - 40%) if one additional wall plane is provided.
If two (2) or more additional wall planes are provided beyond the minimum
requirement, the minimum length of any face shall be ten feet (10').
Architectural features may include covered porches, balconies with railings,
window pop outs, inset windows, bays, etc., and shall be spread out over the
length of the building.
         (iii)   Reduced Upper Levels: Upper levels shall have reduced floor
area to minimize building mass. No second story shall exceed ninety percent
(90%) of the ground floor footprint. For purposes of this calculation, single
level elements such as covered porches and patios, (including those using slat
roofs), open rooms with walls at least eight feet (8') in height, and
permanently affixed trellises may be considered part of the footprint. Where
sloping sites create structures that are more than two (2) stories, the first
(ground) level floor shall be considered as the floor level closest to that of
the primary street access.
         (iv)   Roof Variations: Dominant rooflines shall be avoided. The
impact of a roofline may be minimized by a variety of roof styles, including
the use of flat or shallow pitched formations as well as variation in the
ridgelines and eave lines. Roofs shall provide variation in a manner similar to
wall variations. The same lengths used for determining the minimum number of
wall horizontal offsets set forth in subparagraph (1)(c)(ii) of this section
shall also apply in determining the minimum number of roof vertical offsets.
However, the minimum roof offset of parapets (flat roofs) or ridgelines and
eave lines (pitched roofs) shall be twelve inches (12") or five percent (5%) of
the overall building height, whichever is greater. The use of front facing
gables, dormers, hip roof formations, etc, may be considered in determining if
the required offsets for pitched roofs have been provided.
         (v)   Reduced Roof Mass: The roof of a building is often the single
greatest contributor to its mass and most obvious obstacle to the views from
adjacent properties. Visual impact is minimized when the roof is flat or a very
shallow pitch, or a hip roof formation (sloping from the sides as well as the
front and back) rather than a gabled formation (sloping from the front and back
only). Roof pitches below four to twelve (4:12) are strongly encouraged. Roof
pitches of eight to twelve (8:12) and steeper that resolve in a ridgeline are
prohibited.
         (vi)   Varying Roofline Silhouettes: Variation in the roofline
silhouette is an effective means of harmonizing buildings with their
surroundings by blending its line and form with the Red Mountain backdrop.
         (vii)   Visual Patterns: Every building should have shadow relief
created by recesses and projections. Recesses may include courtyards, entryways
or boxed window openings along the exterior of the building. Projections may
include stairs, balconies, entrances or bays. Covered walkways, breezeways,
patios, trellises, landscape areas and wide roof overhangs are encouraged to
produce shadow effects. Stepped structures may also be used to offset building
mass in sloped areas.
         (viii)   Larger Buildings And Two-Story Structures: Larger buildings
should be placed toward the interior of a development, or placed on the lower
site elevation to reduce apparent mass.
      (d)   Architectural Details: Surface details, ornaments and other
building elements that enrich the character of a building are encouraged.
Attention to detail, including all building and architectural design elements,
shall be required. The following architectural details are desirable and
encouraged:
         (i)   Stonework when implemented properly. Stone should terminate on
an inside corner.
         (ii)   Exposed beams and columns.
         (iii)   Cornices, moldings, bands, pop outs, decorative vents, cast or
sculpted features.
         (iv)   Covered entries.
         (v)   Covered walkways, breezeways, bays and balconies.
         (vi)   Enclosed courtyards and patios, trellises, landscape areas and
wide roof overhangs.
         (vii)   Accessories such as art features, benches, pots, lamps,
artwork and sculptures.
      (e)   Additions: Proposed additions to existing buildings shall
incorporate the predominant architectural features, materials and colors of the
existing buildings.
      (f)   Mechanical Equipment: Air conditioning units, generators and other
auxiliary mechanical and building equipment shall be placed at locations where
they will be least intrusive in terms of noise and appearance, particularly for
adjacent properties and public rights of way. All mechanical equipment shall be
physically screened from view so as not to be seen from public rights of way or
adjacent properties through uses of fences, walls or parapets. In the case of
roof mounted equipment, grouping of the mechanical equipment toward the uphill
parapet is encouraged; otherwise, additional parapets may be required.
Mechanical screening shall consist of a hard exterior surface that matches or
complements the adjacent building surfaces and an inner layer of nonreflective
acoustic insulation with a minimum sound transmission class (STC) of 30. Ground
mounted mechanical screening shall extend a minimum of two feet (2') higher
than the top of the equipment up to a height of six feet (6'). Above six feet
(6') it shall be the same height as the top of the equipment. All roof mounted
mechanical screening shall extend to a minimum of six inches (6") above the
mechanical equipment. All building mounted mechanical or communications
equipment shall be a color to make it as unobtrusive as possible. If located on
or adjacent to a building wall, the color of all mechanical and communications
equipment shall blend with the color and design details of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2955.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2957.gif]
   (2)   Building Scale: The size and scale of all proposed buildings and
structures should be compatible with, and not dominate, the surrounding uses
and natural features.
   (3)   Pedestrian Scale: Regardless of overall building size, elements and
facades at the pedestrian level shall achieve a sense of human scale and create
visual interest at eye level.
   (4)   Building Materials And Textures: Exterior building materials shall be
compatible with and similar to the surrounding landscape in type, texture,
color and character.
      (a)   The following materials are recommended for use on exterior walls:
         (i)   Native Stone: The use of natural or cultured stone complementing
the surroundings of the city is highly recommended. When used as an accent,
stone shall terminate at an inside corner.
         (ii)   Stucco: Stucco is a desirable exterior material, particularly
in a rough or highly textured finish.
         (iii)   Masonry: Integrally colored split faced block is generally
acceptable, as is brick in compatible earth tone blends.
         (iv)   Concrete: Exposed aggregate or colored concrete with a stamped,
pitted or other texture.
      (b)   The following materials are disallowed for use on exterior walls
except when used as architectural details:
         (i)   Unfinished block.
         (ii)   Unfinished concrete.
         (iii)   Metal.
      (c)   The following materials are recommended for sloping roofs:
         (i)   Nonreflective concrete or clay tile.
         (ii)   Wood shingles or shakes (fire retardant rated).
         (iii)   Architectural grade composition shingles.
         (iv)   Patinaed copper.
      (d)   Traditional ribbed, corrugated metal and other nonrecommended
materials are discouraged for sloping roofs.
      (e)   White, brightly colored or reflective materials are prohibited for
all roofs.
      (f)   Low profile skylights with dark framing and tinted glass are
encouraged. White framing or mirrored glass is prohibited.
   (5)   Building Material Color: The color of all exterior building materials
and surfaces shall blend the proposed new buildings with the natural
environment of the city. Color is an important and effective way to create
harmony with the natural landscape and minimize the visual impact of
structures. Color variation using compatible hues can reduce the apparent scale
and building mass. Exterior building colors that respect and enhance the
natural tones of the southern Utah environment shall be used.
      (a)   Minimize Impact: All building materials and colors shall minimize
the impact of buildings on the natural setting. All building colors shall be
earth tones and muted colors that blend and do not contrast with natural desert
colors. Wall extensions from buildings, and all walls and fences, shall be the
same or similar color and materials as the main building.
      (b)   Light Reflective Value (LRV): The LRV of materials used on all
exterior walls shall be between seven (7) (darkest value of shaded vegetation)
and thirty eight (38) (approximate value of red sandstone and soil in the
city). Generally, the more visible the structure, the lower its LRV should be.
      (c)   Color Intensity And Brightness: The strength, intensity and
brightness of the color selected (chroma) shall be in the range from very weak
(grayish) to medium weak (neutral or earth tone). Strong chroma colors should
be avoided. Stains and flat paints are encouraged.
      (d)   Finishes: High gloss paints, factory finished metals or other
materials which increase visual impacts, and aluminum, white or reflective
roofs are prohibited. Matte finishes are recommended. LRV over thirty eight
(38) and strong chroma may be allowed only for small accents and trim around
windows and doors. Chimneys, flues, vents, gutters, downspout, mechanical and
electrical equipment, railings, window shading devices and other exterior
devices shall be similar in LRV and chroma to the surrounding surfaces of the
building, unless they are a special building design feature. In such cases, a
subdued accent color may be acceptable. Bright, glossy, fluorescent and
corporate signature color schemes are strongly discouraged. The following
materials and finishes are prohibited:
         (i)   Colored plastic and fiberglass.
         (ii)   Unpainted or shiny metal details. (Ord. 2014-13, 2014; Ord.
2019-07, 9-5-2019)
CHAPTER 20
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
16.20.101: Purpose
16.20.102: General Provisions
16.20.103: Size Of Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces
16.20.104: Access Requirements
16.20.105: Combination Of Uses
16.20.106: Required Adjoining Parking Area Connections
16.20.107: Location Of Required Off Street Parking
16.20.108: Required Off Street Parking Area Landscaping
16.20.109: Required Off Street Parking Area Lighting
16.20.110: Maintenance Of Parking Spaces And Areas
16.20.111: Number Of Required Off Street Parking Spaces
16.20.112: Disabled Persons Parking
16.20.113: Reduction Of Off Street Parking Requirements
16.20.114: Off Street Loading Requirements
16.20.115: Location Of Loading Spaces
16.20.101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to achieve the purposes of the general plan,
this title, all other land use ordinances, and to promote traffic and
pedestrian safety and efficiency by:
   (1)   The minimization of hard surfaced areas to reduce environmental
impacts, storm water runoff, visual impacts, and prevent heat buildup while
providing adequate parking sufficient to support the associated use or
activity.
   (2)   Requiring off street parking at locations that respect the natural
environment and view amenities of the city.
   (3)   Requiring off street parking areas to respect the image and character
of the city. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.102: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (1)   Off street parking spaces shall be provided, meeting the requirements
of this chapter, for all new buildings, all additions or enlargements to an
existing building, the establishment of any new use, or the expansion of any
existing use.
   (2)   If an existing, legally established building is expanded by more than
thirty percent (30%) of the existing gross floor area, all off street parking
spaces and areas shall comply with the requirements of this chapter, as
applicable.
   (3)   Required off street parking spaces and areas located in commercial and
industrial zoning districts shall not be used for the repair of motor vehicles,
or the display or sale of goods and services of any kind, unless authorized by
a class I use application approval, as provided by chapter 14 of this title.
   (4)   Oil separators and other pollution control devices may be required as
part of use application approval, as recommended by the city engineer, and
required by the land use authority.
   (5)   No sidewalk, trail or required landscape area shall be used for the
off street parking of any vehicles, or as a loading area.
   (6)   Off street parking is prohibited in all accessways, fire lanes or
similar areas not designated for parking purposes. These areas shall be posted
with "no parking" signs and/or other means as required by the land use
authority or fire department. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.103: SIZE OF OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
   (1)   The minimum dimensions of all off street parking spaces, other than
parallel spaces, shall be ten feet (10') wide by eighteen feet (18') long. The
minimum dimensions of all parallel off street parking spaces shall be nine feet
(9') wide by twenty five feet (25') long.
   (2)   All required loading spaces shall have minimum dimensions as required
by the land use authority, depending on the nature of the use. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.20.104: ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
   (1)   All ingress and egress locations from an adjacent road or street to
any off street parking areas, including curb cuts, drive approaches or other
accesses, shall be approved by the city, county or the state department of
transportation, as applicable.
   (2)   A single-family residential lot shall have no more than two (2)
driveways, each of which shall be a maximum of twenty feet (20') wide at the
street lot line. Such driveways shall not be closer to each other than twelve
feet (12'). No driveway shall be closer to a side property line than three feet
(3').
   (3)   The location and dimensions of all driveways shall be as approved by
the land use authority with use approval, as applicable. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.105: COMBINATION OF USES:
Where there is a combination of uses on the same lot, the total number of off
street parking spaces provided shall be the sum of the off street parking
requirements for each individual use. The total number of spaces required may
be reduced if the land use authority, as part of application review, approves a
parking study, conducted by a professional traffic engineer, demonstrating that
a reduction of parking spaces is appropriate, with shared parking possible by
the nature of the uses proposed. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.106: REQUIRED ADJOINING PARKING AREA CONNECTIONS:
Interconnections between adjoining parking areas, located on adjacent lots,
shall be required by the land use authority as part of use approval, and
necessary to promote efficiency, convenience and safety of vehicle movements.
Permanent cross access and maintenance agreements shall be required by the land
use authority as part of use approval.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2959.gif]
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.107: LOCATION OF REQUIRED OFF STREET PARKING:
All required off street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the
use or building it serves, except required off street parking spaces may be
allowed on a separate lot that is within three hundred feet (300') of the use
or building it serves, provided the two (2) lots are not separated by a major
street, if a nonrevocable written parking agreement is in place prior to, or
concurrent with, use approval. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.108: REQUIRED OFF STREET PARKING AREA LANDSCAPING:
To minimize the environmental and visual impacts created by large areas of hard
surfacing, all off street parking areas shall be designed and constructed to
meet the following minimum landscape requirements. A land use authority may
require additional parking area landscaping to achieve the purposes of this
title.
   (1)   Minimum Parking Area Landscaping: All off street parking areas,
providing twenty (20) or more parking spaces, shall provide a minimum of
fifteen percent (15%) of the total parking area as landscape areas. Areas to be
landscaped may include:
      (a)   Traffic islands separating adjacent parking spaces.
      (b)   Peninsulas parallel to individual parking spaces.
      (c)   Planter areas located at the ends of parking rows or other planter
areas located within the off street parking area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2961.gif]
   (2)   Greatest Area: For the purposes of this section, the area provided for
off street parking shall be the greatest area defined by the distance from the
curb lines or edges of the outermost parking space, aisle or driveways.
   (3)   Setback Areas Not Included: For the purposes of this section, no
required setback areas shall be included as meeting the required parking area
landscaping as required by this section.
   (4)   Materials: Landscaping shall consist of trees and other plant
materials suitable for planting in a desert environment. A list of approved
parking area landscape trees and plant materials is available from the zoning
administrator.
   (5)   Irrigation And Maintenance: All required landscaped areas shall be
provided with a permanent and adequate means of irrigation and regularly
maintained, including weed control.
   (6)   Surfacing: All parking lot hard surfacing shall provide a sufficient
area around all trees and landscaping to permit water absorption and prevent
soil compaction. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.109: REQUIRED OFF STREET PARKING AREA LIGHTING:
All off street parking area lighting shall be designed and installed to meet
the following minimum requirements:
   (1)   Parking lot lighting may be provided in all parking areas, with
emphasis placed on appropriate lighting at entrances and exits. All parking lot
lighting shall be integrated with landscape features.
   (2)   All off street parking area lighting shall meet the applicable
requirements for outdoor lighting, as applicable, and as required by chapters
19 and 22 of this title.
   (3)   All lighting fixtures and poles shall be of a decorative nature and
painted or stained a color in harmony with a desert environment.
   (4)   The height of all pole mounted lighting fixtures shall not exceed
twenty feet (20'), measured to the top of the pole or luminary from the
finished or natural grade, whichever is lower.
   (5)   All light fixtures, including security lighting, shall be fully hooded
or shielded and aimed and so that all direct illumination shall be confined to
the property boundaries of the source. All motion sensing light fixtures shall
be fully shielded and adjusted, according to the manufacturer's specifications,
to turn off when detected motion ceases.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2963.gif]
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.110: MAINTENANCE OF PARKING SPACES AND AREAS:
Every parcel of land used as a public or private off street parking area shall
be constructed and maintained in compliance with the following requirements:
   (1)   Surfacing: All off street parking areas shall be surfaced with a
surface adequate in relation to its location and use. All parking areas shall
be surfaced to provide a dustless surface. Storm water drainage systems shall
be provided for all off street parking areas, as recommended by the city
engineer and required by the land use authority. If storm water is to be
carried to adjacent streets, adequate detention shall be required to meet city
requirements, and it shall be piped under all sidewalks.
   (2)   Screening: The sides and rear of any off street parking area that
adjoins a residential zone shall be screened by a masonry wall or solid visual
barrier fence, meeting the requirements of section
16.11.135 of this title.
   (3)   Landscaping: All off street parking areas shall be landscaped and
permanently maintained as required by section
16.20.108 of this chapter, and chapters 19 and 22 of this title.
   (4)   Traffic Control Signs: Traffic control signs and/or striping shall be
provided, as adopted by the city, or recommended by the city engineer, and
required by the land use authority necessary to minimize vehicular and
pedestrian conflicts.
   (5)   Maintenance: All off street parking and loading areas shall be
maintained as required for use approval. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.111: NUMBER OF REQUIRED OFF STREET PARKING SPACES:
The number of required off street parking spaces shall be provided as required
by table 20-1, "Table Of Off Street Parking Requirements", of this section:
   TABLE 20-1
   TABLE OF OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Use  Minimum Off Street
     Parking Requirements
Use                                      Minimum Off Street
                                         Parking Requirements
Accessory dwelling unit for owner or     2 spaces per unit (2 car garage
employee                                 required, section
Dwelling, single-family                 16.11.124 of this title). 4 spaces per
Dwelling, two-family                     unit if located on steep or very steep
Dwelling, condominium                    slope areas (subsection
                                          16.08.209(12) of this title)
Casita or guesthouse                    1 space per unit
                                         2 spaces per unit, 1 space of which
Dwelling, multiple-family               shall be covered (section
                                         16.11.123 of this title)
Animal hospital (veterinary clinic),    1 space for 500 square feet of gross
with outdoor holding facilities          floor area
Animal hospital (veterinary clinic),    1 space for 500 square feet of gross
without outdoor holding facilities       floor area
Art studio                              1 space for each 500 square feet of
                                         gross floor area
Automotive self-service station         1 parking space for each 400 square
                                         feet of gross floor area
Bank, credit union or other financial   1 space for each 400 square feet of
institution                              gross floor area
                                         1 parking space for each guestroom in
Bed and breakfast inn                   addition to parking requirements for
                                         the owner/occupant
Campground                              1 space for each campsite
                                         1/2 space, plus 2 stacking spaces per
Car wash                                each wash bay/facility, excluding any
                                         spaces located in the wash bay/wash
                                         facility
Church                                  1 parking space for each 4 seats in
                                         the assembly area
                                         As approved by the zoning
                                         administrator or sensitive lands
Class I use                             committee with class I use approval
                                         and depending on the type and nature
                                         of the use
Commercial daycare/preschool center     1 parking space for each staff member,
                                         plus 1 space for each 10 students
Commercial kennel                       1 space for each 800 square feet of
                                         gross floor area
                                         1 space for each person employed
Commercial plant nursery                during regular working hours, plus 1
                                         space for each 800 square feet of
                                         gross plant display area
                                         1 parking space for each 3 persons,
Commercial recreation (indoor)           based on the maximum anticipated
Commercial recreation (outdoor)         capacity of all facilities capable of
                                         simultaneous use as determined by the
                                         zoning administrator
Community and resort commercial retail  1 space for each 350 square feet of
sales and services                       gross floor area
Contractor's office                     1 space for 400 square feet of gross
                                         floor area
                                         1 space for each 350 square feet of
Convenience store                       gross floor area, plus 2 spaces per
                                         each gasoline pump provided
                                         1 parking space for each staff member,
Daycare center/assisted care center     plus 1 space for each 8 attendees/
                                         patients
                                         1 space located at the facility, plus
                                         a minimum of 60 feet of stacking area
                                         to accommodate the stacking of 3
Drive-through/drive-up facility         vehicles in the drive-through/drive-up
                                         lane. The location of drive-through/
                                         drive-up must meet the requirements of
                                         section
                                         16.12.121 of this title
                                         As approved by the land use authority
Educational facility                    with use approval, dependent on the
                                         type and nature of the educational
                                         facility
Emergency care facility                 1 space for each 200 square feet of
                                         gross floor area
Golf course                             4 spaces per green
Hospital                                1 parking space for each patient bed
                                         1 space for each sleeping unit, plus 1
Hotel                                   space for each employee on the regular
                                         shift
                                         1 space for each person employed
Light manufacturing                     during regular working hours, 1 space
                                         for each company owned vehicle
                                         As approved by the land use authority
Major facility of a public utility      with use approval, dependent on the
                                         type and nature of the facility
Medical and dental clinic               1 space for each 200 square feet of
                                         gross floor area
Model home                              2 spaces
                                         1 parking space for each 4 fixed seats
Mortuary, funeral home                  in the assembly area, plus 1 per each
                                         commercial funeral vehicle
                                         1 space for each sleeping unit, plus 1
Motel                                   space for each employee on the regular
                                         shift
Neighborhood commercial retail sales    1 space for each 300 square feet of
and services                             gross floor area
Nursing home, convalescent care center  1 parking space for each 2 patient
                                         beds
                                         1 parking space for each 3 persons,
                                         based on the maximum anticipated
Outdoor theater                         capacity of all facilities capable of
                                         simultaneous use as determined by the
                                         zoning administrator
                                         1 space for each person employed
Personal services                       during regular working hours, plus 1
                                         space for each 400 square feet of
                                         gross floor area
Private club                            1 space for each 200 square feet of
                                         gross floor area
                                         1 space for each 400 square feet of
                                         gross floor area. Offices and clinics
                                         for physicians, dentists or similar
Professional offices                    healthcare professionals are required
                                         to meet the off street parking
                                         requirements for medical and dental
                                         clinics
                                         As approved by the land use authority
Public uses and utilities               with use approval, dependent on the
                                         type and nature of the facility
                                         1 parking space for each 4 fixed seats
Reception hall, reception center        in the assembly area, or 1 space for
                                         each 200 square feet of gross floor
                                         area, whichever is less
Recycling collection center             2 spaces for each collection bin/area
Residential facility for elderly        2 spaces, plus 1 space for each 2
persons                                  employees during regular working hours
Residential facility for persons with
a disability                             2 spaces, plus 1 space for each 2
Residential facility for persons with   employees during regular working hours
a disability (substance abuse facility
located within 500 feet of a school)
                                         1 parking space for each 3 persons,
                                         based on the maximum anticipated
Resort                                  capacity of all facilities capable of
                                         simultaneous use as determined by the
                                         zoning administrator
                                         1 space for each 4 seats or 1 space
Restaurant, fast food                   for each 100 square feet of gross
                                         floor area, whichever is less
                                         1 space for each 4 seats, or 1 space
Restaurant, sit down                    for each 100 square feet of gross
                                         floor area, whichever is less
Storage of recreational vehicles        1 space for each vehicle
(limited)
                                         As approved by the land use authority
Telecommunications site/facility        for use approval, dependent on the
                                         type and nature of the facility
 
   (1)   Fractional Amount: In calculating the total number of required off
street parking spaces, fractional amounts shall be rounded to the nearest whole
number.
   (2)   Unspecified Uses: The land use authority, based on the requirements
for similar uses, shall determine the off street parking requirements for any
use not specifically listed. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.112: DISABLED PERSONS PARKING:
Designated parking for disabled persons shall be provided for all uses as
designated by the Americans with disabilities act. Each accessible parking
space shall be painted on the ground with an international accessibility symbol
and posted by a sign in accordance with the Americans with disabilities act,
and located as close as practical to an accessible entrance to the building.
The sign must be placed so that a vehicle parked in that space does not obscure
it. The striping specifications for accessible parking spaces shall comply with
the Americans with disabilities act. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.113: REDUCTION OF OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Requests to reduce off street parking requirements may be granted by the land
use authority, with use approval, if the applicant shows:
   (1)   The unique nature of the existing or proposed land use, or an
unusually large number of pedestrian or transit trips, below normal parking
demands, will be generated.
   (2)   A reduced number of off street parking spaces will meet the demands of
the proposed use without increasing traffic or on street parking problems in
adjacent areas and neighborhoods. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.114: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
Every building or use receiving or distributing materials or merchandise by
truck, shall provide and maintain on the same lot as the building or use,
adequate off street loading space, as required by the land use authority. No
loading space shall be considered as meeting any off street parking
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.20.115: LOCATION OF LOADING SPACES:
No required off street loading spaces shall be permitted in any front yard or
in any street side yard. All loading spaces shall be screened from view from
any road or street. Off street loading spaces are encouraged to be located in
rear yard areas, and encouraged to be partially or entirely enclosed within a
building. The location of all loading areas shall not interfere with parking
lot circulation patterns. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 21
SIGNS
SECTION:
16.21.101: Purpose
16.21.102: Type Of Sign Application Required
16.21.103: Approval Authority
16.21.104: Building Permit Required
16.21.105: Application Processing
16.21.106: Application Initiation And Completeness
16.21.107: Class I Use Application Requirements For Signs
16.21.108: Class II And Class III Use Application Requirements For Signs
16.21.109: Class IV And Class V Use Application Requirements For Signs
16.21.110: Class I Use Application Review Procedures And Approval Standards For
Signs, Except Those Proposed On Any Sensitive Lands Areas
16.21.111: Class I Use Application Review Procedures And Approval Standards For
Signs Proposed On Any Sensitive Lands Areas
16.21.112: Class II And Class III Use Application Review Procedures And
Approval Standards For Signs, Except Those Proposed On Any Sensitive Lands
Areas
16.21.113: Class II And Class III Use Application Review Procedures And
Approval Standards For Signs Proposed On Any Sensitive Lands Areas
16.21.114: Class IV And Class V Use Application Review Procedures And Approval
Standards For Signs, Except Those Proposed On Any Sensitive Lands Areas
16.21.115: Class IV And Class V Use Application Review Procedures And Approval
Standards For Signs Proposed On Any Sensitive Lands Areas
16.21.116: Allowed Signs
16.21.117: Sign Lighting Requirements
16.21.118: Exempt Signs
16.21.119: Prohibited Signs
16.21.120: Noncomplying Signs
16.21.121: Unused And Abandoned Signs
16.21.101: PURPOSE:
This chapter is provided to accomplish the purposes of the general plan and
this title by providing requirements for the location, size, height, design and
other provisions for all signs located within the city, and to achieve the
following additional purposes:
   (1)   To protect the scenic qualities of the city.
   (2)   To provide for the identification of sites and buildings.
   (3)   To provide an organized and convenient method of public communication
without unnecessary clutter, confusion or obtrusiveness.
   (4)   To prevent confusion of allowed signs with traffic, other regulatory
signs and public safety signs.
   (5)   To provide opportunities for the identification of uses and activities
located within the city at a pedestrian friendly and human scale.
   (6)   To minimize any possible adverse effects of signs and associated
lighting on adjacent properties.
   (7)   To protect and enhance the destination resort character of the city
and create a unique desert community.
   (8)   To protect and enhance property values. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.102: TYPE OF SIGN APPLICATION REQUIRED:
   (1)   Proposed Use: The type of application required to install, erect,
construct or modify a sign associated with a proposed use or activity (class I,
class II, class III, class IV or class V use application) shall be the same
application required to establish the proposed use or activity with which the
sign is associated, as identified by the tables of uses, chapter 33 of this
title.
   (2)   Existing Use: The type of application required to install, erect,
construct or modify a sign associated with an existing use or activity (class
I, class II, class III, class IV or class V use application) shall be the same
application required to establish the existing use or activity with which the
sign is associated, as identified by the tables of uses, chapter 33 of this
title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.103: APPROVAL AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Class I Use Applications For Signs:
      (a)   The zoning administrator is authorized to approve, approve with
requirements necessary for compliance with all applicable land use ordinance
provisions, or deny class I use applications to install, erect, construct or
modify any sign associated with a proposed or existing class I use, except
class I use applications proposed on any sensitive lands areas. A class I use
application approval to install, erect, construct or modify any sign shall be
limited to a maximum period of forty five (45) days, such sign being removed
after the expiration of forty five (45) days, as provided and required by
section
16.14.106 of this title.
      (b)   The sensitive lands committee is authorized to approve, approve
with requirements necessary for compliance with all applicable land use
ordinance provisions, or deny class I use applications to install, erect,
construct or modify any sign associated with a proposed or existing class I use
on any sensitive lands areas. A class I use application approval to install,
erect, construct or modify any sign shall be limited to a maximum period of
forty (45) days, such sign being removed after the expiration of forty five
(45) days, as provided and required by section
16.14.106 of this title.
   (2)   Class II Use Applications For Signs:
      (a)   The zoning administrator is authorized to approve, approve with
requirements necessary for compliance with all applicable land use ordinance
provisions, or deny class II use applications to install, erect, construct or
modify any sign associated with a proposed or existing class II use, except
class II use applications proposed on any sensitive lands areas.
      (b)   The sensitive lands committee is authorized to approve, approve
with requirements necessary for compliance with all applicable land use
ordinance provisions, or deny class II use applications to install, erect,
construct or modify any sign associated with a proposed or existing class II
use located on any sensitive lands areas.
   (3)   Class III Use Applications For Signs:
      (a)   The commission is authorized to approve, approve with requirements
necessary for compliance with all applicable land use ordinance provisions, or
deny class III use applications to install, erect, construct or modify any sign
associated with a proposed or existing class III use, except class III use
applications proposed on any sensitive lands areas.
      (b)   The sensitive lands committee is authorized to approve, approve
with requirements necessary for compliance with all applicable land use
ordinance provisions, or deny class III use applications to install, erect,
construct or modify any sign associated with a proposed or existing class III
use located on any sensitive lands areas.
   (4)   Class IV Use Applications For Signs: The commission is authorized to
approve, approve with conditions necessary for compliance with all applicable
land use ordinance provisions, or deny class IV use applications to install,
erect, construct or modify any sign associated with a proposed or existing
class IV use.
   (5)   Class V Use Applications For Signs: The city council is authorized to
approve, approve with conditions necessary for compliance with all applicable
land use ordinance provisions, or deny class V use applications to install,
erect, construct or modify any sign associated with a proposed or existing
class V use. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.104: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
A class I, class II, class III, class IV or class V use application to install,
erect, construct or modify a sign may also be required to receive the approval
of a building permit application, as may be required by the building code, as
adopted. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.105: APPLICATION PROCESSING:
   (1)   A class I, class II, class III, class IV or class V use application to
install, erect, construct or modify a sign may be considered concurrently with
another required class I, class II, class III, class IV or class V use
application.
   (2)   A class I, class II, class III, class IV or class V use application to
install, erect, construct or modify a sign may be considered separately and
independently from another required class I, class II, class III, class IV or
class V use application. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.106: APPLICATION INITIATION AND COMPLETENESS:
   (1)   Requests to install, erect, construct or modify a sign associated with
a proposed or existing class I, class II, class III, class IV or class V use
shall be made by filing the necessary application with the zoning
administrator.
   (2)   A property owner may present a class I, class II, class III, class IV
or class V use application for review and decision to install, erect, construct
or modify a sign. An agent of the property owner, or a lessee of the property,
may present an application for review and decision, provided such application
is accompanied by a property owner affidavit of authorization.
   (3)   A class I, class II, class III, class IV or class V use application to
install, erect, construct or modify a sign shall be determined complete by the
zoning administrator, as provided by chapter 13 of this title. For class I,
class II, class III, class IV or class V use applications determined to be
incomplete; the zoning administrator shall comply with the requirements of
chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.107: CLASS I USE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNS:
A class I use application to install, erect, construct or modify a sign shall
comply with the requirements of all land use ordinances and shall provide the
following information:
   (1)   A complete class I use application.
   (2)   Three (3) copies of a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals
forty feet (1" = 40'), or as required by the zoning administrator, identifying
the following:
      (a)   The location and dimensions of the property and all proposed uses
and buildings, all existing buildings or structures located on the property,
and existing buildings and structures located within one hundred feet (100') of
the property. Existing property lines and existing fence lines shall be shown.
      (b)   The location, dimensions, colors and materials of the proposed sign
shall be shown.
   (3)   Any other maps, drawings, plans, illustrations or other materials
determined necessary by the zoning administrator or sensitive lands committee,
as applicable, to adequately and accurately identify and describe the location,
size, height and other characteristics of the proposed sign. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.21.108: CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNS:
A class II or class III use application required to install, erect, construct
or modify a sign shall comply with the requirements of all land use ordinances
and shall provide the following information:
   (1)   Eight (8) copies of a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals
forty feet (1" = 40'), or as required by the zoning administrator, plus twenty
(20) copies of an eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduced copy of the
site plan set identifying the following:
      (a)   The location and dimension of the property and all proposed uses
and buildings, all existing buildings or other structures located on the
property, all landscaped areas, and the location of all existing and proposed
signs. Existing property lines and existing fence lines shall be shown.
      (b)   The location, dimensions, colors and materials of all proposed
signs shall be shown.
   (2)   Accurate scaled colored plan and elevation drawings, or other
illustration materials, sufficient to identify the dimensions, colors,
materials, shape, design, height, letter styles and construction details of the
proposed sign.
   (3)   Samples of all proposed sign materials and colors.
   (4)   An accurate lighting plan which identifies the type of all sign
illumination devices, including the type of fixtures, lamps, bulb type,
supports, intensity of light, color of light, installation and electrical
details of all proposed sign lighting.
   (5)   Calculations identifying the proposed maximum total sign area for the
site and individual buildings, and identifying separate individual calculations
for the total sign area for the proposed sign, including freestanding monument
sign, wall, window, projecting, awning, canopy or temporary signs.
   (6)   Any other maps, drawings, plans, illustrations or other materials
determined necessary by the zoning administrator, commission or sensitive lands
committee, as applicable, to adequately and accurately identify and describe
the location, size, height and other characteristics of the proposed sign.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.109: CLASS IV AND CLASS V USE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNS:
A class IV or class V use application required to install, erect, construct or
modify a sign shall comply with the requirements of all land use ordinances and
shall provide the following information:
   (1)   Fourteen (14) copies of a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch
equals forty feet (1" = 40'), or as required by the zoning administrator, plus
twenty (20) copies of an eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduced copy
of the site plan set identifying the following:
      (a)   The location and dimension of the property and all proposed uses
and buildings, all existing buildings or other structures located on the
property, all landscaped areas, and the location of all existing and proposed
signs. Existing property lines and existing fence lines shall be shown.
      (b)   The location, dimensions, colors and materials of all proposed
signs shall be shown.
   (2)   Accurate scaled colored plan and elevation drawings, or other
illustration materials, sufficient to identify the dimensions, colors,
materials, shape, design, height, letter styles and construction details of the
proposed sign.
   (3)   Samples of all proposed sign materials and colors.
   (4)   An accurate lighting plan which identifies the type of all sign
illumination devices, including the type of fixtures, lamps, bulb type,
supports, intensity of light, color of light, installation and electrical
details of all proposed sign lighting.
   (5)   Calculations identifying the proposed maximum total sign area for the
site and individual buildings, and identifying separate individual calculations
for the total sign area for the proposed sign, including freestanding monument
sign, wall, window, projecting, awning, canopy or temporary signs.
   (6)   Any other maps, drawings, plans, illustrations or other materials
determined necessary by the zoning administrator, sensitive lands committee,
commission or city council, as applicable, to adequately and accurately
identify and describe the location, size, height and other characteristics of
the proposed sign. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.110: CLASS I USE APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL STANDARDS FOR
SIGNS, EXCEPT THOSE PROPOSED ON ANY SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
   (1)   The procedures for the review of a class I use application for a sign,
except those proposed on any sensitive lands areas, are identified by figure
14-1 in chapter 14 of this title.
   (2)   The zoning administrator shall review the application and determine:
      (a)   The class I use associated with the proposed sign complies with all
requirements of the zoning district in which the use is located.
      (b)   The proposed sign complies with all requirements of this chapter
and chapter 14 of this title.
      (c)   The sign is proposed for a maximum period of forty five (45) days,
such sign being removed after the expiration of forty five (45) days.
   (3)   Upon a finding by the zoning administrator that the proposed sign
complies with all requirements of this chapter and chapter 14 of this title,
the class I use application for a sign shall be approved, with or without
requirements.
   (4)   Upon a finding by the zoning administrator that the proposed sign does
not comply with all requirements of this chapter and chapter 14 of this title,
the class I use application for a sign shall be denied. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.111: CLASS I USE APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL STANDARDS FOR
SIGNS PROPOSED ON ANY SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
   (1)   The procedures for the review of a class I use application for a sign
proposed on any sensitive lands areas are identified by figure 14-2 in chapter
14 of this title.
   (2)   The sensitive lands committee shall review the application and
determine:
      (a)   The class I use associated with the proposed sign complies with all
requirements of the zoning district in which the use is located.
      (b)   The proposed sign complies with all requirements of this chapter,
and chapters 8 and 14 of this title.
      (c)   The sign is proposed for a maximum period of forty five (45) days,
such sign being removed after the expiration of forty five (45) days.
   (3)   Upon a finding by the sensitive lands committee that the proposed sign
complies with all requirements of this chapter, and chapters 8 and 14 of this
title, the class I use application for a sign shall be approved, with or
without requirements.
   (4)   Upon a finding by the sensitive lands committee that the proposed sign
does not comply with all requirements of this chapter, and chapters 8 and 14 of
this title, the class I use application for a sign shall be denied. (Ord. 2005-
13, 2005)
16.21.112: CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND
APPROVAL STANDARDS FOR SIGNS, EXCEPT THOSE PROPOSED ON ANY SENSITIVE LANDS
AREAS:
   (1)   The procedures for the review of a class II or class III use
application for a sign, except those proposed on any sensitive lands areas, are
identified by figures 15-1 and 15-2 in chapter 15 of this title, respectively.
   (2)   The zoning administrator for class II use applications for signs, and
the commission for class III use applications for signs, shall review the
application and determine:
      (a)   The class II use or class III use associated with the proposed sign
complies with all requirements of the zoning district in which the use is
located.
      (b)   The proposed sign complies with all requirements of this chapter,
and chapters 15 and 19 of this title.
   (3)   Upon a finding by the zoning administrator for class II use
applications for signs, or the commission for class III use applications for
signs, that the proposed sign complies with all requirements of this chapter,
and chapters 15 and 19 of this title, a class II use application for a sign or
a class III use application for a sign shall be approved, with or without
requirements.
   (4)   Upon a finding by the zoning administrator for class II use
applications for signs, or the commission for class III use applications for
signs, that the proposed sign does not comply with all requirements of this
chapter, and chapter 15 or 19 of this title, the class II use application for a
sign or a class III use application for a sign shall be denied. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.21.113: CLASS II AND CLASS III USE APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND
APPROVAL STANDARDS FOR SIGNS PROPOSED ON ANY SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
   (1)   The procedures for the review of a class II or class III use
application for a sign proposed on any sensitive lands areas are identified by
figures 15-3 and 15-4 in chapter 15 of this title, respectively.
   (2)   The sensitive lands committee shall review the application and
determine:
      (a)   The class II use or class III use associated with the proposed sign
complies with all requirements of the zoning district in which the use is
located.
      (b)   The proposed sign complies with all requirements of this chapter,
and chapters 8, 15 and 19 of this title.
   (3)   Upon a finding by the sensitive lands committee that the class II use
or class III use application for signs complies with all requirements of this
chapter, and chapters 8, 15 and 19 of this title, a class II use application or
a class III use application for a sign shall be approved, with or without
requirements.
   (4)   Upon a finding by the sensitive lands committee that the class II use
or class III use application for signs does not comply with all requirements of
this chapter, and chapters 8, 15 or 19 of this title, a class II use
application or a class III use application for a sign shall be denied. (Ord.
2005-13, 2005)
16.21.114: CLASS IV AND CLASS V USE APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL
STANDARDS FOR SIGNS, EXCEPT THOSE PROPOSED ON ANY SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
   (1)   The procedures for the review of a class IV or class V use application
for a sign, except those proposed on any sensitive lands areas, are identified
by section
16.16.113, figures 16-1 and 16-2 of this title, respectively.
   (2)   The commission for class IV use applications for signs, or the city
council for class V use applications for signs, shall review the application
and determine:
      (a)   The class IV use or class V use associated with the proposed sign
complies with all requirements of the zoning district in which the use is
located.
      (b)   The proposed sign complies with all requirements of this chapter,
and chapters 16 and 19 of this title.
   (3)   Upon a finding by the commission for class IV use applications for
signs, or the city council for class V use applications for signs, that the
proposed sign complies with all requirements of this chapter, and chapter 16 or
19 of this title, a class II use application for a sign or a class III use
application for a sign may be approved, with or without conditions.
   (4)   Upon a finding by the commission for class IV use applications for
signs, or the city council for class V use applications for signs, that the
proposed sign does not comply with all requirements of this chapter, or chapter
16 or 19 of this title, the class IV use application for a sign or a class V
use application for a sign shall be denied. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.115: CLASS IV AND CLASS V USE APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL
STANDARDS FOR SIGNS PROPOSED ON ANY SENSITIVE LANDS AREAS:
   (1)   The procedures for the review of a class IV or class V use application
for a sign proposed on any sensitive lands areas are identified by section
16.16.113, figures 16-3 and 16-4 of this title, respectively.
   (2)   The commission for class IV use applications for signs or the city
council for class V use applications for signs proposed on any sensitive lands
areas shall review the application and determine:
      (a)   The class IV use or class V use associated with the proposed sign
complies with all requirements of the zoning district in which the use is
located.
      (b)   The proposed sign complies with all requirements of this chapter,
and chapters 8, 16 and 19 of this title.
   (3)   Upon a finding by the commission for class IV use applications for
signs or the city council for class V use applications for signs proposed on
any sensitive lands areas, that the proposed sign complies with all
requirements of this chapter, and chapters 8, 16 and 19 of this title, a class
IV use application for a sign or a class V use application for a sign proposed
on any sensitive lands areas may be approved, with or without conditions.
   (4)   Upon a finding by the commission for class IV use applications for
signs or the city council for class V use applications for signs proposed on
any sensitive lands areas, that the proposed sign does not comply with all
requirements of this chapter, or chapter 8, 16 or 19 of this title, the class
IV use application for a sign or a class V use application for a sign proposed
on any sensitive lands areas shall be denied. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.116: ALLOWED SIGNS:
All signs allowed within the city are identified in table 21-1, "Table Of
Allowed Signs", of this section, and all signs shall comply with the
requirements contained therein: (Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
   TABLE 21-1
   TABLE OF ALLOWED SIGNS
Sign        Allowed Signs
Requirement Freestanding Wall Window Projecting Awning Canopy Temporary
            Monument                                          (Class I Use)
Sign         Allowed Signs
Requirement  Freestanding Wall        Window      Projecting     Awning      Canopy                                                 Temporary
             Monument                                                                                                               (Class I Use)
                                                                                                                                    All
                                                                                                                                    residential,
Zoning       Neighborhood commercial (CN), community commercial (C-1), resort commercial (RC), resort mixed use (RMU), commercial   commercial
districts    professional and research (CPR), commercial with light manufacturing (CLM).                                            and
allowed                                                                                                                             industrial
                                                                                                                                    zoning
                                                                                                                                    districts.
                          No higher   No higher   No higher than No higher
                          than the    than the    the eave line  than the
                          eave line   maximum     or top of the  eave line
Maximum sign              or top of   window      parapet wall   or top of
structure    7 feet       the parapet height and  of the         the parapet No higher than the eave line or top of the canopy, or  4 feet
height                    wall of the must be     building, or   wall of the 15 feet, whichever is lower.             
                          building,   contained   15 feet,       building,
                          or 20 feet, within the  whichever is   or 15 feet,
                          whichever   area of the lower.         whichever
                          is lower.   window.                    is lower.
                          n/a. No     n/a. No                    n/a. No
                          larger than larger than                larger than
Maximum sign 60 square    the wall    the window                 the awning  n/a. No larger than the canopy area with which the     20 square
structure    feet         area with   area with   n/a            area with   sign is associated.                                    feet
area                      which the   which the                  which the
                          sign is     sign is                    sign is
                          associated. associated.                associated.
                          No higher   No higher   No higher than
                          than the    than the    the eave line
                          eave line   maximum     or top of the  No higher
                          or top of   window      parapet wall   than the
Maximum sign 7 feet       the parapet height and  of the         top of the  No higher than the top of the canopy to which it is    4 feet
height                    wall of the must be     building, or   awning to   attached.
                          building,   contained   15 feet,       which it is
                          or 20 feet, within the  whichever is   attached.
                          whichever   area of the lower.
                          is lower.   window.
                          The maximum
                          wall sign
                          area, per
                          building
                          facade,     Shall not
                          shall not   exceed more Shall be
                          exceed 1    than 20     included in    A maximum of 20 percent of the area on each face of the awning or
Maximum sign 40 square    square foot percent of  the maximum    canopy. The area of all awning and canopy signs shall be included  20 square
area         feet         per linear  the window  area allowed   in the maximum area allowed for all walls signs.                   feet
                          foot of     area with   for wall
                          wall with a which it is signs.
                          maximum     associated.
                          sign area
                          of 100
                          square
                          feet.
                          No wall
                          sign shall
             Must meet    be
             the location permitted                                                                                                 As approved
             requirements on any                                                                                                    by the zoning
Sign         as provided  building                                                                                                  administrator
location     by this      facade that n/a. Must meet the location requirements of the building with which it is associated.         or sensitive
             chapter and  does not                                                                                                  lands
             specifically face                                                                                                      committee.
             this table.  directly
                          toward a
                          public road
                          or street.
             No part of
             any sign
             shall extend
             over the
             property or  No part of              No part of any
             into any     any sign                sign shall
             road or      shall                   extend over
             street right extend over             the property
             of way or    the                     or into any
             utility      property or             road or street
             easement.    into any                right of way
             All signs    road or     No window   or utility                                                                        As approved
             must         street      sign shall  easement.      No part of any sign shall extend over the property or into any     by the zoning
Maximum      maintain     right of    project     Shall be       road or street right of way or utility easement.                   administrator
projection   necessary    way or      beyond the  installed at a Shall be attached, painted or appliqued flat against awnings made  or sensitive
             clearances   utility     exterior    right angle to of rigid materials, and shall project not more than the awning of  lands
             from         easement.   surface of  the building   which it is a part.                                                committee.
             underground  No wall     the window. and shall
             or overhead  sign shall              extend
             power        project                 (project) no
             transmission more than               more than 5
             lines as     12 inches               feet from the
             required by  from the                wall to which
             the          wall                    it is
             electrical   surface.                attached.
             power
             provider, as
             provided
             herein.
             May be
             located in
             the required
             front yard                                                                                                             As approved
             setback,                                                                                                               by the zoning
Minimum      provided                                                                                                               administrator
setback      sign is set  n/a. Must meet the location requirements of the building with which it is associated.                     or sensitive
requirements back a                                                                                                                 lands
             minimum of                                                                                                             committee.
             10 feet from
             the road or
             street right
             of way.
             All lighting sources must be fully shielded and no bulb or other lighting source shall be exposed or visible from any  No
Illumination road, street or adjacent property.                                                                                     illumination
                                                                                                                                    allowed.
                                                  Projecting
                          All wall                signs shall
                          signs shall             have a minimum
                          maintain a              clearance of 8
                          minimum                 feet above
                          clearance               grade when     Signs shall maintain the minimum clearance of the awning/canopy of
Minimum                   of 8 feet               located over a which they are a part, but no less than 8 feet above grade when
height       n/a          above grade n/a         pedestrianway. located over a pedestrianway or 13 feet if projecting over an      n/a
                          or as                   If projecting  alley or driveway.
                          approved by             over an alley
                          the land                or driveway,
                          use                     the minimum
                          authority.              clearance must
                                                  be at least 13
                                                  feet.
                                                                                                                                    As approved
                                                                                                                                    by the zoning
Sign         All signs shall be oriented to the adjacent road or street.                                                            administrator
orientation                                                                                                                         or sensitive
                                                                                                                                    lands
                                                                                                                                    committee.
                                                                                                                                    As approved
             All signs shall be designed to be an integral site or building design element. All signs shall be compatible in        by the zoning
Design       design, style, color and materials with the existing or proposed buildings or structures to which the sign is          administrator
requirement  associated and with surrounding buildings and structures. See chapter 19 of this title.                                or sensitive
                                                                                                                                    lands
                                                                                                                                    committee.
             Sign materials shall be similar to or compatible with the materials of the building they identify. Sign colors shall   As approved
Sign         provide sufficient contrast to be legible, yet be subdued enough to blend with the surrounding structures. All sign    by the zoning
materials    background colors shall be dark earth tones or other dark colors. Bright and glossy or fluorescent colors and          administrator
and colors   reflective surfaces are prohibited. Where these colors are part of a logo or insignia, all colors incorporated in the  or sensitive
             logo are permitted in the logo only. See chapter 19 of this title.                                                     lands
                                                                                                                                    committee.
Off premises
signs        All signs shall only be permitted at the location of the activity, business or service connected with the message of the sign.
prohibited
Rights of
way and      No part of any sign shall be permitted within any road or street right of way or utility easement and all signs must maintain
utility      necessary clearances from underground or overhead power transmission lines as required by the electrical power provider.
easements
Fire         No sign or sign structure shall be permitted in a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere with free use of
suppression  all fire appliances, including hydrants, standpipes, automatic fire sprinkler connections and similar fire protection and
access       suppression equipment. No sign or sign structure shall obstruct any fire lane.
             No sign shall be permitted to be located in any "clear view area", as defined herein, and no sign shall be permitted that creates
Clear view   any traffic or pedestrian hazard. See sections
area          16.11.116 and
             16.11.117 of this title.
Building     A valid building permit approval may be necessary, as required by the adopted building code. All signs for which a building permit
permit       is required, including necessary footings, structural permits or electrical permits, shall comply with the requirements of the
required     building code and shall be subject to inspection.
Sign         A sign is authorized and valid only for the approved location.
validity
Valid
business     All businesses and services advertised shall maintain necessary licenses and permits, as may be required by the state and city
license      business licensing requirements, as applicable.
required
Street       Each business shall display its street address number into any freestanding sign provided, or provide the street address at another
address      equally visible location on the site or building.
Sign         All signs shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair.
maintenance
             Any sign determined to be a hazard to the public health, welfare or safety, or determined to be a nuisance because of inadequate
Enforcement  maintenance, dilapidation or building code violation shall be remedied upon notice by the zoning administrator or other city staff
             and shall be subject to removal by the city, or other remedies that may be available to the city.
 
Notes:
   1.    Maximum Sign Structure Height: The height of the permanent,
freestanding supporting structure providing the location for a sign. The
maximum sign structure height shall be the vertical distance from the highest
point of the structure to the lowest point of the finished grade, immediately
adjacent to the structure. No ground shall be bermed, or other earthwork
provided, that would have the effect to exceed the maximum allowed sign
structure height. See figure 21-1 at the end of this section.
   2.    Maximum Sign Height: The highest point on the sign structure of any
text, insignia, logo, advertising, or other site or building identification
materials or other message. See figure 21-2 at the end of this section.
   3.    Maximum Sign Structure Area: The maximum area of the sign structure
calculated by multiplying the highest point of the sign structure by the
longest length of the sign structure. See figure 21-3 at the end of this
section.
   4.    Maximum Sign Area: The area of all sign copy enclosed by a square,
circle, triangle, rectangle, or combination thereof, that encompasses the
extreme limits of text, representation, insignia, logo, or other advertising
materials. The total of all text, insignia, logo, or other advertising or
identification materials shall be included in the calculation to determine
maximum sign area. See figure 21-4 at the end of this section.
(Ord. 2013-06, 2013; amd. Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/ bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2965.gif]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-2967.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/ bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2969.gif]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-2971.gif]
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.117: SIGN LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the sign requirements provided in section
16.21.116, table 21-1, "Table Of Allowed Signs", of this chapter, the following
sign lighting requirements are provided to achieve the purposes of this
chapter:
   (1)   External Illumination: Externally illuminated signs are permitted as
follows:
      (a)   All externally lit signs shall be illuminated only with steady,
stationary, fully shielded light sources aimed directly onto the sign. Light
bulbs or lighting tubes used for illuminating a sign shall not be visible from
any location.
      (b)   The intensity of sign lighting shall not exceed that necessary to
illuminate and make legible a sign from the closest adjacent public right of
way.
      (c)   The fixtures used to illuminate signs shall not be directed toward
any adjacent properties.
      (d)   All light sources shall be fully shielded and shall comply with all
"night sky" protections.
   (2)   Internal Illumination: Internally illuminated signs are permitted as
follows:
      (a)   Individual backlit letters which are silhouetted against a softly
illuminated wall.
      (b)   Individual letters with translucent faces, containing soft lighting
elements inside each letter.
      (c)   Metal faced box signs with cutout letters and soft glow fluorescent
tubes.
   (3)   Lighting Times: A sign shall only be illuminated during the hours of
operation of the facility being identified or advertised or until eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M., whichever is later. Internally illuminated signs shall
provide an automatic timer to comply with this subsection. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.118: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The signs identified in table 21-2, "Table Of Exempt Signs", of this section,
are exempt from the requirements of this chapter, provided such signs comply
with all requirements of table 21-2 of this section, and are not determined to
be a prohibited sign, as provided by section
16.21.119 of this chapter.
   TABLE 21-2
   TABLE OF EXEMPT SIGNS
Sign Type  Sign Requirement
Sign Type        Sign Requirement
Address         Street address numbers no higher than 12 inches.
numbers
Community        Posters and fliers announcing or promoting community events provided such
events posters  posters or fliers do not advertise products or services not associated with the
and              community event. Requires technical review committee review and approval.
announcements
Directional     Directional signs such as "Enter" and "Exit" provided:
signs
               (1)    There shall be no more than 2 directional signs per driveway entrance to
                 a lot, parcel or multiple use lot or parcel.
               (2)    No directional sign shall be greater than 4 square feet in area and have
                 a height greater than 3 feet above grade.
Flags           Any flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, county, city, civic,
                 religious organization, or educational institution.
Historic        Plaques erected for the purposes of identifying a historic site, building, or
plaques          structure.
Hours of        1 unlighted "hours of operation" sign allowed per entrance not larger than 1
operation        square foot in area.
Informational   Signs containing no advertising provided each sign does not exceed 1 square foot
signs            in area, and is limited to a total of 4 square feet for any 1 business.
Minor window    Window signs displaying product names, product logos, business names, or
signs            promoting the nature of the business or the products sold provided:
               (1)    No minor window sign shall exceed 4 square feet.
               (2)    No more than 1 minor window sign is displayed in any 1 window.
               (3)    No more than 2 minor window signs are located in any 1 business.
               (4)    Not allowed in any agricultural or residential zone.
Official        Official government notices and notices posted by government officers or
notices          employees in the performance of their duties.
Political        Signs used to identify and for the support of candidates for national, state,
signs           county, city, school board, service district, or other public office provided
                 such signs:
               (1)    Are stationary and unlighted.
               (2)    Are not erected earlier than 60 days prior to the specified voting day.
               (3)    Are removed within 2 days after the specified voting day.
               (4)    No 1 political sign shall exceed 12 square feet in area and 4 feet in
                 height.
               (5)    Is not located within any clear view area.
                 (1)    Maximum of 48 square feet and a height of 10 feet measured from natural
Project          grade or 11 feet measured from back of curb, whichever is lower. Only 1 sign
identification  allowed per entrance. Signs may be double sided. 2 flagpoles with 3 foot x 7
signs            foot flags and a maximum height of 20 feet are allowed per project entrance
                 (torn or tattered flags shall be replaced immediately).
                 (2)    One 5-foot diameter helium balloon, raised to a maximum height of 100
                 feet, from 10:00 A.M. and retrieved at the close of each sales day allowed on 1
               weekend per quarter, during high traffic events such as the Parade Of Homes,
                 Senior Games, Marathon, Ironman/Fitness Festival, and on federal holidays and
                 July 24.
Public           Signs required for safety or instructional purposes, installed and maintained by
necessity       Ivins City Corporation, such as "No Parking" and street name signs.
signs
Real estate      Any real estate sign advertising real property for sale, lease or rent within
signs or open   Ivins City provided such signs meet the following requirements:
house signs
               (1)    1 sign may be placed on the property that is for sale, lease, or rent, or
                 adjacent thereto.
               (2)    Two 2-foot x 3-foot off site signs are allowed with a temporary permit.
               (3)    Off site signs can be placed on public property, but not on sidewalks,
                 bike paths, or traffic lanes of roadways.
               (4)    Off site signs are permitted in daylight hours only and must be removed
                 overnight.
               (5)    Such signs are stationary and unlighted.
               (6)    Signs must be professionally prepared, neat in appearance, and well
                 maintained.
               (7)    Are removed within 30 days from the date of sale, lease, or rental.
               (8)    No real estate sign shall exceed 2 x 3 feet in area and 3 feet in height.
                 Each individual sign may be double sided.
               (9)    Is not located within any clear view area or placed where it creates a
                 safety hazard.
               (10)    Signs placed on private property are permitted only with the permission
                 of the property owner.
               (11)    Only 1 sign per sales property is permitted at a single location.
Religious       Any religious symbol attached to a place of religious worship.
symbols
Residential      1 nameplate sign showing the name of the occupant of a residence and the address
nameplate,      of the dwelling. The sign shall contain no advertising copy and shall not exceed
street address   2 square feet in area.
or combination
                 Restaurant menu boxes of up to 4 square feet for displaying menus. A
Restaurant      freestanding, or wall sign permit approval shall be obtained for restaurant menu
menu boxes       boxes larger than 4 square feet, and included in the total allowed freestanding
                 or wall signs.
                 Temporary decorations or displays, when such are clearly incidental to, and are
Seasonal        customarily or commonly associated with, any national, local or religious
decorations      celebration; provided that such decorations or displays are maintained in an
                 attractive condition and do not constitute a fire hazard.
Signs            Signs required or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law,
authorized by   statute, or ordinance, including traffic control signs, such as "Stop" and
law              "Yield".
Site and         Pieces of art, monuments, statuary, sculpture, water features, fountains, and
building        other similar features, not containing any corporate advertising, logo,
features         insignia, or other symbol, and used to identify or distinguish a site or
                 building.
                 Not more than 2 permanent subdivision identification signs are permitted for
Subdivision      each primary entrance to a recorded subdivision indicating only the name,
identification  symbol, logo, or other graphic identification of the subdivision. Allowed
signs            subdivision identification signs shall be approved at the time of final
                 subdivision approval by the land use authority.
Warning signs   Temporary or permanent signs erected by a government agency, utility company, or
                 construction company to warn of danger or hazardous conditions.
                 Signs displayed on motor vehicles or trailers being operated in the normal
Vehicle signs   course of business, such as signs indicating the name of the owner or business
                 if the primary purpose of such vehicles is not for the display of signs.
 
(Ord. 2013-06, 2013)
16.21.119: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
All signs allowed within the city are identified in section
16.21.116, table 21-1, "Table Of Allowed Signs", or section
16.21.118, table 21-2, "Table Of Exempt Signs", of this chapter. All other
signs are hereby declared prohibited signs, including, but not limited to, the
following sign types:
   (1)   All off premises signs designed or intended to direct attention to a
business, product or service that is not provided, sold, offered or existing on
the property where the sign is located, including all billboards.
   (2)   Signs on any city owned property, except for political signs, which
shall be removed within two (2) days after the specified voting date and
"Parade Of Homes" signs, which shall be removed the day following the last day
of the Parade Of Homes.
   (3)   All signs installed, erected, constructed or modified without
receiving the necessary application approval.
   (4)   Signs placed on private property without the approval of the owner.
   (5)   Flag mounted signs.
   (6)   All signs having intermittent or flashing illumination, animated or
moving parts, rotating or simulating movement by any means of fluttering,
spinning or reflection devices or that emit sound.
   (7)   Electronic message signs that change copy electronically and including
"time, date and temperature" signs.
   (8)   All banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, flags, searchlights,
strobe lights, beacons and inflatable signs, objects and characters.
   (9)   Flashing signs or lights that contain an intermittent, pulsating or
flashing light source.
   (10)   Portable signs that can be moved from place to place and not
permanently affixed to the ground or building.
   (11)   All signs that project an image or message onto a wall or other
surface.
   (12)   Any text or shape that obstructs the view of motor vehicle operators,
bicyclists and pedestrians entering a public roadway from any parking area,
service drive, private driveway, alley or other thoroughfare.
   (13)   All signs that obstruct free ingress to or egress from required door,
window, fire escape or other required exit.
   (14)   Signs attached to any fences, utility poles, trees, shrubs, rocks or
other natural objects, unless specifically included in the design.
   (15)   All signs constituting a hazard to public health, welfare or safety.
   (16)   All neon signs, except a sign stating "Open" and which do not exceed
two (2) square feet.
   (17)   All roof mounted signs.
   (18)   All signs painted on or attached to vehicles that are parked on the
public right of way or on private premises for advertising.
   (19)   All signs providing a lighting source that is exposed or directly
visible for any public right of way or adjacent property.
   (20)   All neon, rope lights, string lights, exposed bulbs or tubes, or
other directly visible light source designed specifically to outline any
building roofline, or building wall.
   (21)   Any sign, statement, symbol or picture of an obscene nature. (Ord.
2005-13, 2005)
16.21.120: NONCOMPLYING SIGNS:
All signs permitted within the city shall comply with section
16.21.116, table 21-1, "Table Of Allowed Signs", or section
16.21.118, table 21-2, "Table Of Exempt Signs", of this chapter, unless such
signs are determined to be a legal noncomplying structure. A legal noncomplying
structure shall be determined to be a sign existing on the effective date
hereof, and for which a valid approval has been issued. All legal noncomplying
signs may continue, subject to the requirements of chapter 25 of this title.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.21.121: UNUSED AND ABANDONED SIGNS:
A sign shall be considered unused or abandoned and shall be removed after the
activity, product, business, service or other use, which it advertised, has
ceased or has vacated the building, lot or parcel for a period not less than
one year. All unused or abandoned signs shall be removed by the property owner,
upon written notice by the zoning administrator, or other city staff, and shall
be subject to removal by the city, if not removed by the property owner within
thirty (30) days of notice by the zoning administrator, or other city staff, or
other remedies that may be available to the city. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 22
LANDSCAPING
SECTION:
16.22.101: Purpose
16.22.102: Applicability
16.22.103: Landscape Requirements
16.22.104: [Reserved]
16.22.105: [Reserved]
16.22.101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify appropriate standards for
landscaping and site and building lighting to achieve the following purposes:
   (1)   To preserve and enhance the natural environment and aesthetic
qualities of the city.
   (2)   To preserve and enhance the appearance, character and value of all
properties.
   (3)   To promote water conservation through the practical use of native and
low water use plants.
   (4)   To promote compatibility and continuity between different land uses
located in proximity to each other.
   (5)   To prevent objectionable light sources and light pollution of the
night sky.
   (6)   To provide attractive streetscapes on all road and street rights of
way.
   (7)   To protect privacy and the enjoyment of property.
   (8)   To promote energy conservation. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.22.102: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all applications requiring a class II, class III,
class IV or class V use application approval. The requirements of this chapter
shall be considered in all land use application reviews, as well as the
landscaping and outdoor lighting requirements of chapter 19 of this title.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.22.103: LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS:
This chapter provides no specific requirements, standards or regulations for
site and building landscaping that may typically be provided by a land use
ordinance, including minimum planting requirements, plant locations and sizes,
required plant materials, and minimum berming and screening standards. Rather,
the city defers to the skills, talents and abilities of registered landscape
architects to provide site and building landscaping to achieve the purposes of
this chapter and this title. For guidance, the general provisions contained in
chapter 19 of this title are provided for reference, as well as the following
landscape design principles:
   (1)   Landscape plans should achieve the following purposes:
      (a)   Preserve and complement the desert character of the natural
landscape, mitigate building and parking lot impact, add aesthetic charm,
interest and character, and conserve water.
      (b)   Provide visual interest and variety.
      (c)   Provide necessary screening elements.
      (d)   Add year round site beautification.
      (e)   Blend with the natural landscape.
      (f)   Highlight building design features.
      (g)   Conserve water.
   (2)   Landscape plans and landscape features shall demonstrate and provide:
      (a)   Necessary landscape buffers between dissimilar or conflicting land
uses. Landscape buffers shall be provided for off street parking and service
areas, and these areas shall be screened from public streets.
      (b)   A soft landscape transitional treatment when manmade areas and
features adjoin areas of natural open space.
      (c)   Use of plants and site materials consistent with, and of a similar
scale with, existing natural desert landscape, neighboring landscape, and
adjacent streetscape areas where appropriate. Drought tolerant "xeriscape"
desert landscaping is encouraged. Landscaping improvements may also include
berming, contouring, rocks and boulders.
      (d)   Use of vegetation native to southern Utah or desert environments.
      (e)   Use of landscape designs and plant materials necessary to establish
a coordinated relationship to any existing or proposed streetscape plantings.
The size and spacing of landscape elements shall also be of appropriate scale
and character to all proposed site structures and features.
      (f)   Streetscape buffers to provide areas of landscape materials located
on the perimeter of the development site. All streetscape buffer areas shall:
         (i)   Be designed to provide the public with an open view of scenic
vistas.
         (ii)   Blend with the natural and neighboring environment to provide a
pleasant experience for the public.
         (iii)   Be designed to be consistent with neighboring streetscape and
right of way areas.
         (iv)   Be encouraged to be uneven and creative with varied setbacks.
      (g)   When walls, fences and barriers are located adjacent to public
rights of way that create a continuous surface greater than twenty feet (20')
in length, landscape and planting treatments shall be provided to visually
soften the wall, fence or barrier.
      (h)   Efficient long term maintenance. Landscape plans shall demonstrate
that long term maintenance factors have been considered in the landscape
design. For example, irrigation systems shall be designed to achieve low
maintenance and efficient water consumption. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.22.104: [RESERVED]:
(Ord. 2021-02, 2021)
16.22.105: [RESERVED]:
(Ord. 2021-02, 2021)
CHAPTER 23
OUTDOOR LIGHTING
SECTION:
16.23.101: Purpose
16.23.102: Scope And Applicability
16.23.103: Interpretation
16.23.104: Definitions
16.23.105: General Standards And Criteria
16.23.106: Outdoor Site Lighting Plan Submittal Requirements
16.23.107: Lighting Of Drive-Through Facilities And Gas Island Canopies
16.23.108: Review Procedures
16.23.109: Approval Procedure
16.23.110: Appeal Procedure
16.23.111: Enforcement
16.23.101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the quantity and level of lighting
necessary for safety, security and the enjoyment of outdoor living while
protecting and preserving the beauty of the night sky. The type of lighting and
the location of lighting fixtures are key components of effective lighting. It
is the intent of this chapter to effectively light areas with lighting fixtures
that limit glare and direct light onto the area to be lit.
The purpose of this chapter is to assist in implementing the Ivins City General
Plan that includes the following Vision Statement:
“Ivins is a City that values and preserves its scenic beauty and provides a
variety of intellectual, educational, cultural, recreational, historic and
economic opportunities to its diverse population and visitors. Ivins is a
vibrant community that preserves a high quality of life for residents while
promoting a resort character.”
Effective outdoor lighting enhances the City's character and identity, promotes
a pleasant and soft ambiance, protects astronomical observations, and provides
safety and security for persons and property.
Outdoor lighting has a number of functions, it must promise immediate good
vision and orientation so that an area is usable and safe at night. By means of
placement and intensity, lighting is also used to guide pedestrian and
vehicular movement and highlight areas where traffic conflicts. Lighting is
also used for architectural emphasis and effect, to attract business, and to
give a site a particular "personality". All area lighting has the ultimate
purpose of providing visibility. Good visibility is achieved through the
interaction of intensity, direction, and reflection of light so that an
observer can immediately translate received light into terms of shapes,
surfaces, distance and movement.
In order to effectively regulate these activities, communities are empowered to
establish regulations and standards for all outdoor lighting. This chapter
contains standards and guidelines to maintain appropriate levels of lighting
for safety and security while preserving, protecting, and enhancing the "night
sky" in Ivins City.
This chapter, and any rules, regulations and specifications hereafter adopted,
is initiated for the following purposes:
   (1)   To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (2)   To preserve, protect, and enhance the natural beauty of the "night
sky".
   (3)   To encourage and promote the conservation of energy resources.
   (4)   To maintain and enhance property values.
   (5)   To adopt clear standards for all outdoor lighting and to inform the
public of those standards.
   (6)   To implement the goals and objectives of the Ivins City General Plan.
   (7)   To implement the goals and objectives of the Ivins City Design
Guidelines and Standard Specifications for Design and Construction.
   (8)   To eliminate light trespass onto abutting properties.
   (9)   To promote appropriate business.
   (10)   To allow flexibility for creative lighting.
   (11)   To avoid duplicate lighting sources.
   (12)   To enhance community image.
   (13)   To comply with adopted state energy codes.
(Ord. 2007-11, 2007; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 2021; Ord. 2021-12, 2021)
16.23.102: SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY:
This chapter, together with the Ivins City General Plan, Ivins City Zoning
Ordinance, Ivins City Subdivision Ordinance, Ivins City Design Guidelines, and
Ivins City Standard Specifications for Design and Construction shall guide
outdoor lighting within the municipal boundaries of the City. This chapter does
not apply to indoor lighting.
(Ord. 2007-11, 2007; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 2021; Ord. 2021-12, 2021)
16.23.103: INTERPRETATION:
   (1)   Greater Restrictions Prevail. In their interpretation and application,
the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as minimum requirements.
Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than any
statute, other regulations, ordinance or covenant, the provisions of this
chapter shall prevail whenever legally allowed. Where the provisions of any
statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant impose greater restrictions
than the provision of this chapter, the provisions of such statute, other
regulation, ordinance or covenant shall prevail.
   (2)   Definitions. Whenever any word or phrase used in this chapter is not
defined herein, but is defined in related sections of the Utah Code or in the
Ivins Municipal Code, such definition is incorporated herein and shall apply as
though set forth herein in full, unless the context clearly indicates a
contrary intention. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, words used in
the present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural, the
term "shall" is always mandatory and the term "may" is permissive.
   (3)   Severability of Parts. The various sections, subparagraphs, sentences,
phrases and clauses of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
such part of this chapter is declared to be invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction or is amended or deleted by the City Council, all remaining parts
shall remain valid and in force.
(Ord. 2007-11, 2007; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 2021; Ord. 2021-12, 2021)
16.23.104: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used
in the interpretation and construction of this chapter. Words used in the
present tense include the future; the singular includes the plural; the word
"shall" is mandatory and not directory; the word "may" is permissive. Words
used in this chapter, but not defined herein, shall have the meaning first as
defined in any other ordinance adopted by the City and then its common,
ordinary meaning.
BOLLARD: A post-shaped light fixture that is useful along pathways, garden
borders and other areas that require definition at night. These fixtures cast
light downward in a full three hundred and sixty degree (360°)-pattern or have
half lenses that confine illumination to one hundred and eighty degrees (180°).
Bollards shall use cut-off optics.
BACKLIGHTED SIGN OR LETTERING: An internally illuminated sign or lettering with
an opaque front and an open or translucent back, that is illuminated. Light is
directed against a surface behind the letter, producing a halo effect. Also
known as a silhouette or halo lighted.
Examples of Internally Illuminated Backlighted (Silhouette or Halo) Signs:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4143.png]
CORRELATED COLOR TEMPERATURE (CCT): A measure of light source color appearance,
expressed in kelvins (K), ranging from one thousand degrees kelvin (1,000°K) to
ten thousand degrees kelvin (10,000°K). The following table provides examples
to help in understanding the approximation of these colors.
Temperature Source
Temperature       Source
1,700°K          Match flame, low pressure sodium lamps.
1,850°K          Candle flame, sunset/sunrise
2,200°K          High Pressure Sodium lamps, (Ivins Standard Streetlight
                  Color)
2,400°K - 2,700°Standard incandescent lamps
2,700°K - 3,000°"Soft white" or "warm white" LED lamps
4,000° K         Clear metal halide lamps, "Cool white" LED lamps
4,500° - 5,500°K"Daylight" LED lamps
5,000° K         Direct sunlight
6,000° K         Cloudy Sky
10,0'00° K       Blue Sky
 
CUT-OFF FIXTURE: The IES definition of a shielded luminaire where less than two
and a half percent (2.5%) of the light is emitted above ninety degrees (90 )
above horizontal, for purposes of this chapter. Also see definition for full
cut-off fixture.
DESIGN GUIDELINES: The document adopted by the City Council to direct and guide
the aesthetics of development in Ivins City.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARDS: Includes, but is not limited to, digital signage,
LED sign message boards, scrolling LED sign, and programmable electronic
message signs. Excluded: open/closed signs; message boards for traffic that may
be used for special events approved by Ivins City.
EXISTING OUTDOOR LIGHTING: All existing outdoor lighting located on a subject
property that is part of a land use application or building permit.
EXTERIOR ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign that is illuminated by a light that is
directed towards and shines on the face of a sign; also called direct
illumination.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4157.png]
FLOODLIGHT: A fixture designed to "flood" a well-defined area with light.
FRONT LIGHTED LETTERING OR SIGN: An internally illuminated sign or lettering
with a translucent face.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4159.png]
FLUORESCENT LAMP: A Long Arc lamp that uses the fluorescence of a phosphor to
produce visible light.
FOOT-CANDLE (fc): A standard unit of measure used to specify illuminance; how
much light is falling per square foot onto a surface. One (1) foot-candle of
illumination arises when one (1) lumen is spread onto one (1) square foot of
surface. The amount of light striking a surface, measured by a light meter.
FULL CUT-OFF FIXTURE: The IES definition of a shielded luminaire where none of
the light is emitted above ninety degrees (90 ) above horizontal, for purposes
of this chapter. Additionally, this requires the luminaire to have a flat lens
and may not be angled more than one degree (1 ) from horizontal. Also see
definition for cut-off fixture.
FULLY SHIELDED FIXTURE: A fixture with an opaque housing or attachment which
prevents a line of sight to the bulb when viewed from another property and
which prevents a line of sight to any part of the light source at or above a
horizontal plane running through the lowest portion of the fixture.
GENERAL PLAN: The document that sets forth general guidelines for proposed
future development of the land within the municipality that includes what is
also commonly referred to as a "Master Plan".
GLARE: Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to reduce
a viewer's ability to see, and in extreme cases causing momentary blindness.
HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRE: The (mounting) height of a luminaire shall be measured as
the vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the
luminaire to the lowest direct light emitting part of the luminaire. When the
luminaire is provided with shielding the height may be measured on the based on
the level where shielding is thee hundred and sixty degrees (360 ) around the
fixture.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4149.png]
 
HIGH-INTENSITY DISCHARGE (HID) LAMP: Family of bulb type that produces
illumination by passing an electric current through a gas, also referred to as
a "gas discharge lamp". HID includes low and high-pressure sodium, mercury
vapor, and metal halide.
HIGH-PRESSURE SODIUM (HPS) LAMP: An HID lamp where light is produced from a
mixture of mercury and sodium at high pressure. The lamp produces a yellow or
amber effect.
HOME ACCENT LIGHTING: Lighting of building surfaces, landscape features, statue
and similar items for the purpose of decoration and ornamentation and that does
not have as its primary function the safety and security of persons or
property.
IES: The Illuminating Engineering Society, the ANSI accredited standards
writing body for lighting definitions and recommended practices cited in this
chapter.
ILLUMINANCE: The intensity of light per unit of area.
INCANDESCENT LAMP: A lamp in which the light is produced by a filament of
conducting material contained in a vacuum and heated by an electric current.
INITIAL LUMENS: The amount of light emitted by a lamp after one hundred (100)
hours of operation.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: A light source contained within the sign provides
its illumination. This includes both backlighted and front lighted signs as
defined in these definitions.
KELVIN: The unit of measurement of color temperature of light appearance
provided by a light bulb. See definition of correlated color temperature (CCT).
LAMP: The electric bulb or tube within a luminaire that produces the actual
light.
LASER SOURCE LIGHT: A device containing a substance the majority of whose atoms
or molecules can be put into an excited energy state, allowing the substance to
emit coherent light in an intense narrow beam.
LED LAMP: The LED light bulb is an electric light for use in light fixtures
that produces light using one or more light emitting diodes. The lamp color can
be manufactured in a broader spectrum.
LIGHT POLLUTION: Occurs when night lighting is emitted upwards and obstructs
the view of the night sky.
LIGHT SOURCE: The lamp and lens, diffuser, or reflective enclosure, also known
as a luminaire.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Occurs when outdoor night lighting encroaches onto adjacent
properties and/or adjacent public properties. See also Spill Light.
LIGHTING FIXTURE: The assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system. It
includes the elements designed to give light output control, such as a
reflector (mirror) or refractor (lens), the ballast, housing, and the
attachment parts.
LOW-PRESSURE SODIUM (LPS) LAMP: An HID lamp where the light is produced by
radiation from sodium vapor at a relatively low pressure. The lamp produces a
yellowish light.
LUMEN: The standard unit used to measure the brightness of the illumination
exiting a lamp, provided by the manufacturer.
LUMINAIRE: A structure that holds an electric lamp and its socket, wiring, and
auxiliaries, such as ballasts, reflectors, lenses and attachment parts.
MEAN LUMENS: The amount of light emitted by a lamp at the end of useful life.
Used for calculation of illuminance demonstrating compliance with these
requirements, unless noted differently.
MERCURY VAPOR LAMP: An HID lamp where the light is produced by radiation from
mercury vapor. The lamp produces a blue/green light.
METAL-HALIDE LAMP: An HID lamp where the light is produced by radiation from
metal-halide vapors. The lamp produces a crystal white light. Lamp may be
coated or uncoated by a phosphor.
NEON LAMP: A discharge tube filled with luminous gas (neon, argon, xenon or
other gasses). Tubes are often formed into text, symbols or decorative elements
and produce lights of various colors. Replaceable fluorescent lamps are not
included in this definition.
NON-CONFORMING LUMINAIRES: Luminaires that do not conform to this chapter but
existed at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING: The nighttime illumination of an outside area or object by
any handmade device located outdoors that produces light by any means.
PHOTOMETRICS: A branch of science that deals with the measurement of the
intensity of light or of relative illuminating power in terms of perceived
brightness to the human eye. Photometric measurements are crucial in the
quality control and development of any lighting that is to be utilized in a
human environment.
PLASMA LAMP: High-efficiency Plasma (HEP): High efficiency plasma lighting is
the class of plasma lamps that have system efficiencies of ninety (90) lumens
per watt or more.
SAFETY LIGHTING: Low-level lighting used to illuminate vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
SECURITY LIGHTING: Lighting designed to illuminate a property or grounds for
the purpose of visual security. This includes fully shielded lighting designed
to remain on during nighttime hours in the absence of business activity as well
as motion sensing lighting fixtures.
SPILL LIGHT: Undesired light falling beyond the desired and allowable target.
See Light Trespass.
SPORTS LIGHTING: Lighting designed for active recreation, whether publicly or
privately owned, including but not limited to, parks, baseball and softball
diamonds, soccer and football fields, golf courses, tennis courts, roping/
equestrian activities and swimming pools: requires special construction permit.
SPOTLIGHT: Any lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate
the light output into a directed beam of less than twenty-five degrees (25 ) in
a particular direction.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION: The standards and
construction requirements for improvements as published by Ivins City, most
recent edition.
STREET LIGHTING: Lighting installed by or at the direction of a governmental
agency to illuminate public roadways and adjacent walking surfaces.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE: The Ivins City Subdivision Ordinance as presently
adopted and as amended hereafter by the City Council.
TEMPERATURE: See definition for correlated color temperature.
UP-LIGHTING: Direct light emitted above the horizontal. See Light Pollution.
VISIBLE LIGHT SOURCE: The light source represents the bulb or lamp that is
generating the illumination. If the illuminated parts of the bulb or lamp are
not visible because it is behind a filtered or unfiltered lens, then the lens
itself would represent the visible light source.
WATT: The standard unit used for measuring the amount of electrical energy
used.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: Ivins City Staff that is designated by the City Manager
to administer provisions of this chapter.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The City Zoning Ordinance as presently adopted and as amended
hereafter by the City Council.
(Ord. 2007-11, 2007; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 2021; Ord. 2021-12, 2021)
16.23.105: GENERAL STANDARDS AND CRITERIA:
Listed herein are standards and criteria for lighting. It is important to note
that the intent of this section is to effectively regulate lighting, and it is
not the intent of this section to limit creative lighting solutions. Creative
approaches to lighting are encouraged and viable alternatives to these
standards and guidelines may be substituted if the alternatives can be
demonstrated to meet the intent of this chapter and do not otherwise violate
this chapter.
   (1)   Type of Lights Recommended: LED Lamps and other lighting technologies,
current or future, that have similar or better energy efficiencies.
   (2)   Conformance with Applicable Codes. All outdoor electrically powered
illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of
this chapter, Building Codes, the Electrical Code, and Sign Ordinance, with
appropriate permits and inspection. Reference applicable IES publications.
   (3)   Color/Temperature: Warm lighting colors are required and blue-white
colors are generally prohibited. In this regard, all outdoor light shall meet
the following:
      (a)   For non-residential properties, private streets and parking lot
lighting: The correlated color temperature (CCT) of outdoor lamps shall be
three thousand degrees Kelvin (3,000°K) or less.
      (b)   For residential properties, the correlated color temperature (CCT)
of all outdoor lamps shall be three thousand degrees Kelvin (3,000°K) or less.
   (4)   Light Trespass. All light fixtures, including security lighting, shall
be aimed and shielded so that the direct illumination shall be confined to the
property boundaries of the light source. Direct illumination shall not fall
onto or across any public or private street or road. No spill lighting is
permitted.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4151.png]
 
   (5)   Fully Shielded Fixtures. All outdoor lighting shall be full cut-off
fixtures fully shielded with fixtures installed and aimed in such a way so that
no direct light is emitted above the horizontal or trespassing into adjacent
properties including the adjacent street. Shielding may be accomplished by:
full cut-off fixtures; design; shielding; visors; louvers; or other devices.
See examples of shielding in Figures 23-2 and 23-3.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4153.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4155.png]
 
   (6)   Spotlights. Spotlights shall be shielded, aimed or directed toward the
ground and no light shall trespass into a neighboring property or create direct
glare for motorists.
   (7)   Searchlights, Floodlights, etc. Searchlights, floodlights, laser
source lights, strobe, or flashing lights, illusion lights, or any similar high
intensity light shall not be permitted except in emergencies by public safety
personnel or at their direction.
   (8)   Site Shielding. In certain cases, additional shielding may be required
to mitigate glare or light trespass. The need for additional shielding shall be
considered as part of the development review process described in the Ivins
City Subdivision Ordinance.
   (9)   Up-lighting. Up-lighting (light pollution) is prohibited unless the
light is shielded in a manner that confines the light to the surface of a
building façade or other object of illumination, without spill light.
   (10)   Light Curfews.
      (a)   Commercial and industrial lighting shall be turned off within
thirty (30) minutes of close of business, except that lighting within forty
(40) feet of a building, outside display areas, or other areas requiring
security lighting shall not exceed two (2) initial lumens per square foot.
      (b)   Lighting for signage, except monument signs, shall be turned off
thirty (30) minutes after the close of business.
      (c)   Sports lighting shall be turned off by eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.,
except to conclude a specific sporting event that is underway.
   (11)   Landscape Lighting. The primary function of landscape lighting is to
provide illumination for pathways, steps, and entrances to buildings.
      (a)   Pathway Lighting. The intent of pathway lights is to provide pools
of light to help direct pedestrians along the path, not to fully illuminate the
path. Steps and path intersections should be illuminated for safety. The
maximum average foot-candle permitted on the ground is an average one (1)
horizontal foot-candle or less. Two (2) types of lights may be selected: three
and one half (3'6") foot bollards with louvers or ten (10) foot pole mounted
down directed luminaires. Lights must be shielded.
      (b)   Highlighting, Backlighting. Only low voltage systems are permitted.
Lights must be shielded so that it is not visible beyond the property boundary.
A maximum foot-candle permitted at ten (10) feet is 0.6 horizontal foot-candles
from the light source. Up-lighting is prohibited except where demonstrated to
be non-polluting at a power density of two hundred and fifty (250) lumens per
ten (10) square feet of landscape area.
      (c)   The lighting of vegetation and other landscape features shall
comply with the regulations established in this chapter.
      (d) The regulations contained in this section
16.23.105(11) shall apply to Home Accent Lighting.
   (12)   Lighting of Flags.
      (a)   U.S. Code states that:
      “It is the universal custom to display the flag only from sunrise to
sunset on buildings and flagstaffs in the open. However, when a patriotic
effect is desired, the flag may be displayed twenty-four hours a day if
properly illuminated during the hours of darkness.”
      (b)   The lighting of Federal or State flags shall be permitted provided
that the light is a narrow beam spotlight rather than a floodlight, carefully
aimed to avoid creating a source of glare (maximum lumen output of 1500 lumens
per pole).
   (13)   Security Lighting. Appropriate security lighting is allowed in
compliance with the general provisions of this chapter including shielding,
direction, color, and measurement.
      (a)   Commercial. Security lighting is permitted within forty feet (40')
of a building, in outside display areas, or other areas requiring such
lighting. Security lighting may remain on after the close of business for
security purposes, reduced to defined illuminance levels.
      (b)   Residential. All security lighting shall be fully shielded with a
motion sensor set on a five (5) minute timer. Infrared sensor spotlights are
the recommended light type for security. The lighting shall not be triggered by
activity off the property.
   (14)   Roadway/Streetlights/Trails. All streetlights shall be in accordance
with Ivins City Standard Specifications except as indicated below for non-
standard lighting.
      (a)   Full Cut-off Fixtures. All new lighting for streets or highways
shall be full cut-off fixtures.
      (b)   Light Source. Streetlights shall preferably use LED lighting.
      (c)   Height. Streetlights shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') in
height.
      (d)   Non-Standard Poles. Metal poles that are used to mount light
fixtures shall be painted black, brown, or other colors that blend with the
surrounding terrain. Fiberglass poles shall be likewise painted or
intrinsically colored. Wooden poles shall be naturally stained or painted in
colors that blend with the surrounding terrain.
      (e)   Non-complying Streetlights. Existing street and highway lights that
do not meet the requirements of this chapter shall be brought into compliance
as part of the Ivins City Capital Facilities Improvements Plan as funds become
available.
      (f)   Location. Roadway and streetlights, as a minimum, should be placed:
         (i)   At intersections and crosswalks on major collector streets and
arterials unless within one hundred and twenty-five feet (125') of an adjacent
streetlight.
         (ii)   At intersections and crosswalks on minor collector or
residential collector streets unless within two hundred and fifty feet (250')
of an adjacent streetlight.
      (g)   Exceptions: Exceptions may be made by the City Engineer or Public
Works Director if crosswalks and street signs along collector and arterial
streets are provided with alternative lighting as proposed by a developer.
   (15)   Trails. Trails lighting shall be low-level bollards (below eye level
where possible), shielded, and designed to meet all requirements established in
this chapter and in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Design and
Construction. Bollards shall not be necessary where trail is within one hundred
feet (100') of a streetlight. Other low-level lighting alternatives shall be
considered during the development process on a case by case basis.
   (16)   Project Entrance Lighting. The design of the fixtures shall blend
with the general theme of the project, project signage, and should be
integrated into entry landscaping as approved by the development process.
   (17)   Parking Lots
      (a)   Full cut-off fixtures. All lighting shall be full cut-off fixtures
as defined by The Illuminating Engineering Society (IES).
      (b)   Appropriate location. Entrances, exits, and barriers should be
emphasized.
      (c)   Integrate with landscaping. All parking lot lighting should be
integrated into landscape areas wherever possible.
      (d)   Height. Height of parking area light poles should be in proportion
to the building mass and height, and shall be no more than fourteen (14) feet
above the parking lot surface.
      (e)   Maximum. A maximum of two (2) initial lumens per square foot of
parking lot surface is permitted.
      (f)   Shielding. All lighting shall be shielded and even modified, if
necessary, such that parking lot lighting does not light trespass onto adjacent
properties or into the adjacent streets. A properly shielded fixture would have
not visible glare spots until a person or vehicle enters the property of the
parking lot.
      (g)   Spot or floodlighting prohibited. Spot or floodlighting of parking
lots from a building or other structure is not permitted.
      (h)   Compliance required. Parking lot lighting shall comply with all
other requirements of this chapter.
      (i)   Metal Poles. If metal poles are used to mount light fixtures they
shall be painted black, brown, or other colors that blend with the surrounding
terrain.
      (j)   Wooden Poles. Wooden poles shall be naturally stained or painted in
earth tones.
   (18)   Sports Facility Lighting.
      (a)   All sports lighting shall be fully shielded, or be designed or
provided with sharp, cut-off capability, so as to minimize up-light, spill
light, and glare.
      (b)   All sports lighting shall be turned off within thirty (30) minutes
of the completion of the last game, practice, or event. In no case shall
recreational lighting occur after eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. except to
conclude a specific sporting event that is underway.
      (c)   IES Certificate. All new sports lighting fixtures shall not exceed
the minimum standard illumination levels for sports lighting as established by
IES. All new sports lighting shall require site specific computer calculations
and a printout demonstrating that such lighting meets IES standards and does
not otherwise violate this chapter, including required time of day and lighting
curfew.
      (d)   Compliance. All sports lighting shall meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   (19)   Residential Lighting.
      (a)   All exterior luminaires on porches, garages, and entryways shall be
fully shielded to prevent glare onto adjacent property or public right of ways
and light pollution into the night sky. Luminaires shall be directed at
walkways or entries and shall not be directed upward.
      (b)   Security lighting shall be in compliance with paragraph (13) above.
      (c)   Private sport court facilities shall use fully shielded fixtures
that prevents light trespass onto adjacent properties. Use of the lights after
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M is prohibited. Pole height for mounting fixtures
shall not exceed twenty feet (20') above the surface of the court.
      (d)   All sports lighting poles shall be painted black, brown, or other
colors that blend with the surrounding terrain.
   (20)   Signs. Signs, including directional, project entrance, free standing,
building, and monuments signs shall comply with the following requirements:
      (a)   Shielded. All lighting fixtures shall be aimed and shielded so that
light is directed only onto the sign façade and not aimed at adjacent streets,
roads, or properties.
      (b)   Mounting. Lighting fixtures shall be mounted so as to light only
the sign. Lighting fixtures producing more than 1800 initial lumens must, and
all lighting is encouraged to, be mounted above sign and directed downward
towards sign.
      (c)   Maximum. A maximum of forty (40) initial lumens per square foot of
sign surface is permitted. This figure is the total amount of initial lumens
produced by all lamps used to illuminate the sign, divided by the area of the
sign    
      (d)   Internally Illuminated Signs. Are preferred to spot lighted signs,
either backlit (halo) or front lit signs are allowed as long as there is no
glare and the sign meets the maximum lumens restriction above.
      (e)   Signs in residential zones. Signs that abut residential zones shall
be designed, placed, and landscaped in such a manner so that the lighting does
not trespass onto residential properties
      (f)   Signs in commercial zones. Signs shall have no visible light source
and only low intensity lighting.
   (21)   Exempt Lighting. The following lighting shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter:
      (a)   Holiday lighting, as long as it does not create a hazard or
nuisance from glare.
      (b)   Traffic control signals and devices.
      (c)   Temporary emergency lighting in use by law enforcement or
government agencies or at their direction.
      (d)   Temporary lighting, used for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
days in any one (1) year period for festivals, celebrations, or other public
activities.
      (e)   Temporary construction lighting used for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days in any one (1) year period.
   (22)   Prohibited Lighting. The following lighting shall be prohibited:
      (a)   Unshielded lighting. Unshielded lighting for any purpose is
prohibited.
      (b)   Flashing, blinking, intermittent lights. Flashing, blinking,
intermittent lights or other lights that move or give the impression of
movement, are prohibited. Holiday lighting is permitted.
      (c)   Building mounted lights under most conditions. Spotlights may not
be affixed to buildings for the purpose of lighting parking lots or sales
display lot areas. Fully shielded fixtures may be attached to buildings to
light walkways and parking lot spaces adjacent to buildings.
      (d)   Laser lighting. All laser lighting is prohibited.
      (e)   Searchlights. All searchlights are prohibited.
      (f)   Neon. All neon lighting must be shielded.
      (g)   Fluorescent Tube Lights. All outdoor use of fluorescent tube lights
is prohibited.
      (h)   Electronic Message Boards.
      (i)   On-premise digital signs.
(Ord. 2007-11, 2007; amd. Ord. 2018-18, 2019; Ord. 2021-02, 2021; Ord. 2021-12,
2021)
16.23.106: OUTDOOR SITE LIGHTING PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
Site and building lighting plans shall be provided for all class II, class III,
class IV and class V use applications identifying all proposed site and
building lighting and identifying the type, design, location, intensity, height
and direction of all site and building lighting. A photometric plan of the
site, including all site and building light, may be required by the land use
authority, necessary to review compliance with this section.
For guidance, the general provisions contained in chapter 19 of this title are
provided for reference. All class II, class III, class IV and class V use
applications shall be found to comply with the following:
(1)   To protect the night sky, all outside lighting shall be "downlighting"
and no lighting shall be allowed to trespass, or spill onto, any adjoining
properties.
(2)   All exterior lighting should provide for the illumination of buildings
and grounds for safety purposes, but in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
(3)   Warm lighting colors are required to conform with Section 16.23.105,
Paragraph (3) of this chapter.
(4)   All exterior lighting shall be reduced to the minimum levels necessary
for safety and security purposes. The use of motion sensors is encouraged and
may be required.
(5)    All wa lkw ay light ing shou ld be pr ovid ed belo w eye lev el to dir
ect lig ht do wn wa rd ont o the walkway surface.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4161.png]
 
   (6)   No indoor lighting shall be provided or constructed to provide
lighting for any outdoor areas.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 2021; Ord. 2021-12, 2021)
16.23.107: LIGHTING OF DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES AND GAS ISLAND CANOPIES:
All lighting for drive-through facilities and canopies associated with gasoline
pumps shall be "down lighting" and provided so that all lighting fixtures are
recessed at least six inches (6") above the bottom of the outside skirt of any
drive-through facility or canopy.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4163.png]
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 2021; Ord. 2021-12, 2021)
16.23.108: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
   (1)   Single-Family Residential. All single-family home outdoor lighting
shall comply with this chapter.
   (2)   Multi-Family Residential and Commercial. Lighting plans are required.
All building plans, commercial sign permit applications, conditional use
permits, and subdivision applications shall include a detailed lighting plan
that shows evidence that the proposed lighting fixtures and light sources
comply with this chapter.
      (a)   Lighting plans shall include the following:
         (i)   Plans or drawings indicating the proposed location of lighting
fixtures, height of lighting fixtures, and type of illumination devices, lamps,
supports, shielding, and reflectors used along with installation and electrical
details.
         (ii)   Illustrations, such as those contained in a manufacturer's
catalog, of all proposed lighting fixtures.
         (iii)   Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers,
showing illumination levels in wattage and lumens per lamp and lighting
fixture.
         (iv)   Total initial lumens for the developed area.
         (v)   Initial lumens for any specialized lighting.
         (vi)   Initial lumens per square foot of externally illuminated sign
surface.
         (vii)   Site specific computer calculations for all parking lots,
sports fields, and similar large-scale lighted areas. Include assumptions,
depreciation factors, complete calculation areas and summary information.
   (3)   Evidence of Compliance with Codes. All lighting plans shall include
certification by a licensed electrical engineer that the lighting fixtures
proposed by the plan conform to the requirements of this chapter, Building and
Electrical Codes.
(Ord. 2007-11, 2007; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 2021; Ord. 2021-12, 2021)
16.23.109: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   (1)   Small Scale Applications. Lighting plans for developments of one (1)
acre or less shall be approved by the Ivins City Zoning Administrator.
   (2)   New Development. New development applications shall include a detailed
lighting plan that will be approved as part of the development approval in
compliance with the Ivins City Subdivision Ordinance, the conditional use
permit, or the building permit.
   (3)   Sign Applications. Sign applications shall include a detailed lighting
plan that will be approved as part of the sign application approval.
   (4)   Compliance with this chapter. All lighting approvals shall be granted
only in compliance with this chapter.
   (5)   Suspension, Revocation, or Modifications to the Lighting Plan. The
Zoning Administrator may suspend, revoke, or require modification of any
lighting plan that is not in compliance with this chapter.
   (6)   Lamp or Fixture Substitution. If any outdoor light fixture or the type
of light source therein is proposed to be changed after a lighting plan has
been approved, a change request must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
for approval. Adequate information to assure compliance with all codes must be
provided and the change request must be received prior to substitution.
(Ord. 2007-11, 2007; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 2021; Ord. 2021-12, 2021)
16.23.110: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
The applicant or any person aggrieved by a final decision, determination, or
requirement imposed regarding this chapter may appeal according to the
provisions set forth in Chapter 30 of the Ivins City Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 2007-11, 2007; amd. Ord. 2021-02, 2021; Ord. 2021-12, 2021)
16.23.111: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter shall only apply prospectively from the date
they were adopted and not retroactively. Outdoor lighting that conformed with
Ivins City ordinances prior to the adoption of a provision of this chapter
shall be treated similarly to a legal nonconforming use that can be maintained
or replaced but not expanded. Where applicable, the Ivins City Zoning
Administrator is authorized as the enforcing officer for this chapter, and
shall enforce all applicable provisions, entering actions in court if
necessary, and his failure to do so shall not legalize any violations of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2021-02, 2021; Ord. 2021-12, 2021)
CHAPTER 24
RESERVED
CHAPTER 25
NONCONFORMING USES, NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES AND OTHER NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
16.25.101: Purpose
16.25.102: Nonconforming Uses
16.25.103: Noncomplying Structures
16.25.104: Termination Of Nonconforming Use Due To Abandonment
16.25.105: Noncomplying Lots
16.25.106: Noncomplying Signs
16.25.107: Appeal
16.25.101: PURPOSE:
This chapter is provided to establish procedures for determining the existence
of a legal nonconforming use, a legal noncomplying structure, or other legal
nonconformity, including noncomplying lots and signs, as required by the act.
(Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.25.102: NONCONFORMING USES:
   (1)   A nonconforming use may be continued by the present or future property
owner.
   (2)   As allowed by the act, a legal nonconforming use may be extended
through the same building, provided no structural alteration of the building is
proposed or made for the purposes of the extension. For the purposes of this
subsection, the addition of a solar energy device to a building shall not be
considered a structural alteration. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
   (3)   As allowed by the act, the owner of a parcel of property on which a
nonconforming use exists may apply for a conditional use permit for a legal
conforming use on the same parcel of property as the nonconforming use.
Examples of legal conforming uses that may be allowed would be for a separate
structure used for a legal conforming use and/or expanded parking to eliminate
the need for vehicles related to the nonconforming use to park on a public
street. (Ord. 2016-06, 2016)
   (4)   The city may require the termination of a legal nonconforming use by
providing a formula establishing a reasonable time period during which the
owner can recover or amortize the amount of his investment in the nonconforming
use.
   (5)   The city may not terminate a nonconforming use of a structure that is
involuntarily destroyed in whole or in part due to fire or other calamity
unless the use has been abandoned.
   (6)   A nonconforming use of a structure shall terminate if:
      (a)   The structure is allowed to deteriorate to a condition that the
structure is rendered uninhabitable and is not repaired or restored within six
(6) months after written notice is provided to the property owner, by the
zoning administrator or building official, that the structure is uninhabitable
and that the nonconforming use will be lost if the structure is not repaired or
restored within six (6) months.
      (b)   The property owner has voluntarily demolished a majority of the
building that houses the nonconforming use.
      (c)   A nonconforming use may only be changed to a use allowed by the
tables of uses, chapter 33 of this title, for the zoning district in which the
property is located by following the approval procedures for such new use, as
required by this title and all other land use ordinances. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.25.103: NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES:
   (1)   A noncomplying structure may be continued by the present or future
property owner.
   (2)   The city may not prohibit the reconstruction or restoration of a
noncomplying structure that is involuntarily destroyed in whole or in part due
to fire or other calamity unless the structure has been abandoned.
   (3)   Necessary maintenance and repairs may be made to a legal noncomplying
structure by following the procedures for any approval, permit, or license,
including the issuance of a building permit, for such maintenance and repairs,
as required by all land use ordinances, and building code.
   (4)   A noncomplying structure shall terminate if:
      (a)   The structure is allowed to deteriorate to a condition that the
structure is rendered uninhabitable and is not repaired or restored within six
(6) months after written notice is provided to the property owner, by the
zoning administrator or building official, that the structure is uninhabitable
and that the noncomplying structure will be lost if the structure is not
repaired or restored within six (6) months.
      (b)   The property owner has voluntarily demolished a majority of the
noncomplying structure. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.25.104: TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USE DUE TO ABANDONMENT:
   (1)   Any party claiming a nonconforming use has been abandoned shall have
the burden of establishing the abandonment.
   (2)   Abandonment may be presumed to have occurred if:
      (a)   A majority of the primary structure associated with the
nonconforming use has been voluntarily demolished without prior written
agreement with the city regarding an extension of the nonconforming use;
      (b)   The use has been discontinued for a minimum period of one year; or
      (c)   The primary building associated with the nonconforming use remains
vacant for a minimum period of one year.
   (3)   The property owner may rebut the presumption of abandonment made under
this section and shall have the burden of establishing that any claimed
abandonment under this section has not in fact occurred.
   (4)   The city may terminate the nonconforming use status of a school
district or charter school when the property associated with the school
district or charter school use or structure ceases to be used for school
district or charter school purposes for a minimum period of one year. (Ord.
2007-35, 2008)
16.25.105: NONCOMPLYING LOTS 1 :
This section shall only apply to legal undeveloped lots or parcels.
   (1)   A legal lot of record, or any parcel of record, legally existing on
the date of adoption hereof shall:
      (a)   Be eligible for a building permit authorizing the construction of
one single-family dwelling, even though such lot or parcel may not conform to
the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, provided:
         (i)   That such lot or parcel of land is located in a zoning district
that allows single-family dwellings, and
         (ii)   The proposed construction can qualify for the issuance of a
building permit for a single-family dwelling, as required by the building code,
as adopted. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
 
Notes
  1. See also sections
1 16.11.109 and
  16.11.110 of this title.
16.25.106: NONCOMPLYING SIGNS:
This section shall apply only to signs that were legal on the date of adoption
hereof but which may now be a noncomplying sign.
   (1)   A noncomplying sign shall not be enlarged.
   (2)   A noncomplying sign shall not be moved or replaced, except to bring
the sign into compliance with this title and all other land use ordinances.
   (3)   The text message of a noncomplying sign may be changed if such changes
do not create any new nonconformities or other noncompliance.
   (4)   A noncomplying sign shall be considered abandoned if it advertises a
business, service, commodity, or other activity that has been discontinued for
a minimum period of one year. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.25.107: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator regarding any
matter related to a nonconforming use, noncomplying structure, or other
nonconformity may appeal the decision to the appeal authority designated in
chapter 30 of this title. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
CHAPTER 26
BUILDING CODE AND BUILDING PERMITS
SECTION:
16.26.101: Purpose
16.26.102: Building Permit Required
16.26.103: Building Permit Application
16.26.104: Building Code Compliance
16.26.105: Certificates Of Occupancy
16.26.106: Exemptions
16.26.101: PURPOSE:
The adoption and enforcement of the city building code for the construction of
buildings and structures located within the city serves the public interest by
providing for structural stability, fire resistance, adequate ventilation and
other safety and sanitary features. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.26.102: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (1)   The construction, reconstruction, restoration, extension, alteration,
expansion or enlargement of any building or structure shall not be commenced
until a building permit application is approved, as required by the city's
adopted building code, unless exempt by the building code or state law,
including agricultural buildings to the extent exempted by the provisions of
Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-4, as amended.
   (2)   For any construction exempt from the requirements of the adopted
building code or state law, the building official may require the submission of
information and materials necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of
all land use ordinances, building code and state law. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.26.103: BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION:
   (1)   Application for a building permit shall be presented to the building
official, including all information and materials as required by the adopted
building code.
   (2)   Prior to the issuance of any required building permit, the proposed
use, building or structure shall have received the necessary land use
application approvals, as applicable, and as required by this title, and all
other land use ordinances.
   (3)   Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant may be required
to post a bond, or provide other financial security, in such form and sum as
required by the land use authority, or building official, and approved by the
city attorney, with sufficient surety running to the city to offset any costs
or expenses associated with construction activities on and off the site. (Ord.
2005-13, 2005)
16.26.104: BUILDING CODE COMPLIANCE:
All structures requiring a building permit shall comply with the requirements
of the building code, as adopted by the city. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.26.105: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
A certificate of occupancy (CO) shall be required before any building or
structure, or part thereof, may be used or occupied, as required by the adopted
building code. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued permitting the
occupancy or use of any building or structure unless and until:
   (1)   All construction has been completed, as authorized, if a building
permit is required.
   (2)   The use conforms to the regulations of all land use ordinances and all
other applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations, if no building permit is
required.
   (3)   Payment of all applicable fees and charges, other requirements have
been provided, and all conditions for the establishment of the use, building or
structure have been met. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.26.106: EXEMPTIONS:
The following properties, uses and structures shall, to the extent provided by
state law, be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (1)   Properties owned and operated by the state or federal government.
Where state or federal law requires that the agency take steps to comply with
all applicable local regulations, this exemption shall not be construed to
abrogate that requirement.
   (2)   Agricultural buildings to the extent exempted by the provisions of
Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-4, as amended. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 27
VARIANCES
SECTION:
16.27.101: Purpose
16.27.102: Approval Authority
16.27.103: Application Initiation And Completeness
16.27.104: Variance Application Requirements
16.27.105: Variance Application Review Procedures And Approval Standards
16.27.106: Burden Of Proof
16.27.107: Variance Requirements Authorized
16.27.108: Use Variance Prohibited
16.27.109: Effect Of Granting Variance
16.27.110: Continuing Validity And Expiration
16.27.111: Appeal
16.27.112: Figures
16.27.101: PURPOSE:
This chapter is provided to allow the opportunity for any person desiring a
modification to the requirements of this title, as applied to a parcel of
property to have such request considered, such request being considered a
variance to the requirements of this title, as allowed by the act. (Ord. 2007-
35, 2008)
16.27.102: APPROVAL AUTHORITY:
The appeal authority designated in chapter 30 of this title is authorized to
approve, approve with requirements, or deny all variance applications. (Ord.
2007-35, 2008)
16.27.103: APPLICATION INITIATION AND COMPLETENESS:
   (1)   Requests for a variance shall be made on a variance application.
   (2)   A property owner may present a variance application for review and
decision. An agent of the property owner, or a lessee of the property, may
present a variance application for review and decision, provided such
application is accompanied by a property owner affidavit of authorization.
   (3)   A variance application shall be determined complete by the zoning
administrator, as provided by chapter 13 of this title. For variance
applications determined to be incomplete, the zoning administrator shall comply
with the requirements of chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.27.104: VARIANCE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Applications for a variance shall provide the following information and
materials:
   (1)   A complete variance application.
   (2)   Other information, determined necessary by the applicant, to clearly
establish the need for a variance and compliance with the provisions of section
16.27.105 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.27.105: VARIANCE APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL STANDARDS:
   (1)   The procedures for the review of a variance application are identified
by figure 27-1 in section
16.27.112 of this chapter.
   (2)   The appeal authority may grant a variance only if:
      (a)   Literal enforcement of this title would cause an unreasonable
hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purposes of this title;
      (b)   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do
not generally apply to other properties in the same zoning district;
      (c)   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zoning
district;
      (d)   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and
will not be contrary to the public interests; and
      (e)   The spirit of this title is observed and substantial justice done.
   (3)   In determining whether or not enforcement of this title would cause
unreasonable hardship, as required by subsection (2)(a) of this section, the
appeal authority shall not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged
hardship:
      (a)   Is located on, or associated with the property for which the
variance is sought; and
      (b)   Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, and not from
conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
   (4)   In determining whether enforcement of this title would cause
unreasonable hardship, as required by subsection (2)(a) of this section, the
appeal authority shall not find an unreasonable hardship if the hardship is
self-imposed or economic.
   (5)   In determining whether or not there are special circumstances attached
to the property, as required by subsection (2)(b) of this section, the appeal
authority may find that special circumstances exist only if the special
circumstances:
      (a)   Relate to the hardship complained of; and
      (b)   Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in
the same zoning district.
   (6)   Upon a finding by the appeal authority that the approval standards for
a variance are met, the applicant may present any other necessary use or
building permit applications that may be required by this title, all other land
use ordinances, or the building code, as adopted, as provided by section
16.27.109 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.27.106: BURDEN OF PROOF:
The applicant for a variance shall have the burden of proof that all the
conditions justifying a variance, as required by section
16.27.105 of this chapter, have been met. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.27.107: VARIANCE REQUIREMENTS AUTHORIZED:
In approving a variance, the appeal authority may impose requirements on the
applicant that will:
   (1)   Mitigate any harmful effects of the variance; or
   (2)   Serve the purposes of the standards or requirements that are modified.
(Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.27.108: USE VARIANCE PROHIBITED:
The appeal authority shall not grant any variance that would have the effect of
authorizing a use that is not allowed in the zoning district, or a use that is
prohibited in Ivins City, as identified by the tables of uses, chapter 33 of
this title. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.27.109: EFFECT OF GRANTING VARIANCE:
   (1)   A variance approval by the appeal authority shall run with the land.
   (2)   Following a decision on a variance application, the city recorder or
designee shall provide the applicant with a written notice of the decision. The
written record of all variance applications shall be maintained on file by the
city recorder.
   (3)   The granting of a variance shall not authorize the establishment or
extension of any use, or the development, construction, reconstruction,
alteration or moving of any building or structure, but is a prerequisite to the
filing of an application for an approval, permit or license, required by this
title, all other land use ordinances, and building code. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.27.110: CONTINUING VALIDITY AND EXPIRATION:
See section
16.03.115 of this title. (Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
16.27.111: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the appeal authority regarding any matter
related to a variance may appeal the decision to the district court, as
provided by the act, and as provided by chapter 30 of this title. (Ord. 2007-
35, 2008)
16.27.112: FIGURES:
   FIGURE 27-1
   VARIANCE APPLICATION PROCEDURES
  Application filed with zoning administrator   
  Application filed with zoning           
    administrator
                                        
  Zoning administrator determines
 application completeness (see chapter 13   
  of this title)
                                          
Application determined complete (see   Application determined incomplete (see
chapter 13 of this title)              chapter 13 of this title)
                                           
  Complete application reviewed by appeal
 authority for compliance with              
  requirements of all land use ordinances,
  including this title
                                            
                                            
Application found to comply with
requirements of all land use           Application found to not comply with
ordinances, including this title.      requirements of all land use
Application approved by appeal         ordinances, including this title.
authority, with or without             Application denied by appeal authority
requirements
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2007-35, 2008)
CHAPTER 28
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
SECTION:
16.28.101: Purpose
16.28.102: Approval Authority
16.28.103: Allowed Special Exceptions
16.28.104: Application Initiation And Completeness
16.28.105: Special Exception Application Requirements
16.28.106: Special Exception Application Review Procedures And Approval
Standards
16.28.107: Planning Commission Recommendation Required
16.28.108: Terms And Conditions For Special Exceptions
16.28.109: Effect Of Granting Special Exception
16.28.110: Continuing Validity And Expiration
16.28.111: Special Exception Approval Amendment
16.28.112: Appeal
16.28.101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to allow for activities, clearly associated with
a Class II, Class III, Class IV or Class V use, provided such associated
activity can be properly integrated into the planning, site design, site
layout, building design and building layout, and can be conducted in a manner
that creates no adverse impacts to adjoining uses, properties or the City as a
whole. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.28.102: APPROVAL AUTHORITY:
The City Council, following the receipt of a commission recommendation, is
authorized to review all special exception applications. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.28.103: ALLOWED SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
The following special exceptions may be authorized under the provisions of this
chapter:
   (1)   A height greater than twenty five feet (25') for a primary residential
building, as required by subsection
16.11.126(1) of this title.
   (2)   A height greater than thirty five feet (35') for a primary commercial
and industrial building, as required by subsection
16.11.126(3) of this title. (Ord. 2012-02, 2012)
   (3)   A gross building area greater than those allowed in chapter 33 of this
title (section
16.33.102, "Table 33-2, Table Of Uses, Nonresidential Zoning Districts", of
this title), for all listed uses in Neighborhood Commercial (CN), Community
Commercial (C-1), Resort Commercial (RC), Resort Mixed Use (RMU), Commercial
Professional and Research (CPR) and Commercial With Light Manufacturing (CLM).
(Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
   (4)   A height greater than one (1) story, with a maximum height of fifteen
feet (15') for pitched roofs, or thirteen feet (13') for flat roofs for
guesthouse or casita, as provided by subsection
16.12.107(10) of this title.
   (5)   A commercial sign that overhangs a public right-of-way, including
sidewalk but not extending into the street, provided each of the following
conditions are met:
      (a)   The commercial business currently has a legal nonconforming sign
located within the public right-of-way;
      (b)   The pole, or other device to which the overhanging sign will be
attached, is located on applicant's property outside the public right-of-way;
      (c)   No part of the sign, pole or other device to which the sign is
attached can be higher than twenty feet (20').
      (d)   If the sign overhangs a sidewalk, the bottom of the sign must be at
least eight feet (8') above the sidewalk.
      (e)   The maximum size of the sign can be no larger than seventy two (72)
square feet. (Ord. 2012-02, 2012)
16.28.104: APPLICATION INITIATION AND COMPLETENESS:
   (1)   A request for a special exception shall be made on the application.
   (2)   A property owner may present a special exception application for
review and decision. An agent of the property owner, or a lessee of the
property, may present a special exception application for review and decision,
provided such application is accompanied by a property owner affidavit of
authorization.
   (3)   A special exception application shall be determined complete by the
zoning administrator, as provided by chapter 13 of this title. Special
exception applications determined to be incomplete, the zoning administrator
shall comply with the requirements of chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.28.105: SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Applications for a special exception shall provide the following information
and materials:
   (1)   A complete special exception application.
   (2)   Fourteen (14) copies of a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch
equals forty feet (1" = 40'), or as required by the zoning administrator,
prepared by a licensed engineer or architect, plus twenty (20) copies of an
eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduced copy of the site plan set
identifying the following:
      (a)   The location and dimensions of the property and all proposed uses
and buildings, and existing buildings or other structures located on the
property, and existing buildings and structures located within one hundred feet
(100') of the property. Existing property lines and existing fence lines shall
be shown.
      (b)   The proposed setbacks and exterior dimensions of all proposed
buildings and structures.
      (c)   The location of roads and streets serving the site, or proposed to
serve the site.
      (d)   The location and dimension of all proposed ingress and egress
points, off street parking and loading areas, including the total number of
parking and loading spaces.
      (e)   The location and dimensions of all pedestrian and biking
facilities, including sidewalks and trails, if any.
      (f)   All public and private rights of way and easements located on or
adjacent to the property, proposed to be continued, created, relocated or
abandoned shall be shown.
      (g)   For special exceptions requesting additional primary building
height, the application shall include the proposed building elevation plans,
identifying the maximum height of all proposed buildings and structures, and
shall include a view shed analysis clearly identifying all impacts on views to
Red Mountain and Snow Canyon, and impacts to views to the building site.
(Additional viewpoints and view shed analysis requirements may be determined
necessary by the city council and commission.)
      (h)   Such other information as the zoning administrator, commission or
city council determines necessary to adequately review and decide the
application. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.28.106: SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL
STANDARDS:
   (1)   The procedures for the review of an application for a special
exception are identified by figure 28-1 in this chapter.
   (2)   The city council in deciding, and the commission in formulating a
recommendation for a special exception, shall review the application and
determine from the application:
      (a)   The special exception is an allowed special exception, as
identified in this chapter.
      (b)   The special exception complies with the requirements applicable to
the zoning district, including minimum area, yard setbacks, height, and all
other requirements, unless modified by the approval of a special exception
application.
      (c)   The proposed special exception will be conducted in compliance with
the requirements of this title, and all other land use ordinances.
      (d)   The special exception will not have a materially adverse effect
upon the character of the area or the public health, safety and welfare.
      (e)   The special exception will not result in the destruction, loss or
damage of natural, scenic or historic features of significance.
      (f)   The special exception will not cause air, water, soil or noise
pollution or other types of pollution.
      (g)   Requirements are proposed, or can be proposed, necessary to secure
the purposes of this title, and prevent or minimize any adverse effects upon
properties in the vicinity, upon the city as a whole, or upon public facilities
and services.
   (3)   The city council shall not approve, and the commission shall not
recommend, a special exception unless the evidence presented establishes the
proposed special exception:
      (a)   Will not be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of
persons residing or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or
improvements in the vicinity;
      (b)   Will not create any nuisance;
      (c)   Is located on a lot or parcel of sufficient size to accommodate the
special exception; and
      (d)   Will not have a negative impact on adjacent properties, the
character of the area, or the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.28.107: PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION REQUIRED:
Prior to the city council deciding a special exception application, a
recommendation on the proposed special exception shall be received from the
commission. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.28.108: TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS:
   (1)   All approvals by the city council approving a special exception shall
comply with all requirements of this title, all other land use ordinances, and
the requirements for a building permit, as applicable.
   (2)   The city council may impose such reasonable requirements with respect
to location, construction, maintenance, operation, site planning, and other
items for the special exception deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent
properties and the public interest. These requirements may include, but are not
limited to, requirements on use, site plan layout and configuration, building
size, design, features and location, construction, operation, character,
location, landscaping, lighting, fencing, screening and buffering, measures
directed at minimizing possible nuisances, measures to protect natural
features, and other requirements determined necessary and appropriate. Any
approval requirements imposed on a special exception shall be clearly
identified and included in the city council's decision. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.28.109: EFFECT OF GRANTING SPECIAL EXCEPTION:
   (1)   Following a decision of a special exception application by the city
council, the city recorder shall provide the applicant with a written notice of
the decision. The written record of all special exception applications shall be
maintained on file by the city recorder.
   (2)   The granting of a special exception shall not authorize the
establishment or extension of any use, or the development, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure, but is a
prerequisite to the filing of an application for an approval, permit or license
required by this title, all other land use ordinances, and the building code.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.28.110: CONTINUING VALIDITY AND EXPIRATION:
See section
16.03.115 of this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.28.111: SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPROVAL AMENDMENT:
The procedure for amending any special exception approval shall be the same
procedure to approve the special exception application in the first instance.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.28.112: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city council regarding a special
exception may appeal the decision to district court, as provided by chapter 30
of this title.
   FIGURE 28-1
   SPECIAL EXCEPTION APPLICATION PROCEDURES
  Application filed with zoning administrator
    Application filed with zoning
    administrator
                                           
 Zoning administrator determines             
  application completeness (see chapter 13)
                                           
                                         
Application determined complete (see     Application determined incomplete (see
chapter 13)                              chapter 13)
     
                                            
  Commission considers special exception
 application. Commission formulates and      
  transmits a recommendation to the council
                                             
  Council considers the application,
 recommendation of commission, and all       
  other information received
                                             
                                             
Application found to comply with         Application found to not comply with
requirements of all land use             requirements of all land use
ordinances, including this title,        ordinances, including this title,
building code, and all other             building code, and all other
applicable codes. Application approved   applicable codes. Application denied
by council, with or without              by council
requirements
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
CHAPTER 29
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
16.29.101: Purpose
16.29.102: Types Of Violations
16.29.103: Continuing Violation
16.29.104: Enforcement
16.29.105: Legal Lots Required
16.29.106: Legal Nonconformity An Affirmative Defense
16.29.107: Stop Work
16.29.108: Penalties For Violations
16.29.101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish remedies, penalties and procedures
for violations of this title, and all other land use ordinances, and to provide
for the enforcement of the land use ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.29.102: TYPES OF VIOLATIONS:
It shall be an unlawful act for any person to violate any provision of this
title, and all other land use ordinances, including, but not limited to:
   (1)   To conduct, commence or establish any use, construction, remodeling or
other activity that is subject to the city land use ordinances without the
required approvals, permits and licenses, as required by the land use
ordinances.
   (2)   To conduct, commence or establish any use, construction, remodeling or
other activity not allowed by the land use ordinances.
   (3)   To violate, by act or omission, any requirement or condition imposed
by a land use authority on any required approval, permit or license.
   (4)   To erect, construct, reconstruct, alter or change the use of any
building or structure without the approval of a building permit application.
   (5)   To conduct, commence or establish any use in violation of the land use
ordinances.
   (6)   To reduce the size of any lot or parcel without the approvals, permits
and licenses, as required by the land use ordinances.
   (7)   To increase the density or intensity of use of any land or structure
without the approvals, permits and licenses, as required by the land use
ordinances.
   (8)   To remove, deface, obscure, or otherwise interfere with any notice
required by the land use ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.29.103: CONTINUING VIOLATION:
Each day a violation of a land use ordinance occurs, it shall be considered a
separate violation hereunder. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.29.104: ENFORCEMENT:
   (1)   The city, or any adversely affected owner of real estate within the
city, in which violations of the land use ordinances occur, or are about to
occur, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute:
      (a)   Injunctions, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate actions;
or
      (b)   Proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the unlawful
building, use or act.
   (2)   The city need only establish the violation to obtain the injunction.
   (3)   The building official shall not issue a building permit unless the
plans for the proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or
use fully conform and comply with all regulations of all land use ordinances
and building code.
   (4)   The city manager, zoning administrator, city engineer, city attorney
and building official are hereby identified and authorized to enforce all
provisions and requirements of the land use ordinances, and to initiate any and
all proceedings the city may deem prudent to ensure compliance with all land
use ordinances, as allowed and authorized by state laws. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.29.105: LEGAL LOTS REQUIRED:
No building permit application shall be approved or issued for the construction
of any building or structure located on a lot subdivided or sold in violation
of the provisions of all land use ordinances. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.29.106: LEGAL NONCONFORMITY AN AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be an affirmative defense to the enforcement of all land use
ordinances that the unlawful act being enforced exists as a legal nonconforming
use or noncomplying structure 1 . (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 25 of this title.
16.29.107: STOP WORK:
In accordance with the power to stop work under the adopted building code, the
building official may issue a stop work order, with or without revoking
permits, on any building or structure where there exists an uncorrected
violation of a requirement of the land use ordinances and adopted building
code. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.29.108: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
In addition to any other remedies available at law, penalties for violations of
any of the provision of the land use ordinances may be pursued under the city
administrative code enforcement program 1 . (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 4, chapter 2 of this code.
CHAPTER 30
APPEALS
SECTION:
16.30.101: Purpose
16.30.102: Legislative Appeals; Administrative Appeals
16.30.103: Maximum Time To File Appeal
16.30.104: Requirements For An Appeal Petition
16.30.105: Condition Precedent To Judicial Review; Appeal Authority Duties
16.30.106: Appeal Petition Required
16.30.107: Meetings, Records And Action Of An Appeal Authority
16.30.108: Due Process
16.30.109: Burden Of Proof
16.30.110: Record On Appeal
16.30.111: Standard Of Review For Appeals
16.30.112: No Automatic Stay On Appeal
16.30.113: Final Decision
16.30.114: District Court Review
16.30.101: PURPOSE:
This chapter is provided to direct an applicant, a board, or officer of the
City, or any other person who believes they are adversely affected by a
decision of a Land Use Authority, to appeal a land use decision to the
appropriate appellate body and to set forth the procedures for such appeal.
(Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
16.30.102: LEGISLATIVE APPEALS; ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
   (1)   Legislative Appeals: Appeals from land use decisions that are
identified as legislative matters and subject to legislative proceedings in
section
16.04.102 of this title shall only be appealed to the District Court pursuant
to section 10-9a-801 of the Utah Code. The City's Appeal Authority shall have
no jurisdiction to consider any such legislative matter.
   (2)   Administrative Appeals: The City's Administrative Law Judge, as
provided under title 2, chapter 5, "Administrative Hearings", of this Code is
hereby designated as the Appeal Authority required by section 10-9a-701 of the
Act, to hear and decide requests for variances and appeals from administrative
decisions. (Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
16.30.103: MAXIMUM TIME TO FILE APPEAL:
   (1)   District Court Review: Any person adversely affected by a final
decision of a legislative land use decision or, after exhausting administrative
remedies on an administrative decision, must file a petition for review of the
decision with the District Court within thirty (30) days after the City's land
use decision is final.
   (2)   Administrative Appeal: Any person, including the applicant for any
administrative land use application approval, license, or permit, and any board
or officer of the City, aggrieved by a decision of a Land Use Authority's
administrative decision may, within ten (10) calendar days of the decision,
appeal the administrative decision to the City's Appeal Authority identified by
subsection
16.30.102(2) of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
16.30.104: REQUIREMENTS FOR AN APPEAL PETITION:
Any appeal petition of a land use decision shall clearly identify the alleged
error made by the Land Use Authority. (Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
16.30.105: CONDITION PRECEDENT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW; APPEAL AUTHORITY DUTIES:
   (1)   As a condition precedent to judicial review, each adversely affected
person shall timely and specifically challenge a Land Use Authority's decision,
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (2)   An Appeal Authority shall:
      (a)   Act in a quasi-judicial manner; and
      (b)   Serve as the final arbiter of issues involving the interpretation
or application of the land use ordinances; and
      (c)   May not entertain an appeal of a matter in which the Appeal
Authority, or any participating member, had first acted as the Land Use
Authority.
   (3)   An Appeal Authority shall require an adversely affected party to
present every theory of relief that it can raise in District Court.
   (4)   An Appeal Authority shall not require an adversely affected party to
pursue duplicate or successive appeals before it, or another Appeal Authority
as a condition of the adversely affected party's duty to exhaust administrative
remedies. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.30.106: APPEAL PETITION REQUIRED:
   (1)   A petition to appeal a land use decision shall be made in the form and
manner required by the applicable appellate body, depending on whether it is an
appeal from a legislative decision to District Court or an appeal from an
administrative decision to the City's Appeal Authority.
   (2)   The question whether a petition to appeal is complete or not shall be
determined by the applicable clerk of the appellate body with whom the petition
is filed. (Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
16.30.107: MEETINGS, RECORDS AND ACTION OF AN APPEAL AUTHORITY:
   (1)   Each Appeal Authority as identified herein shall:
      (a)   Notify each of its members of any meeting or hearing;
      (b)   Provide each of its members with the same information and access to
City resources as any other member;
      (c)   Convene only if a quorum of its members is present; and
      (d)   Act only upon the vote of a majority of its convened members.
   (2)   After an appeal application is determined to be complete by the Zoning
Administrator, as provided herein, the Zoning Administrator shall coordinate
with the Appeal Authority staff to schedule the hearing of the appeal. The
Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Appeal Authority all materials
constituting the full and complete record of the decision of the Land Use
Authority.
   (3)   Following a written decision by the Appeal Authority, as provided by
section
16.30.113 of this chapter, the staff of the Appeal Authority shall provide the
applicant with a copy of the written decision.
   (4)   A record of the decisions of the Appeal Authority shall be maintained
in the Office of the City Recorder, which shall constitute the official record
of the appeal. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.30.108: DUE PROCESS:
   (1)   Each Appeal Authority shall conduct each appeal as provided herein.
   (2)   Each Appeal Authority shall respect the due process rights of each of
the participants. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.30.109: BURDEN OF PROOF:
Any person bringing an appeal and alleging an error of a Land Use Authority's
decision has the burden of proof that the Land Use Authority erred. (Ord. 2017-
02, 2017)
16.30.110: RECORD ON APPEAL:
The City shall transmit to the applicable appellate body the record on appeal,
including the minutes, findings, orders, and, if available, a true and correct
transcript of the proceedings. If the proceedings were tape recorded, a
transcript of the tape recording(s) is a true and correct transcript for
purposes of this requirement.
   (1)   If there is a record, the appellate body's review shall be limited to
the record as provided above. The appellate body shall only consider the
materials originally presented before the Land Use Authority in making the
decision that is the subject of the appeal. The appellate body may not accept
or consider any evidence outside the record unless that evidence was offered
below and the appellate body determines that it was improperly excluded.
   (2)   If there is no record, the appellate body may call witnesses and take
evidence. (Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
16.30.111: STANDARD OF REVIEW FOR APPEALS:
   (1)   Legislative Decisions: A decision, ordinance, or regulation involving
the exercise of legislative discretion is valid if it is reasonably debatable
that the decision, ordinance, or regulation promotes the general welfare of the
City and is not otherwise illegal.
   (2)   Administrative Decisions: A final decision of an administrative matter
by a Land Use Authority or an Appeal Authority is valid if the decision is
supported by substantial evidence in the record and is not arbitrary,
capricious, or illegal.
   (3)   Determination Of Illegality: A determination of illegality requires a
determination that the decision, ordinance, or regulation violates a law,
statute, or ordinance in effect at the time the decision was made or the
ordinance or regulation adopted. (Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
16.30.112: NO AUTOMATIC STAY ON APPEAL:
The filing of an appeal petition does not act as an automatic stay of the Land
Use Authority's decision, ordinance or regulation. (Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
16.30.113: FINAL DECISION:
A decision of each Appeal Authority, as identified herein, shall take effect on
the date when the Appeal Authority, as applicable, issues a written decision,
which shall constitute a final decision by the City in the matter. (Ord. 2017-
02, 2017)
16.30.114: DISTRICT COURT REVIEW:
The procedures, standards of review and other requirements governing District
Court review of final decision made by an Appeal Authority, or decisions,
ordinances, or regulations made by the City Council involving the exercise of
legislative discretion, are set forth in section 10-9a-801 of the Act and are
incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 2017-02, 2017)
CHAPTER 31
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKINGS
SECTION:
16.31.101: Policy Considerations For Constitutional Takings; Purpose
16.31.102: Guidelines Advisory
16.31.103: Review Of Takings Application Required
16.31.104: Review Of City Decision; Procedures
16.31.105: Reviewing Guidelines
16.31.106: Results Of Review
16.31.101: POLICY CONSIDERATIONS FOR CONSTITUTIONAL TAKINGS; PURPOSE:
   (1)   It is the policy of the city to carefully consider constitutional
taking claims, in fairness to the owner of private property bringing the claim,
and in view of the uncertainty and expense involved in defending lawsuits
alleging such issues.
   (2)   At the same time, the legitimate role of the city to lawfully regulate
real property must be preserved and the public's right to require the
dedication or exaction of property consistent with the constitution. Consistent
with this policy, this chapter establishes a procedure for the review of
actions that may involve the issue of constitutional takings, as well as
providing guidelines for such considerations.
   (3)   This chapter is further intended, and shall be construed to
objectively and fairly review claims by citizens that a specific government
action should require payment of just compensation, while preserving the
ability of the city to lawfully regulate real property and fulfill its duties
and functions. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.31.102: GUIDELINES ADVISORY:
The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter are advisory only, and shall not be construed to expand or limit
the scope of the city's liability for a constitutional taking. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.31.103: REVIEW OF TAKINGS APPLICATION REQUIRED:
Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a constitutional
taking of private real property by an action of a land use authority shall
request a review of a decision of the land use authority by filing an
application, containing all the information, required herein. (Ord. 2005-13,
2005)
16.31.104: REVIEW OF CITY DECISION; PROCEDURES:
Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a constitutional
taking of private real property by an action of a land use authority shall
request a review of the decision.
The following are specific procedures established for such review:
   (1)   The person requesting a review must have obtained a decision from a
land use authority.
   (2)   Within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision that gave rise
to the concern that a constitutional taking may have occurred, the person
requesting the review shall file in writing, with the city manager, a written
request for review of that decision. A copy shall also be filed with the city
attorney.
   (3)   The city council, or designee of the city council, shall immediately
set a time to review the decision giving rise to the constitutional takings
claim.
   (4)   In addition to the written request for review, the applicant shall
submit the following information:
      (a)   Name of the applicant requesting review.
      (b)   Name and business address of the current owner of the property,
form of ownership (whether sole proprietorship, for profit or nonprofit
corporation, partnership, joint venture or other), and if owned by a
corporation, partnership or joint venture, the name and address of all
principal shareholders or partners.
      (c)   A detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there has
been a constitutional taking.
      (d)   A description of the property alleged to have been taken.
      (e)   Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property alleged
to have been taken, including the date and cost at the date the property was
acquired. This should include any evidence of the value of the property before
and after the alleged constitutional taking, the name of the party from whom
purchased, if applicable, including the relationship, if any, between the
person requesting a review and the party from whom the property was acquired.
      (f)   The nature of the property interest claimed to be affected, such
as, but not limited to, fee simple ownership or leasehold interest.
      (g)   Terms, including sale price, of any previous purchase or sale of a
full or partial interest in the property in the three (3) years prior to the
date of application.
      (h)   All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including
financing, offering for sale, or ad valorem taxation, within the three (3)
years prior to the date of application.
      (i)   The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes paid on the property for
the previous three (3) years.
      (j)   All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured
by the property, including the name of the mortgagee or lender, current
interest rate, remaining loan balance and term of the loan and other
significant provisions, including, but not limited to, right of purchasers to
assume the loan.
      (k)   All listings of the property for sale or rent, prices asked and
offers received, if any, within the previous three (3) years.
      (l)   All studies commissioned by the applicant, or agents of the
applicant, within the previous three (3) years concerning feasibility of
development or utilization of the property.
      (m)   Itemized income and expense statements from the property for the
previous three (3) years.
      (n)   Information from a title policy or other source showing all
recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the property.
      (o)   The city council, or their designee, may request additional
information identified to be necessary, in their opinion, to arrive at a
conclusion concerning whether there has been a constitutional taking.
   (5)   An application shall not be deemed to be "complete" until the city
council, or designee, certifies to the applicant that all the materials and
information required above, have been received by the city. The city council,
or designee, shall notify the applicant of any missing information and
identifying the materials and information necessary to correct the incomplete
application.
   (6)   The city council, or designee, shall hear all the evidence related to
and submitted by the applicant and the city.
   (7)   A decision on a review of a constitutional takings claim shall be
rendered within fourteen (14) days from the date the complete application for
review has been received by the city manager. The decision of the city council,
or designee, regarding the results of the review shall be given in writing to
the applicant and the land use authority that rendered the decision giving rise
to the constitutional takings claim.
   (8)   If the city council, or designee, fails to hear and decide the review
within fourteen (14) days, the decision appealed from shall be presumed to be
approved and the constitutional takings claim denied by the city council, or
designee. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.31.105: REVIEWING GUIDELINES:
The city council, or the city council's authorized designee, shall review the
facts and information presented by the applicant to determine whether or not
the action by the land use authority constitutes a "constitutional taking", as
defined in section
16.34.102 of this title. In doing so, they shall consider:
   (1)   Whether the physical taking or exaction of the private real property
bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest.
   (2)   Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists for the action taken
by the city.
   (3)   Whether the property and exaction is taken roughly proportionate and
reasonably related, both in nature and extent, to the impact caused by the
activities that are the subject of the decision being reviewed.
   (4)   Other items identified by sections
16.03.118 and
16.03.119 of this title. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.31.106: RESULTS OF REVIEW:
After completing the review, the city council, or designee, shall make a
determination regarding the above issues, and where determined to be necessary
and appropriate, shall make a recommendation to the land use authority that
made the decision giving rise to the constitutional takings claim. (Ord. 2005-
13, 2005)
CHAPTER 32
RESERVED
CHAPTER 33
TABLES OF USES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
16.33.101: Table 33-1, Table Of Uses, Residential Zoning Districts
16.33.102: Table 33-2, Table Of Uses, Nonresidential Zoning Districts
16.33.103: Table 33-3, Summary Table Of Development Standards For Primary
Buildings In Residential Zones
16.33.104: Table 33-4, Summary Table Of Development Standards For Accessory
Buildings In Residential Zones
16.33.105: Table 33-5, Summary Table Of Development Standards For Primary
Buildings In Nonresidential Zones
16.33.106: Table 33-6, Summary Table Of Development Standards For Accessory
Buildings In Nonresidential Zones
16.33.101: TABLE 33-1, TABLE OF USES, RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
To view Table 33-1, click HERE
I   Class I uses are determined to be temporary uses, subject to the
    requirements of chapter 14 of this title.
II  Class II uses are determined to be permitted uses, subject to the
    requirements of chapter 15 of this title.
III Class III uses are determined to be permitted uses, subject to the
    requirements of chapter 15 of this title.
IV  Class IV uses are determined to be conditional uses, subject to the
    requirements of chapter 16 of this title.
V   Class V uses are determined to be conditional uses, subject to the
    requirements of chapter 16 of this title.
A use identified by "X" is determined to be a prohibited use in the zoning
district.
A use not identified in the table below is determined to be a prohibited use
within Ivins City.
 
              RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-   RE-  RE-  R-   R-        R-2- Town-
Use RA-5 RA-1 43.0 37.0 25.0 20.0 17.51 15.0 12.5 1-10 1-  R-1-5 10   house R-M
                                                       7.5
                                                                  RA-      RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-   RE-  RE-  R-  R-  R-  R-  Town-
Use                                                               5   RA-1 43.0 37.0 25.0 20.0 17.51 15.0 12.5 1-  1-  1-5 2-  house R-M
                                                                                                               10  7.5     10
Accessory building. A building customarily incidental and clearly
subordinate to the existing primary building and located on the
same lot as the primary building, and meeting all requirements of
the building codes and land use ordinances, as adopted by the     II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  II  II       II
City. (See sections
16.12.103,
16.12.104 and
16.12.105 of this title.)
Accessory dwelling unit for owner or employee. An attached, or
detached, dwelling unit for an employee or owner and incidental
and clearly subordinate to the existing primary building or use
and located on the same lot as the primary building or use, and   IV  IV   X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        X
meeting all requirements of the Building Code and land use
ordinances, as adopted by the City. (See section
16.12.106 of this title.)
Accessory use. A use clearly incidental and subordinate to the
existing primary use and customarily found in connection with the
primary use and located on the same lot as the primary use. (See  II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  II  II       II
section
16.12.103 of this title.)
Agricultural building. A structure used solely in conjunction
with an allowed agriculture use, and not for human occupancy, and
complying with the requirements of section 58-56-4, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended. To qualify as an agricultural        II  II   X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        X
building the structure must be located outside of a residential
area, as defined by section 58-56-4(1), Utah Code Annotated,
1953, as amended.
Agriculture. An area of 5 contiguous acres, or larger, which is
used for the commercial production, keeping, or maintenance for
sale of plants and domestic animals typically found in southern
Utah, or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry
management program, but excluding the keeping of prohibited       II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  II  II       II
animals, commercial plant nursery, as defined herein,
concentrated animal feeding operation, as defined by the Utah
Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, and subject to the Utah
pollutant discharge elimination system (UPDES), or similar
activities.
Animal hospital (veterinary clinic), with outdoor holding
facilities. A facility for the diagnosis, treatment,              V   X    X    X    X    X    X     X    X    X   X   X   X        X
hospitalization, and boarding of animals and includes outdoor
holding facilities.
Animal hospital (veterinary clinic), without outdoor holding
facilities. A facility for the diagnosis, treatment,              IV  X    X    X    X    X    X     X    X    X   X   X   X        X
hospitalization, and boarding of animals and does not include
outdoor holding facilities.
Barn, corral, stable, coop, pen or animal run. A structure or
fenced area, and its associated buildings and structures, for the
feeding, housing, or confinement of domestic animals, as defined  II  II   X    II   X    X    X     X    II   X   X   X   X        X
herein. Stable includes a building, or a portion thereof, used to
shelter and feed horses and ponies. (See section
16.12.113 of this title.)
Bed and breakfast inn. A residential structure, located on a
legal lot (as defined in chapter 34 of this title), offering
transient lodging accommodations in separate guestrooms and where
meals may be provided. A bed and breakfast inn shall provide no
more than 3 guestrooms and shall meet all applicable requirements
of the Building Code and land use ordinances, as adopted by the
City. A guestroom is 1 room having no kitchen facilities. (See    IV  IV   IV   IV   IV   IV   IV    IV   IV   IV  IV  X   X        X
section
16.12.116 of this title.) Bed and breakfast inn is determined to
be a commercial business for the purposes of the Written Text for
Padre Canyon Estates Phases 1, 2, and 3, and a prohibited use in
Padre Canyon Estates Phases 1, 2, and 3. (See appendix A of this
title.)
Beekeeping. See title 6, chapter 9 of this Code.                  II  X    X    X    X    X    X     X    X    X   X   X   X        X
Casita or guesthouse (associated with the construction of the
primary dwelling unit). A dwelling unit attached, or detached,
from the primary dwelling unit and located on the same lot as the II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  X   X        X
primary dwelling unit for the occupancy of family members or
nonpaying guests of the owner. (See section
16.12.107 of this title.)
Casita or guesthouse (proposed at any time after the construction
of the primary dwelling unit). A dwelling unit attached, or
detached, from the primary dwelling unit and located on the same  II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  X   X        X
lot as the primary dwelling unit for the occupancy of family
members or nonpaying guests of the owner. (See section
16.12.107 of this title.)
Church. A facility principally used as a location for people to
gather for religious worship or other religious activities. 1     A church is a Class IV use in all zones, shall be new construction and
accessory dwelling unit for the housing of the pastor or similar  shown on a recorded subdivision plat, or be outside of a recorded
church leader of the church and their family may be permitted as  subdivisions plat.
an accessory use.
Class I use. A special event or use established for a maximum
period of 45 days, such event, or use being discontinued after
the expiration of 45 days, and conducted in compliance with all   I   I    I    I    I    I         I    I    I   I   I   I        I
the requirements of this title. Such use shall be allowed only
after the approval of a Class I use application, as established
by the provisions of this title. (See chapter 14 of this title.)
Commercial kennel. Any premises or establishment where 4 or more
dogs, older than 4 months, are kept for the purpose of boarding,
breeding, raising or training dogs for a fee or on a nonprofit    V   X    X    X    X    X    X     X    X    X   X   X   X   X     X
basis. (See section
16.12.115 of this title.)
Domestic livestock and fowl. Limited to domesticated horse (Equus
caballus), domesticated cattle (Bos taurus and Bos indica),
domesticated sheep (Ovis aries), domesticated goat (Capra hircus)
and domestic fowl, but excluding the keeping of pigs (Suidae),    II  II   X    II   X    X         X    II   X   X   X   X        X
peacocks, guinea fowl, emus and ostriches. Domestic livestock and
fowl do not include inherently or potentially dangerous animals,
fowl, reptiles, or exotic animals. (See section
16.12.113 of this title.)
Dwelling, condominium. An individually owned dwelling unit, the
ownership of which includes an undivided interest in the land and
other common areas and facilities, as provided and recorded in a  X   X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        IV
property deed or other instrument, as required by Utah law, and
which are typically maintained by an association of the owners.
Must meet allowed density requirements.
Dwelling, multiple-family. A building containing 3 or more        X   X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        IV
dwelling units.
Dwelling, single-family. A building containing 1 dwelling unit.   II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  II  X        II
Dwelling, two-family. A building containing 2 attached dwelling   X   X    X    X    X    X    X     X    X    X   X   X   II  II    II
units.
Educational facility (public or private). Public schools,
colleges or universities qualified by the State of Utah Board of
Regents or State of Utah Board of Education to provide academic
instruction. Privately owned buildings and uses for educational   II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  II  II       II
activities that have a curriculum for technical or vocational
training, kindergarten, elementary, secondary or higher
education.
Home based business. An activity carried out for gain by a        As allowed and provided for by title 5, chapter 3 of this Code.
resident of the dwelling unit.
Home daycare. The care of children who are family and nonfamily
members in an occupied dwelling unit, and complying with all
State standards and licensing, by a resident of the dwelling unit
at least twice a week for more than 3 children, but fewer than 9
children. The total number of children being cared for shall
include children under the age of 4 years residing in the         As allowed and provided for by title 5, chapter 3 of this Code.
dwelling unit, who are under the supervision of the provider
during the period of time the childcare is provided. When a
caregiver cares for only 3 children under age 2, the group size,
at any given time shall not exceed 6. Home daycare shall comply
with all requirements of title 5, chapter 3 of this Code, as
applicable.
Home preschool. A preschool program complying with all State
standards and licensing for nonfamily members in an occupied
dwelling unit, by residents of that dwelling unit, in which
lessons are provided for not more than 6 children for each
session of instruction. Sessions shall last for not more than 4   As allowed and provided for by title 5, chapter 3 of this Code.
hours and shall not overlap. Individual children may attend only
1 preschool session in any 24 hour period. Home preschool shall
be considered, and shall comply with all requirements of title 5,
chapter 3 of this Code, as applicable.
Household pets (noncommercial). Domesticated animals and birds
ordinarily permitted in a dwelling unit and kept for company or
pleasure of the owner, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats,
and caged birds, in compliance with all applicable requirements
of title 6 of this Code. Household pets do not include domestic   II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  II  II       II
livestock or fowl, as defined herein, or inherently or
potentially dangerous animals, fowl, reptiles, or exotic animals.
(See section
16.12.112 of this title.)
Major facility of a public utility. Any overhead or underground
electric transmission lines (greater than 115,000 volts),
substations of electric utilities; gas regulator stations,
transmission and gathering pipelines and storage areas of         V   X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        X
utilities providing natural gas or petroleum derivatives; and
their appurtenant facilities, water treatment plant, sewage
treatment plant, or similar public or quasi-public use or
activity.
Minor facility of a public utility. Any water, sewer, power, gas,
telephone, cable television, or other utility, distribution line, II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  II  II       II
or facility, which is located underground and buried beneath the
surface of the ground.
Model home. A dwelling unit having all of the following
characteristics:
(1)   The dwelling unit is constructed upon a lot in a
subdivision for which a final plat has been recorded.             II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  II  II       II
(2)   The dwelling unit is intended to be temporarily utilized as
an example of the dwelling units that are proposed to be built in
the same subdivision.
Nursing home, convalescent care center. A facility that provides
24 hour residential care to persons who are not related by blood,
marriage, or adoption to the owner, operator, or manager of the   X   X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        IV
facility. A nursing home or convalescent care center provides
some level of skilled nursing or medical service to the
residents.
Public uses and utilities. A use operated exclusively by a public
body or quasi- public body, such use having the purpose of
serving the public health, safety, or general welfare, and
including streets, parks, recreational facilities, administrative V   V    V    V    V    V         V    V    V   V   V   V        V
and service facilities, and public utilities, and found to
conform to the General Plan, as adopted. Public uses and
utilities do not include "major facility of a public utility", as
defined herein.
Residence for persons with a disability. A residence in which
more than 1 person with a disability resides; and is licensed or
certified by the Department of Human Services under title 62A,
chapter 2, Licensure of Programs and Facilities; or is licensed
or certified by the Department of Health under title 26, chapter  V   V    V    V    V    V         V    V    V   V   V   V        V
21, Healthcare Facility Licensing and Inspection Act. See
definition of "disability" in chapter 34 of this title. (See
section
16.12.108 of this title.)
Residence for persons with a disability that are substance abuse
facilities located within 500' of a school. A residence in which
more than 1 person with a disability resides; and is licensed or
certified by the Department of Human Services under title 62A,
chapter 2, Licensure of Programs and Facilities; or is licensed   V   V    V    V    V    V         V    V    V   V   V   V        V
or certified by the Department of Health under title 26, chapter
21, Healthcare Facility Licensing and Inspection Act. See
definition of "disability" in chapter 34 of this title. (See
section
16.12.109 of this title.)
Residential facility for elderly persons. A single-family or
multiple-family dwelling unit that does not operate as a business
and is owned by 1 of the residents, or an immediate family member
of 1 of the residents, or the title is placed in trust for a
resident, and that meets the requirements of the Utah Code
Annotated, as amended, meeting all applicable building codes, as
adopted, land use ordinance requirements, and is occupied on a 24
hour per day basis by 8 or fewer elderly persons in a family type
arrangement. Adequate off street parking shall be provided and
the facility must be capable of use as a residential facility for
elderly persons without structural or landscaping alterations     III III  III  III  III  III       III  III  III III III III      III
that would change the structure's residential character. No
person being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse shall be placed
in a residential facility for elderly persons; and placement in a
residential facility for elderly persons is on a strictly
voluntary basis and not a part of, or in lieu of, confinement,
rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional facility. "Elderly
person" means a person who is 60 years old or older, who desires
or needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting,
but who is capable of living independently. (See section
16.12.110 of this title.)
Solar - Individual Solar Photovoltaic System. An onsite solar
power generation system that back feeds a primary structure.                                                            
Excess electricity produced can be distributed to the utility
grid.
   Roof Mounted:                                               II  II   II   II   II   II   II    II   II   II  II  II  II  II    II
   Ground Mounted                                              II  II   II   II   II   II   II    II   II   II  II  II  X   X     X
Short term residential rental (only with approved overlay). The
use, occupancy, rent or lease, for direct or indirect
remuneration, of a residential dwelling unit or portion thereof   V   V    V    V    V    V    V     V    V    V   V   V   V        V
for an effective term of less than 30 days. (See chapter 7, part
8 of this title.)
Sign, awning. A sign displayed on or attached flat against the    X   X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        X
surface of an awning. (See chapter 21 of this title.)
Sign, canopy. A sign attached to, or constructed in, a canopy,
typically located over a fuel island. (See chapter 21 of this     X   X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        X
title.)
Sign, freestanding monument. A sign attached to the ground or a
foundation in the ground, and where there are no poles, braces,   X   X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        X
or other visible means of support other than the attachment or
foundation to the ground. (See chapter 21 of this title.)
Sign, projecting. A sign attached to a building and extending no
more than 5' perpendicular from the building wall to which the    X   X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        X
sign is attached. (See chapter 21 of this title.)
Sign, temporary/Class I use sign. A sign intended to be displayed
for a limited period, not to exceed 45 days. (See chapter 21 of   I   I    I    I    I    I         I    I    I   I   I   I        I
this title.)
Sign, wall. A sign displayed upon or against the wall of a
building, where the exposed face of the sign is parallel to the   X   X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        X
wall and extends not more than 12 inches horizontally from the
face of the wall. (See chapter 21 of this title.)
Sign, window. A sign attached to a window to be visible from      X   X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        X
outside of the building. (See chapter 21 of this title.)
Storage of recreational vehicles (limited). The storage and
parking of recreational vehicles, including motor homes, boats,                                                                      See
caravans, trailers, or similar, for a period exceeding 48 hours,  II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  II  II       note
and owned by the property owner. (See section                                                                                        2
16.12.111 of this title.)
Swimming pool. An artificial body of water having a depth in
excess of 18 inches, designed, constructed and used for swimming,                                                                    See
dipping or immersion purposes by men, women or children, and      II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  II  II       note
located on a same lot or parcel as a dwelling, or dwellings. (See                                                                    2
section
16.12.119 of this title.)
Tennis court/sports court. An improved area used for the playing                                                                     See
of tennis or other sports activities, including, but not limited  II  II   II   II   II   II        II   II   II  II  II  II       note
to, basketball and volleyball, and located on a same lot or                                                                          2
parcel as a dwelling, or dwellings.
Townhouse. A townhouse building having 4 units or less with a 2   X   X    X    X    X    X    X     X    X    X   X   X   X   IV    IV
car garage. Setbacks for this type of townhouse reduced to 10'.
Townhouse (R-M). A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a
group of 3 or more attached units in which each unit extends from X   X    X    X    X    X    X     X    X    X   X   X   X   X     IV
the foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least
2 sides.
Twinhome. 2 attached single-family dwellings having a firewall
separation from the lowest level to flush against the underside
of the roof. The entire exterior and roof materials shall be of   X   X    X    X    X    X    X     X    X    X   X   X   II  X     II
the same color, quality and consistency. Each dwelling unit shall
have its own attached 2-car garage.
Wireless telecommunications site/ facility. A facility used for
the transmission or reception of electromagnetic or electro-optic
information, including wireless telecommunications facilities        IV
such as "cellular" or "PCS" (personal communications systems)     25'
communication and paging systems. This use is not required to be  maximum
located on a separate lot or to comply with the minimum lot size  pole
requirement for the district in which it is located but is        height
required to meet the design and locational requirements, as               X    X    X    X         X    X    X   X   X   X        X
established for such uses, as provided by this title.             28" x
Telecommunications site/facility does not include radio antennas  36"
complying with the ruling of the Federal Communications           maximum
Commission in "amateur radio preemption, 101 FCC 2nd 952 (1985)"  antenna
or a regulation related to amateur radio service adopted under 47 size
CFR part 97. (See section
16.12.122 of this title.)
 
Notes:
   1.    Contact the Building and Zoning Department for specific requirements.
   2.    See chapter 18 of this title.
(Ord. 2009-09, 2009; amd. Ord. 2011-02, 2011; Ord. 2015-04, 2015; Ord. 2016-06,
2016; Ord. 2016-16, 2016; Ord. 2017-06, 2017; Ord. 2017-17, 2017; Ord. 2023-29,
2023)
16.33.102: TABLE 33-2, TABLE OF USES, NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS:
To view Table 33-2, click HERE
I   Class I uses are determined to be temporary uses, subject to the
    requirements of chapter 14 of this title.
II  Class II uses are determined to be permitted uses, subject to the
    requirements of chapter 15 of this title.
III Class III uses are determined to be permitted uses, subject to the
    requirements of chapter 15 of this title.
IV  Class IV uses are determined to be conditional uses, subject to the
    requirements of chapter 16 of this title.
V   Class V uses are determined to be conditional uses, subject to the
    requirements of chapter 16 of this title.
A use identified by "X" is determined to be a prohibited use in the zoning
district.
A use not identified in the table below is determined to be a prohibited use
within Ivins City.
 
Use CN C-1 RC CLM RMU CPR
Use                   CN  C-1 RC                CLM RMU               CPR
Accessory building. A
building customarily
incidental and
clearly subordinate
to the existing
primary building and
located on the same
lot as the primary
building, and meeting II  II  II                II  II                II
all requirements of
the Building Code and
land use ordinances,
as adopted by the
City. (See sections
16.12.103,
16.12.104, and
16.12.105 of this
title.)
Accessory dwelling
unit for owner or
employee. An
attached, or
detached, dwelling
unit for an employee
or owner and
incidental and
clearly subordinate
to the existing
primary building or   III III III               III III               III
use and located on
the same lot as the
primary building or
use, and meeting all
requirements of the
Building Code and
land use ordinances,
as adopted by the
City. (See section
16.12.106 of this
title.)
Accessory use. A use
clearly incidental
and subordinate to
the existing primary
use and customarily
found in connection
with the primary use  II  II  II                II  II                II
and located on the
same lot as the
primary use. (See
section
16.12.103 of this
title.)
Agricultural
building. A structure
used solely in
conjunction with an
allowed agriculture
use, and not for      III III III               III III               III
human occupancy, and
complying with the
requirements of
section 15A-1-204(7)
(a)(b)(i)(ii)(A)(B),
Utah Code Annotated.
Agriculture. An area
of 5 contiguous
acres, or larger,
which is used for the
commercial
production, keeping,
or maintenance for
sale of plants and
domestic animals
typically found in
southern Utah, or
lands devoted to a
soil conservation or
forestry management   II  II  II                II  II                II
program, but
excluding the keeping
of exotic animals,
"commercial plant
nursery", as defined
herein, concentrated
animal feeding
operation, and
subject to the Utah
pollutant discharge
elimination system
(UPDES), or similar
activities.
Alcoholic beverage
establishments. As
defined in the Ivins
City alcoholic
beverage control      As allowed and provided for by the Ivins City alcoholic
ordinance and         beverage control ordinance, as amended.
including definitions
for class A, B, C, D,
and E alcoholic
beverage control
licenses.
Animal hospital
(veterinary clinic),
with outdoor holding
facilities. A
facility for the      X   X   X                 V   X                 X
diagnosis, treatment,
hospitalization, and
boarding of animals
and includes outdoor
holding facilities.
Animal hospital
(veterinary clinic),
without outdoor
holding facilities. A
facility for the
diagnosis, treatment, IV  IV  X                 III X                 IV
hospitalization, and
boarding of animals
and does not include
outdoor holding
facilities.
Art studio. A
building or workshop
area for artists,
sculptors,
photographers, or
similar arts
professionals, and
their assistants and
staff, which shall
include an area open  III III III               III III               X
to the public for the
display and sale of
original works of art
made on the premises.
Processes utilized
may not create smoke,
fumes, noise, and
nuisance or health
hazards outside the
building.
Art workshop. A
building or workshop
area for artists,
sculptors,
photographers, or
similar arts
professionals, and
their assistants and
staff, which may
include an area open
to the public for the
display and sale of   IV  IV  IV                IV  IV                IV
original and/or mass
produced works of art
made on the premises.
Processes utilized
may not create smoke,
fumes, noise, and
nuisance or health
safety hazards
outside the building.
This does not require
a retail operation.
Automotive self-
service station. A
place where flammable
or combustible
liquids or gases used
as fuel are stored
and dispersed from
fixed equipment into
the fuel tanks of
motor vehicles. Such
an establishment may
offer the retail sale
of convenience items
as an accessory use,
provided such area
for the sale of
convenience items
does not exceed 3,000
square feet of gross
floor area. The
maximum square
footage of any        X   V   X                 X   X                 X
canopies associated
with gasoline pumps
shall be no more than
2,500 square feet, or
the gross square
footage of the
primary structure,
whichever is less.
Automotive self-
service station
specifically excludes
and does not allow
any servicing, repair
or maintenance of
motor vehicles,
trailers, and similar
mechanical equipment,
including engine,
brake, muffler, tire
repair and change,
lubrication and tune
ups.
Bank, credit union or
other financial
institution. A
financial company or
corporation providing
the extension of
credit, and the
custody, loan or
exchange of money. A
bank, credit union or III III III               III III               III
other financial                                                       Secondary
institution proposing
to provide drive-
through service shall
be required to secure
a conditional use
permit approval for
such drive-through
facility as provided
herein.
Bar Establishment.
All establishments
referred to as Bar    X   X   X                 V   X                 X
Establishments under
the Utah Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act.
Bed and breakfast
inn. A residential
structure, located on
a legal lot (as
defined in chapter 34
of this title),
offering transient
lodging
accommodations in
separate guestrooms
and where meals may
be provided. A bed
and breakfast inn
shall provide no more
than 3 guestrooms and
shall meet all
applicable
requirements of the
building code and
land use ordinances,  IV  III III               X   III               X
as adopted by the
city. A guestroom is
1 room having no
kitchen facilities.
(See section
16.12.116 of this
title.) Bed and
breakfast inn is
determined to be a
commercial business
for the purposes of
the Written Text for
Padre Canyon Estates
phases 1, 2, and 3
and a prohibited use
in Padre Canyon
Estates phases 1, 2,
and 3. (See appendix
A of this title.)
Billboard. A
freestanding sign
designed or intended
to direct attention
to a business,
product, or service   X   X   X                 X   X                 X
that is not provided,
sold, offered, or
existing on the
property where the
sign is located.
Car wash. A structure
withor hand operated
facilities used
principally for the
cleaning, washing,
polishing, or waxing
of motor vehicles.
A facility of this
type may be able to
accommodate more than X   IV  X                 IV  X                 X
1 vehicle at the same
time. This does not
include, however,
automated car washes
where the vehicle is
pulled through a
tunnel car wash and
dried with large,
loud driers at the
end.
Church. A facility
principally used as a
location for people
to gather for
religious worship or
other religious
activities. 1         IV  IV  IV                IV  IV                IV
accessory dwelling
unit for the housing
of the pastor or
similar church leader
of the church and
their family shall be
permitted.
Class I use. A
special event or use
established for a
maximum period of 45
days, such event, or
use being
discontinued after
the expiration of 45
days, and conducted
in compliance with    I   I   I                 I   I                 I
all the requirements
of this title. Such
use shall be allowed
only after the
approval of a class I
use application, as
established by the
provisions of this
title. (See chapter
14 of this title.)
Commercial daycare/
preschool center. A
facility, operated by
a person qualified
and licensed by the
state of Utah, which
provides children                                                     IV
with daycare and/or   X   IV  IV                X   IV                Secondary
preschool instruction
as a commercial
business and
complying with all
applicable state
standards and
licensing.
Commercial kennel.
Any premises or
establishment where 4
or more dogs, older
than 4 months, are
kept for the purpose
of boarding,          X   X   X                 V   X                 X
breeding, raising or
training dogs for a
fee or on a nonprofit
basis. (See section
16.12.115 of this
title.)
Commercial plant
nursery. A use
wholly, or partially,
contained within 1 or
more greenhouses
where trees, shrubs,
flowers, or vegetable X   IV  X                 IV  X                 X
plants are grown and
sold to retail
customers. Commercial
plant nursery does
not include wholesale
nurseries or
greenhouses.
Commercial recreation
(indoor). Any use,
either public or
private, providing
amusement, pleasure,
or sport, which is
operated entirely
within an enclosed
building, including,
but not limited to,
tennis, bowling,      X   IV  IV                IV  IV                IV
skating, baseball                                                     Secondary
batting cages, horse
riding or similar
activities but not
including video game
arcades. This use may
include associated
eating and drinking
areas, retail sales
areas and staff
offices.
Commercial recreation
(outdoor). An area or
facility that offers
entertainment or
recreation outside.
This use is limited
to a golf driving
range, baseball
batting cages, riding
arena, tennis
facility, miniature
golf, and swimming
pool, and may
include, as accessory
uses, associated      X   X   V                 V   V                 V
eating and drinking
areas, retail sales
areas and staff
offices. This use
specifically excludes
shooting range, go-
cart, motor vehicle
and/or motorbike
tracks, or similar
activities that may
create noise, dust,
or other nuisances to
adjoining and
surrounding uses.
Community and resort
commercial retail
sales and services.
Establishments
engaged in the retail
sale of goods and
services. Community
and resort commercial
retail sales and
service businesses
must conduct all
sales of goods and
services, with all
associated storage of
goods and materials,
within a totally
enclosed building
(with the exception
of occasional outdoor
"sidewalk"
promotions), with no
separate individual
building to exceed
30,000 square feet in
total gross building
area and the total
gross floor area of
all buildings, on any
separate, individual
lot, does not exceed
more than 80,000
square feet of gross
building area.
Community and resort
commercial retail
sales and services
specifically excludes
all sales, accessory
uses, and service
uses that typically
display goods or
services, or store
goods or products in  X   V   V                 X   V                 X
open, unenclosed
areas, including, but
not limited to,
automotive, truck,
recreational vehicle,
trailer, and
manufactured home
sales lots, repair
yards, open storage
areas, and all
similar outside
display and storage
areas of goods,
materials, equipment,
and vehicles. Retail
sales may include
light manufacturing
on site which is
limited to the
processing, blending,
and packaging, of
nonhazardous
ingredients in the
production of food
products, cosmetic
products, and other
similar type products
associated with
retail sales.
Manufacturing
processes shall not
create noise, smoke,
fumes, odors, glare,
or health or safety
issues outside the
building where
processing takes
place. Operations to
process products
shall be conducted
entirely within the
building.
Contractor's office.
A facility providing
building construction
and maintenance,
including carpentry,
plumbing, roofing,
electrical, air
conditioning and      X   III X                 III III               III
heating, within a
totally enclosed
building, and
excluding any areas
of open storage of
any building
materials, equipment,
or vehicles.
Convenience store. A
retail establishment
selling consumer
products including
prepackaged food and  X   V   X                 X   V                 V
household items,                                                      Secondary
having a gross
building area of not
more than 3,000
square feet.
Cultural event
center. A facility
which provides live
theater, musical
performances, short
duration film
festivals, and other
cultural events. The
facility may also
provide limited use   X   X   V                 X   V                 X
for receptions,
conferences,
seminars, and other
similar events or
gatherings.
Specifically excludes
all movie theaters
such as Megaplex or
IMAX type theaters.
Daycare center/
assisted care center.
A facility which
provides less than 24
hour assisted care or
supervision for 5 or
more persons, 14
years of age and
older and who are not IV  IV  IV                X   IV                X
related by blood,
marriage or adoption
to the owner or
operator, with or
without compensation
for such care, and
with or without a
stated educational
purpose.
Drive-through/drive-
up facility. A
facility where goods
and services are
provided to customers X   IV  IV                IV  IV                IV
within a vehicle.
(See section
16.12.121 of this
title.)
Dwelling,
condominium. An
individually owned
dwelling unit, the
ownership of which
includes an undivided
interest in the land
and other common
areas and facilities,
as provided and                  IV                 IV
recorded in a         X   X   Mixed Use Overlay X   See chapter 17 of X
property deed or              only                  this title
other instrument, as
required by Utah law,
and which are
typically maintained
by an association of
the owners. Must be
located within an
approved Mixed Use
Overlay District.
Dwelling, multiple-
family. A building
containing 3 or more             IV                 IV
dwelling units. Must  X   X   Mixed Use Overlay X   See chapter 17 of X
be located within an          only                  this title
approved Mixed Use
Overlay District.
Dwelling,
neighborhood
commercial. A maximum
of 2 dwelling units
allowed only on the
second story above
commercial. The       IV  X   X                 X   X                 X
residential floor
area shall have a
minimum setback on
all sides from the
ground floor
footprint of 4 feet.
Dwelling, single-                IV                 IV
family. A building    X   X   Mixed Use Overlay X   See chapter 17 of X
containing 1 dwelling         only                  this title
unit.
Dwelling, two-family.            IV                 IV
A building containing X   X   Mixed Use Overlay X   See chapter 17 of X
2 dwelling units.             only                  this title
Educational facility
(public or private).
Public schools,
colleges or
universities
qualified by the
State of Utah Board
of Regents or State
of Utah Board of
Education to provide
academic instruction. X   IV  IV                X   IV                IV
Privately owned
buildings and uses
for educational or
research activities
that have a
curriculum for
technical or
vocational training,
kindergarten,
elementary, secondary
or higher education.
Emergency care
facility. A
healthcare facility
providing primarily
outpatient emergency  X   IV  IV                X   IV                X
care for the
diagnosis and
treatment of
individuals.
Home based business.
An activity carried   As allowed and provided for by title 5, chapter 3 of this
out for gain by a     Code.
resident of the
dwelling unit.
Hospital. A facility
licensed by the State
of Utah Department of
Health providing
clinical, temporary   X   V   X                 X   X                 X
or emergency service
of a medical,
obstetrical or
surgical nature to
human patients.
Hotel. A building or
buildings offering
temporary lodging
accommodations, or
overnight
accommodations for
guests, with access
through a common
entrance, lobby or
hallway and room      X   V   V                 X   V                 X
reservation system to
4 or more guestrooms,
and which may include
additional services,
such as restaurants,
meeting rooms,
entertainment, and
recreational
facilities.
Household pets
(noncommercial).
Domesticated animals
and birds ordinarily
permitted in a
dwelling unit and
kept for company or
pleasure of the
owner, including, but
not limited to, dogs,
cats, and caged
birds, in compliance  II  II  II                II  II                II
with all applicable
requirements of title
6 of this Code.
Household pets do not
include inherently or
potentially dangerous
animals, fowl or
reptiles or exotic
animals. (See section
16.12.112 of this
title.)
Light manufacturing.
Includes the
processing and
fabrication of
finished products,
predominantly from
previously prepared
materials, and
includes the
assembly, fabrication
or processing of
goods and materials
using processes that
do not create noise,
smoke, fumes, odors,  X   X   X                 IV  X                 X
glare, or health or
safety hazards
outside of the
building and where
such assembly,
fabrication or
processing takes
place. Operations to
process products
shall be conducted
entirely within a
building that does
not exceed a gross
building floor area
of 3,000 square feet.
Major facility of a
public utility. Any
electric transmission
lines (greater than
115,000 volts), power
plants or substations
of electric
utilities; gas
gathering facility,
regulator stations,
transmission and
gathering pipelines
and storage areas of  X   X   X                 V   X                 X
utilities providing
natural gas or
petroleum
derivatives; and
their appurtenant
facilities, water
treatment plant,
sewage treatment
plant, or similar
public or quasi-
public use or
activity.
Medical and dental
clinic. An
organization of
doctors, dentists, or
other healthcare
professional
providing physical or
mental health service IV  IV  IV                X   IV                IV
and medical or
surgical care of the
sick or injured but
which does not
include inpatient or
overnight
accommodations.
Minor facility of a
public utility. Any
water, sewer, power,
gas, telephone, cable
television, or other
utility, distribution II  II  II                II  II                II
line, or facility,
which is located
underground and
buried beneath the
surface of the
ground.
Model home. A
dwelling unit having
all of the following
characteristics:
    The dwelling unit
    is constructed
    upon a lot in a
(1) subdivision for
    which a final
    plat has been
    recorded.         X   X   II                X   II                X
    The dwelling unit
    is intended to be
    temporarily
    utilized as an
(2) example of the
    dwelling units
    that are proposed
    to be built in
    the same
    subdivision.
Mortuary, funeral
home. An
establishment in
which the dead are
prepared for burial   X   IV  X                 X   X                 X
or cremation. The
facility may include
a chapel and other
rooms to conduct
funeral services.
Motel. A building or
group of buildings
containing 4 or more
guestrooms, some or
all of which may have
a separate entrance
leading directly from
the outside of the
building with a
garage or parking
space located on the
lot and designed,
used or intended      X   V   V                 X   V                 X
wholly or in part for
the accommodation of
persons usually
traveling by private
automobile or motor
coach and which may
include additional
services, such as
restaurants, meeting
rooms, entertainment
and recreational
facilities.
Neighborhood
commercial retail
sales and services.
Establishments
engaged in the retail
sale of goods and
services.
Neighborhood
commercial retail
sales and service
businesses must
conduct all sales of
goods and services,
with all associated
storage of goods and
materials, within a
totally enclosed
building (with the
exception of
occasional outdoor
"sidewalk"
promotions), with no
separate individual
building to exceed
3,000 square feet in
total gross building
and the total gross
floor area of all
buildings, on any                                                     IV
separate, individual  IV  IV  IV                X   IV                Secondary
lot, does not exceed
more than 6,000
square feet of gross
building area.
Neighborhood
commercial retail
sales and services
specifically excludes
all sales, accessory
uses, and service
uses that typically
display goods or
services, or store
goods or products in
open, unenclosed
areas, including, but
not limited to,
automotive, truck,
recreational vehicle,
trailer, and
manufactured home
sales lots, repair
yards, open storage
areas, and all
similar outside
display and storage
areas of goods,
materials, equipment,
and vehicles.
Nursing home,
convalescent care
center. A facility
that provides 24 hour
residential care to
persons who are not
related by blood,
marriage, or adoption
to the owner,         V   V   V                 X   V                 X
operator, or manager
of the facility. A
nursing home or
convalescent care
center provides some
level of skilled
nursing or medical
service to the
residents.
Outdoor theater. A
facility for outdoor
performances where
the audience views
the production while
seated outside and
which may include     X   X   V                 X   V                 X
associated
restaurant,
commercial retail
sales areas, staff
offices, production,
and maintenance
facilities.
Personal services. An
establishment for the
provision of personal
services, including,
but not limited to,                                                   IV
barber or beauty      IV  IV  IV                X   IV                Secondary
shop, dry cleaners,
optometrist shop,
tanning salon,
fitness center, or
photographic studio.
Private club. Any
nonprofit corporation
operating as a social
club, recreational,
fraternal or athletic                                                 IV
association, or       X   IV  IV                X   IV                Secondary
kindred association
organized primarily
for the benefit of
its stockholders or
members.
Professional offices.
A building for the
professions,
including, but not
limited to,
government,
physicians, dentists,
lawyers, realtors,
architects,
engineers, artists,   IV  IV  IV                IV  IV                IV
musicians, designers,
teachers, accountants
and others who,
through training, are
qualified to perform
services of a
professional nature,
and where no storage
or sale of
merchandise exists.
Public uses and
utilities. A use
operated exclusively
by a public body or
quasi- public body,
such use having the
purpose of serving
the public health,
safety, or general
welfare, and
including streets,
parks, recreational   IV  IV  IV                IV  IV                IV
facilities,
administrative and
service facilities,
and public utilities,
and found to conform
to the general plan,
as adopted. Public
uses and utilities do
not include "major
facility of a public
utility", as defined
herein.
RV resort. A parcel
of land under the
control of any person
wherein 2 or more RV
sites, along with the
amenities,
facilities, and
services designed to
provide guests with a X   X   V                 X   X                 X
higher quality
experience than found
in an RV park or
campground, are
offered for short
term rental to the
public and complies
with chapter 17, part
2 of this title.
Reception hall,
reception center. A
facility for the
holding of events
including, but not    X   IV  IV                X   IV                X
limited to, weddings,
wedding receptions,
community meetings,
and group gatherings.
Recycling binnies.
"Recycling binnies"
are recycling
containers that are
no more than 4 cubic
yards in size. The
total capacity of all
recycling binnies at
any 1 site shall not
exceed 40 cubic
yards. Sites for
recycling binnies
that are located in
parking lots may not
occupy required
parking spaces.
Recycling binnies     II  II  II                II  II                II
must be arranged to
not impede traffic
flow. The operator of
the recycling binnies
shall remove products
stored at the site at
least once a week.
The operator of the
recycling binnies
shall keep the
binnies in proper
repair and both the
binnies and the site
shall be kept neat
and clean in
appearance.
Recycling collection
center. A center for
the acceptance and
temporary storage of
recyclable materials
to be transferred to
a recycling
processing facility.
Recycling collection
centers involve no
more than 3
collection containers
up to 40 cubic yards
in total size.
Collection centers
located in parking
lots may not occupy
required parking
spaces. A collection  X   IV  X                 IV  X                 X
center must be
arranged to not
impede traffic flow.
The operator of the
collection center
shall remove products
stored at the site at
least once a week.
The operator of the
collection center
shall keep the
collection center in
proper repair and the
exterior must have a
neat and clean
appearance. Automated
can recycling
machines are limited
to 2 per site.
Residence for persons
with a disability. A
residence in which
more than 1 person
with a disability
resides; and is
licensed or certified
by the department of
human services under
title 62A, chapter 2,
licensure of programs
and facilities; or is V   V   V                 X   V                 X
licensed or certified
by the department of
health under title
26, chapter 21,
health care facility
licensing and
inspection act. See
definition of
"disability". (See
section
16.12.108 of this
title.)
Residence for persons
with a disability
that are substance
abuse facilities
located within 500
feet of a school. A
residence in which
more than 1 person
with a disability
resides; and is
licensed or certified
by the department of
human services under
title 62A, chapter 2, V   V   V                 X   V                 X
licensure of programs
and facilities; or is
licensed or certified
by the department of
health under title
26, chapter 21,
health care facility
licensing and
inspection act. See
definition of
"disability". (See
section
16.12.109 of this
title.)
Resort. A specialized
guest complex
intended for
relaxation and
enjoyment, designed
for occupancy of
limited duration,
including
recreational
activities such as
tennis, golf,
swimming, horse
riding, body
conditioning, hiking
and similar           X   V   V                 X   V                 X
activities intended
primarily for use by
guests. A resort may
also include
residential units of
various types or
commercial uses
designed to serve and
provide for the
convenience of
guests, including
restaurants, gift
shops, and similar
uses.
Resort Hotel. A
building or buildings
offering temporary
lodging
accommodations, or
overnight
accommodations for
guests, with a common
room reservation      X   X   V                 X   V                 X
system, 4 or more
guestrooms, and which
may include
additional services,
such as restaurants,
meeting rooms,
entertainment, and
recreational
facilities.
Restaurant, fast
food. A building or
facility that sells
food and beverages
primarily over a
counter, rather than
by waitress or
waiter; packages its
food in wrappers,     X   IV  IV                X   IV                IV
boxes or cartons
regardless if the
food is consumed on
or off the restaurant
premises; and
typically provides a
drive-through/drive-
up facility.
Restaurant, sit down.
A building or
facility for the
preparation, retail   IV  IV  IV                X   IV                IV
sale, and on site
consumption of food
and beverages.
Sale, distribution,
and consumption of
alcoholic beverages
and alcoholic
products. As defined  As provided by title 5, chapter 4 of this Code, Ivins
and provided by title City alcoholic beverage control ordinance.
5, chapter 4 of this
Code, Ivins City
alcoholic beverage
control ordinance.
Sexually oriented
business. An activity
identified and
conducted in          X   X   X                 V   X                 X
compliance with the
requirements of Title
5, Chapter 6 of this
Code, as applicable
Sign, awning. A sign
displayed on or
attached flat against As required and provided by chapter 21 and section
the surface of an     16.21.102 of this title.
awning. (See chapter
21 of this title.)
Sign, canopy. A sign
attached to, or
constructed in, a     As allowed and provided by chapter 21 and section
canopy, typically     16.21.102 of this title.
located over a fuel
island. (See chapter
21 of this title.)
Sign, freestanding
monument. A sign
attached to the
ground or a
foundation in the
ground, and where
there are no poles,   As allowed and provided by chapter 21 and section
braces, or other      16.21.102 of this title.
visible means of
support other than
the attachment or
foundation to the
ground. (See chapter
21 of this title.)
Sign, projecting. A
sign attached to a
building and
extending no more
than 5 feet           As allowed and provided by chapter 21 and section
perpendicular from    16.21.102 of this title.
the building wall to
which the sign is
attached. (See
chapter 21 of this
title.)
Sign, temporary/Class
I use sign. A sign
intended to be
displayed for a       As allowed and provided by chapter 21 and section
limited period, not   16.21.102 of this title.
to exceed 45 days.
(See chapter 21 of
this title.)
Sign, wall. A sign
displayed upon or
against the wall of a
building, where the
exposed face of the
sign is parallel to   As allowed and provided by chapter 21 and section
the wall and extends  16.21.102 of this title.
not more than 12
inches horizontally
from the face of the
wall. (See chapter 21
of this title.)
Sign, window. A sign
attached to a window
to be visible from    As allowed and provided by chapter 21 and section
outside of the        16.21.102 of this title.
building. (See
chapter 21 of this
title.)
Storage of
recreational vehicles
(limited). The
outside storage and
parking of not more
than 2 recreational
vehicles, including
motor homes, boats,   II  II  II                II  II                II
caravans, trailers,
or similar, for a
period exceeding 48
hours, and owned by
the property owner.
(See section
16.12.111 of this
title.)
Storage space
(limited). Kayenta
has remaining
approximately 16,000  X   X   X                 V   X                 X
sq. ft. of allowed
storage space in the
Crescent Moon area as
of May 1, 2018.
Swimming pool. An
artificial body of
water having a depth
in excess of 18
inches, designed,
constructed and used
for swimming, dipping
or immersion purposes X   X   IV                X   IV                X
by men, women or
children, and located
on a same lot or
parcel as a dwelling,
or dwellings. (See
section
16.12.119 of this
title.)
Tattoo Parlor. An
establishment that
fixes an indelible
mark or figure upon
the body by inserting
a pigment under the
skin or by producing  X   X   X                 IV  X                 X
scars. (This does not
include aestheticians
and others who apply
permanent makeup,
including
cosmetologists and
dermatologists.)
Tennis court/sports
court. An improved
area used for the
playing of tennis or
other sports
activities,
including, but not    X   X   IV                X   IV                IV
limited to,                                                           Secondary
basketball and
volleyball, and
located on a same lot
or parcel as a
dwelling, or
dwellings.
Wireless
telecommunications
site/facility. A
facility used for the
transmission or
reception of
electromagnetic or
electro-optic
information,
including wireless
telecommunications
facilities such as
"cellular" or "PCS"
(personal
communications
systems)
communication and
paging systems. This
use is not required
to be located on a
separate lot or to
comply with the
minimum lot size
requirement for the
district in which it  X   X   X                 IV  X                 X
is located but is
required to meet the
design and locational
requirements, as
established for such
uses, as provided by
this title.
Telecommunications
site/facility does
not include radio
antennas complying
with the ruling of
the Federal
Communications
Commission in
"amateur radio
preemption, 101 FCC
2nd 952 (1985)" or a
regulation related to
amateur radio service
adopted under 47 CFR
part 97. (See section
16.12.122 of this
title.)
 
(Ord. 2012-08, 2012; amd. Ord. 2014-05, 2014; Ord. 2014-09, 2014; Ord. 2016-06,
2016; Ord. 2016-28, 2016; Ord. 2017-17, 2017; Ord. 2018-11, 2018; Ord. 2020-06,
2020)
16.33.103: TABLE 33-3, SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PRIMARY
BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
This table is a summary table only. All required development standards are
contained within the various chapters of this title, and more particularly
chapters 11, 12, 19, 20, 21, and 22 of this title.
Development           RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-  R-1- R-  R-1- R-2-
Standards   RA-5 RA-1 43.0 37.0 25.0 20.0 17.5 15.0 12.5 10   1-  5    10   R-M
                                                              7.5
Development  RA-5  RA-1 RE-    RE-    RE-    RE-    RE-    RE-    RE-    R-1-10 R-     R-1-5  R-2-10 R-M
Standards               43.0   37.0   25.0   20.0   17.5   15.0   12.5          1-7.5
Site plan                                                                                            See
approval     As required by chapter 19 of this title.                                                note
                                                                                                     1
Buildable    As required by section                                                                  See
area          16.11.118 of this title.                                                               note
                                                                                                     1
Minimum lot  5     1    43,000 37,000 25,000 20,000 17,500 15,000 12,500 10,000 7,500  5,000  10,000 See
size         acres acre sq.    sq.    sq.    sq.    sq.    sq.    sq.    sq.    sq.    sq.    sq.    note
                        ft.    ft.    ft.    ft.    ft.    ft.    ft.    ft.    ft.    ft.    ft.    1
Lot frontage As required by section                                                                  See
required     16.11.121 of this title.                                                                note
                                                                                                     1
Building     As required by chapter 19 and section                                                   See
requirements 16.11.124 of this title.                                                                note
                                                                                                     1
Site                                                                                                 See
lighting     As required by chapters 19 and 22 of this title.                                        note
                                                                                                     1
Off street                                                                                           See
parking      As required by chapter 20 of this title.                                                note
                                                                                                     1
             Double car garage, 400 sq. ft. minimum - see sections                                   See
Garage       16.11.124,                                                                              note
requirements 16.12.103 and                                                                           1
             16.12.104 of this title.
Required     As required by section                                                                  See
enclosed     16.11.124 of this title.                                                                note
storage                                                                                              1
Minimum      As required by section                                                                  See
building     16.11.125 of this title.                                                                note
height                                                                                               1
Maximum      As required by section                                                                  See
building     16.11.126 of this title.                                                                note
height                                                                                               1
Mechanical   (1) As required by section                                                              See
equipment    16.11.130 of this title.                                                                note
screening    (2) Must comply with all requirements of chapter 19 of this title.                      1
                                                                  80' (72.5' if
                                                                  lot is
                                                                  located       75'    50'    70'
Minimum lot        Width to length ratio no                       within the    85' on 60' on 80' on See
width        None  less than 1:3.            90'    80'    80'    area bounded  corner corner corner note
                                                                  by 200 East,  lot    lot    lot    1
                                                                  200 West, 300
                                                                  North, 200
                                                                  South).
Minimum            See                                                                 22' to garage See
front yard   30'   note 30'    30'    25'    25'    25'    25'    25'    25'    20'    15' to        note
                   1                                                                   dwelling      1
Minimum rear       See                                                                               See
yard         30'   note 30'    30'    30'    30'    10'    10'    10'    10'    10'    10'    10'    note
                   1                                                                                 1
Minimum side                                                                    10' and 8'           See
yard         30'   30'  30'    15'    15'    15'    10'    10'    10'    10'    **See below          note
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                **1 side setback may
                                                                                be reduced to 5'
**Minimum                                                                       when 15' minimum is  See
side yard    n/a   n/a  n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    maintained between   note
exception                                                                       primary structures   1
                                                                                abutting reduced
                                                                                setback property
                                                                                line.
Minimum side                                                                           See
yard for     30'   30'  30'    30'    25'    25'    25'    25'    25'    25'    20'    note 1 20'
corner lots
Minimum                                                                                1,300  900
floor area   900 sq. ft.                                                               sq.    sq.    See
for dwelling                                                                           ft.    ft.    note
Minimum                                                                                              1
floor area                                                                                    600
first story  600 sq. ft.                                                               n/a    sq.
(grade                                                                                        ft.
level) of
two-story
                                                                                       Architectural
Architecture                                                                           and landscape
and                                                                                    plans         See
landscaping  n/a   n/a  n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    required at   note
plans                                                                                  subdivision   1
required                                                                               or CUP
                                                                                       approval.
                                                                                       Landscaping
                                                                                       required at
Landscape                                                                              CO.           See
required     n/a   n/a  n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    Front yard    note
                                                                                       only R-1-5.   1
                                                                                       Full yard R-
                                                                                       2-10.
Adequate     As required by section                                                                  See
public       16.11.111 of this title.                                                                note
facilities                                                                                           1
Culinary
water and    As required by section                                                                  See
sanitary     16.11.112 of this title.                                                                note
sewage                                                                                               1
systems
             As required by section                                                                  See
Utilities    16.11.113 of this title.                                                                note
                                                                                                     1
Required
streets,                                                                                             See
curb,        As required by section                                                                  note
gutter,      16.11.114 of this title.                                                                1
sidewalks,
and trails
Clear view   As required by sections                                                                 See
areas        16.11.116 and                                                                           note
             16.11.117 of this title.                                                                1
 
Note:
   1.    See chapter 18 of this title.
(Ord. 2015-04, 2015; amd. Ord. 2016-06, 2016; Ord. 2017-06, 2017; Ord. 2017-17,
2017)
16.33.104: TABLE 33-4, SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY
BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
This table is a summary table only. All required development standards are
contained within the various chapters of this title, and more particularly
chapters 11, 12 and 19 of this title.
To view Table 33-4, click HERE
Development RA-      RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-   RE-  RE-  R-1- R-  R-1- R-2-
Standards   5   RA-1 43.0 37.0 25.0 20.0 17.55 15.0 12.5 10   1-  5    10   R-M
                                                              7.5
Development  RA- RA- RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-  RE-   RE-  RE-  R- R-  R-1- R-2-
Standards    5   1   43.0 37.0 25.0 20.0 17.55 15.0 12.5 1- 1-  5    10   R-M
                                                         10 7.5
Site plan                                                                 See
approval     As required by chapter 19 of this title.                     note
                                                                          6
Primary      As required by section                                       See
building     16.12.103 of this title.                                     note
required                                                                  6
Building     As required by section                                       See
requirements 16.12.103 of this title.                                     note
                                                                          6
Building     As required by section                                       See
codes        16.12.103 of this title.                                     note
                                                                          6
Utility      As required by section                                       See
connections  16.12.103 of this title.                                     note
                                                                          6
Accessory    As required by sections                                      See
building     16.12.103 and                                                note
location     16.12.104 of this title.                                     6
Maximum      As required by section                                       See
garage       16.12.104 of this title.                                     note
height                                                                    6
Number of    As required by section                                       See
allowed      16.12.104 of this title.                                     note
garages                                                                   6
Maximum      As required by section                                       See
garage size  16.12.104 of this title.                                     note
                                                                          6
Maximum                                                                   See
accessory    As required by section                                       note
building     16.12.104 of this title.                                     6
height
Maximum
total size                                                                See
of garage(s) As required by section                                       note
and other    16.12.104 of this title.                                     6
accessory
buildings
Minimum
distance
between
accessory                                                                 See
building     100' 1       100' n/a                  100' n/a              note
housing                   1,3                       1,2                   6
animals and
dwelling
unit on
adjacent lot
Minimum rear
and side
yards for                 30'                       30'                   See
accessory    30' 4        3,4  n/a                  2,4  n/a              note
buildings                                                                 6
housing
animals
 
Notes:
   1.    See section
16.12.113 of this title.
   2.    See subsection
16.12.113(4) of this title.
   3.    See subsection
16.12.113(5) of this title.
   4.    See subsection
16.12.113(9) of this title.
   5.    Contact the Building and Zoning Department for specific requirements.
   6.    See chapter 18 of this title.
(Ord. 2009-09, 2009; amd. Ord. 2016-06, 2016; Ord. 2017-06, 2017; Ord. 2017-17,
2017)
16.33.105: TABLE 33-5, SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PRIMARY
BUILDINGS IN NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES:
This table is a summary table only. All required development standards are
contained within the various chapters of this title, and more particularly
chapters 11, 12, 19, 20, 21 and 22 of this title.
To view Table 33-5, click HERE
Development Standards CN C-1 RC RMU CPR CLM
Development  CN C- RC RMU CPR CLM
Standards       1
Site plan    Required by chapter 19 of this title.
approval
Lot          As required by sections
standards    16.11.119 and
             16.11.120 of this title.
Buildable    As required by section
area         16.11.118 of this title.
Lot frontage As required by section
required     16.11.121 of this title.
Building     As required by chapter 19 of this title.
requirements
Site         As required by chapters 19 and 22 of this title.
lighting
Minimum      As required by section
building     16.11.125 of this title.
height
Site and
building     As required by chapters 19 and 21 of this title.
signage
Maximum      As required by section
building     16.11.126 of this title.
height
Mechanical   As required by section
equipment    16.11.130 and chapter 19 of this title.
screening
Maximum
building     3,000 square feet. No separate building larger than 30,000 square feet.
size
Minimum lot  Lot size sufficient to meet all requirements of chapter 19 of this
size         title.
Minimum lot  Lot width sufficient to meet all requirements of chapter 19 of this
width        title.
             (1)    Front yard sufficient to meet all requirements of chapter 19 of
             this title.
Minimum      (2)    When a front yard abuts a residential zone, the front yard
front yard   requirements of the adjacent residential zone shall apply or as required
             by the Land Use Authority to meet the requirements of chapter 19 of this
             title.
             (1)    Rear yard sufficient to meet all requirements of chapter 19 of
             this title.
Minimum rear (2)    When a rear yard abuts a residential zone, the rear yard
yard         requirements of the adjacent residential zone shall apply or as required
             by the Land Use Authority to meet the requirements of chapter 19 of this
             title.
             (1)    Side yard sufficient to meet all requirements of chapter 19 of
             this title.
Minimum side (2)    When a side yard abuts a residential zone, the side yard
yard         requirements of the adjacent residential zone shall apply or as required
             by the land use authority to meet the requirements of chapter 19 of this
             title.
Off street
parking      Must comply with all requirements of chapter 20 of this title.
requirements
Adequate     As required by section
public       16.11.111 of this title.
facilities
Culinary
water and    As required by section
sanitary     16.11.112 of this title.
sewage
systems
Utilities    As required by section
             16.11.113 of this title.
Required
streets,
curb,        As required by section
gutter,      16.11.114 of this title.
sidewalks,
and trails
Clear view   As required by sections
areas        16.11.116 and
             16.11.117 of this title.
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
16.33.106: TABLE 33-6, SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY
BUILDINGS IN NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES:
This table is a summary table only. All required development standards are
contained within the various chapters of this title, and more particularly
chapters 11, 12 and 19 of this title.
To view Table 33-6, click HERE
Development Standards CN C-1 RC RMU CPR CLM
Development  CN C- RC RMU CPR CLM
Standards       1
Site plan    Required by chapter 19 of this title.
approval
Primary      Required by section
building     16.12.103 of this title.
required
Building     Required by section
requirements 16.12.103 of this title.
Building     Required by section
codes        16.12.103 of this title.
Utility      Required by section
connections  16.12.103 of this title.
             (1)    No accessory building shall be located closer than 3' to any side or
             rear property line (section
             16.12.103 of this title).
             (2)    No portion of an accessory building shall be closer than 1' to any
Location  �property line (section
             16.12.103 of this title).
             (3)    No stormwater from any accessory building shall be allowed to run
             onto any adjacent property (section
             16.12.103 of this title).
Maximum
accessory    As required for the primary building.
building
height
             (1)    Front yard sufficient to meet all requirements of chapter 19 of this
Minimum      title.
front yard   (2)    When a front yard abuts a residential zone, the front yard
             requirements of the adjacent zone shall apply or as required by the land
             use authority to meet the requirements of chapter 19 of this title.
             (1)    Rear yard sufficient to meet all requirements of chapter 19 of this
             title.
Minimum rear (2)    When a rear yard abuts a residential zone, the rear yard
yard         requirements of the adjacent residential zone shall apply or as required by
             the land use authority to meet the requirements of chapter 19 of this
             title.
             (1)    Side yard sufficient to meet all requirements of chapter 19 of this
             title.
Minimum side (2)    When a side yard abuts a residential zone, the side yard
yard         requirements of the adjacent residential zone shall apply or as required by
             the land use authority to meet the requirements of chapter 19 of this
             title.
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2014-05, 2014)
CHAPTER 34
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
16.34.101: Purpose And Conflicts
16.34.102: Definitions Of General Purpose
16.34.101: PURPOSE AND CONFLICTS:
This chapter provides definitions of general terms used throughout this title
for which a definition is considered necessary. The word "herein" means "in
this title"; the word "regulations" means "these regulations"; "used" or
"occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the
words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied". For the
convenience of users of this title, certain terms may be illustrated herein. If
a conflict arises between an illustration and a definition, the definition
shall apply. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
16.34.102: DEFINITIONS OF GENERAL PURPOSE:
Words not defined herein shall have a meaning consistent with "Webster's New
Collegiate Dictionary", latest edition.
ABANDON/ABANDONED: A use that has been discontinued for a minimum period of one
year, or a building, structure, sign or other object that remains vacant or
unused for a minimum period of one year.
ABANDONMENT: Any act that results to abandon.
ACCESS: The provision of vehicular and/or pedestrian ingress and egress to a
lot, parcel, building or structure.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building incidental and clearly subordinate to the
primary building.
ACCESSORY USE: A use that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the
primary use located on the same lot.
ACT: The municipal land use, development, and management act, as provided by
Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 9a, as amended.
ACTIVE OR VALID BUILDING PERMIT: A building permit that has not expired.
ADJACENT PROPERTY/ADJACENT LANDOWNERS: A lot or parcel of property, or the
owner of record of such, according to the records of the Washington County
recorder that has a common boundary line with a lot or parcel of property that
is the subject of some action before the city.
AFFECTED ENTITY: A county, municipality, independent special district under
Utah Code Annotated title 17A, chapter 2, independent special districts, local
district under Utah Code Annotated title 17B, chapter 2, local districts,
school district, interlocal cooperation entity established under Utah Code
Annotated title 11, chapter 13, interlocal cooperation act, specified public
utility, or the Utah department of transportation, if:
   (1)   The entity's services or facilities are likely to require expansion or
significant modification because of an intended use of land;
   (2)   The entity has filed with the municipality a copy of the entity's
general or long range plan; or
   (3)   The entity's boundaries or facilities are within one mile of land that
is the subject of a general plan amendment or land use ordinance change.
AGENT: The person with written authorization to represent a property owner.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: Means and includes "beer" and "liquor", as defined in the
state of Utah alcoholic beverage control act, as amended.
ALTERATION: Any change, addition or modification in construction of a building
or structure.
ANTENNA: A transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications that
radiates or captures radio signals.
ANTENNA, ROOF MOUNTED: Antennas mounted on a roof or roof mounted structure of
a building.
ANTENNA, STEALTH DESIGN: An antenna and/or antenna mounting system designed to
be virtually unseen as the result of design, color schemes, screening and/or
disguising.
ANTENNA, WALL MOUNTED: Antennas mounted against the vertical wall of a
building.
APPEAL AUTHORITY: The city's administrative law judge as provided by chapter 30
of this title.
APPLICANT: Any person presenting a land use application for any approval,
permit or license required by a land use ordinance.
APPLICATION, COMPLETE: An application that includes all information requested
on the appropriate form, and payment of all applicable fees.
APPLICATION, INCOMPLETE: An application that lacks information requested on the
appropriate form, or lacks the payment of all applicable fees.
APPLICATION/LAND USE APPLICATION: Written requests for an approval, permit or
license and completed in a manner prescribed by this title for review and
decision by a land use authority.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION: Any projection which is not intended for occupancy
and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building, but shall
not include signs.
AWNING: A roofed structure placed to extend outward from the building providing
a protective shield for doors, windows and other openings supported by the
building or other supports.
BASE DISTRICT: A zoning district that establishes regulations governing land
use and site development in a specific geographic area.
BASEMENT: A story partly under ground and having at least one- half (1/2) its
height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
BAY WINDOW: A window or series of windows forming a recess or bay from a room
and projecting outward from the wall.
BEER: All products that contain sixty three one-hundredths of one percent
(0.63%) of alcohol by volume or one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by
weight, but not more than four percent (4%) of alcohol by volume or three and
two-tenths percent (3.2%) by weight, and are obtained by fermentation, infusion
or decoction of any malted grain. Beer may or may not contain hops or other
vegetable products. "Beer" includes products referred to as malt liquor, malted
beverages or malt coolers.
BERM: A mound of earth used as a site feature, or to shield, screen and buffer
uses, undesirable views and to separate land uses.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): A practice, or combination of practices,
determined to be the most effective (including technological, economic and
institutional considerations) means of preventing or reducing disturbance or
disruption to the natural environment.
BILLBOARD: A sign located on industrial, commercial or residential property and
the sign is designed or intended to direct attention to a business, product or
service that is not sold, offered or existing on the property where the sign is
located. See also definition of Sign, Off Premises.
BUILDABLE AREA: That area of a lot or parcel which is outside of any required
setback areas and outside of any other areas regulated by this title.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2979.gif]
BUILDING: Any structure, whether permanent or temporary, which is designed,
intended or used for occupancy by any person, business, animals, possessions,
or for storage of property or materials of any kind.
BUILDING CODE: The international building code, as adopted by the city.
BUILDING DIVISION/BUILDING DEPARTMENT: The building department of Ivins City,
Utah.
BUILDING FACADE: That portion of an exterior elevation of a building extending
from the finished grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire
width of the building elevation.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: The horizontal, linear dimension of that side of a building
abutting a street, a parking area, or other circulation area open to the
public.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the natural or finished grade,
whichever is lower, to the highest point of the building or structure.
BUILDING LINE: The line circumscribing the buildable area of a lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/bfe1b77f120773ada0c8573f992b553417b20367/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2982.gif]
BUILDING LINE, FRONT: A line parallel to the front lot line and at a distance
therefrom equal to the required depth of the front yard setback and extending
across the entire width of the lot or parcel.
BUILDING LINE, REAR: A line parallel to the rear lot line and at a distance
therefrom equal to the required depth of the rear yard setback and extending
across the entire width of the lot or parcel.
BUILDING LINE, SIDE: A line parallel to the side lot line and at a distance
therefrom equal to the required depth of the side yard setback and extending
between the front and rear building lines.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The person charged with the administration and enforcement
of the building code of Ivins City, or designee.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit authorizing a construction activity.
BUSINESS: Means and includes all trades, occupations, professions or activities
carried on within the city for the purpose of gain or economic profit.
BUSINESS LICENSE DIVISION: The business license division of Ivins City, Utah.
CANOPY: A roofed structure constructed and provided as a protective shield for
a facility such as gas pump islands.
CARPORT: Roofed structures open on at least two (2) sides and subject to all
requirements prescribed for a garage.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A certificate issued by the building official
authorizing occupancy of a building or structure requiring a building permit.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER: The Ivins City manager.
CITY ENGINEER: A registered civil engineer so appointed by the city.
CITY MANAGER: The duly appointed city manager of Ivins City, Utah.
CLEAR VIEW AREA: Areas at intersecting streets and driveways where unobstructed
vision is maintained, as required by this title.
CLOSURE (DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ORDINANCE): The cessation of
operation of a facility, or any portion thereof, and the act of securing such
facility or portion thereof, to ensure protection of ground water in accordance
with federal, state and local regulations applicable to the specific facility.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A design that locates buildings in specific areas of a
site to allow the remaining land to be used, but not limited to, recreation,
open space and preservation of sensitive land areas.
CODE: The Ivins City municipal code, as adopted.
COMMISSION: The planning commission of Ivins City, Utah.
COMMON AREA: Facilities and yards under common ownership.
COMMON OWNERSHIP: Ownership of the same property by different persons.
CONDITIONAL USE: A land use that, because of its unique characteristics or
potential impact on the municipality, surrounding neighbors or adjacent land
uses, may not be compatible in some areas, or may be compatible only if certain
conditions are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts. For
the purposes of this title, conditional uses include class IV and class V uses.
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING: A governmental action that results in a taking of
private property so that compensation to the owner of the property is required
by the:
   (1)   Fifth or fourteenth amendment of the constitution of the United
States; or
   (2)   Utah constitution article I, section 22.
CONSTRUCTION: The materials, architecture, assembly and installation of a
building or structure.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: All grading, excavation, construction, grubbing or other
site preparation or development activity which disturbs or changes the natural
vegetation, grade, or any existing building or structure, or the act of adding
an addition to an existing building or structure, or the erection of a new
primary or accessory building or structure on a lot or parcel.
CORRAL: A space, yard or other unenclosed area, other than a building, used for
the confinement of animals.
COUNCIL: The city council of Ivins City, Utah.
COUNTY: The unincorporated area of Washington County, Utah, or the board of
county commissioners of Washington County, Utah.
COURT: An open area, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or
buildings, which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by the walls of such
building or buildings.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street with only one outlet and an area for the safe and
convenient turning around of traffic.
CULINARY WATER AUTHORITY: The department, agency or public entity with
responsibility to review and approve the feasibility of the culinary water
system and sources for the subject property.
CUT: The process of lowering the natural grade of the ground, or the depth or
the volume of such material removal.
DECIBEL (dB): A unit of measure used to express intensity of noise.
DECLARATION: The legal instrument by which property is subjected to the
provisions of the state of Utah condominium ownership act, or a declaration of
covenants, conditions and restrictions.
DEDICATION: The setting aside of land by an owner for any public use for the
enjoyment of the public and owned by a public agency.
DEMOLISH OR DEMOLITION: Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a
building or structure.
DENSITY: The intensity or number of nonresidential and residential uses
expressed in terms of unit equivalents per acre or lot or units per acre.
DENSITY, BASE: The number of dwelling units per acre allowed by a zoning
district.
DENSITY, INCENTIVE: The number of additional dwelling units per acre allowed in
addition to the base density.
DEVELOPER: Any person or organization that develops, or intends to develop or
sell property for the purpose of future development subject to the provisions
of this title, or other land use ordinances.
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any of the following:
   (1)   Any manmade change to improved or unimproved lands, including, but not
limited to, buildings or structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations;
   (2)   Any construction, reconstruction or expansion of a building, structure
or use;
   (3)   Any change in the use of a building or structure;
   (4)   Any change in the use of land that creates additional demand and need
for public facilities or services;
   (5)   The act of subdividing; or
   (6)   The act, process or result of developing.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A contract between an applicant or owner and the city
council pursuant to the provisions in this title.
DEVELOPMENT SITE: The perimeters and total area of a tract, lot or parcel of
land intended to be used for a development activity.
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: Established regulations concerning lot areas, yard
setbacks, building height, lot coverage, open space and any other special
regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purpose of this title or other
land use ordinances.
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities, including a person having a record of
such impairment or being regarded as having such impairment 1 . "Disability"
does not include current illegal use of or addiction to any federally
controlled substance, as defined in section 102 of the controlled substances
act, 21 USC 802 2 . "Disability" does not include placement in lieu of
confinement, rehabilitation or treatment in a correctional facility.
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONE: An area within which certain practices
are mandated to protect ground water flowing to public drinking water wells.
DRINKING WATER SUPPLY SPRING: A drinking water spring that supplies water that
has been permitted or intended for consumptive use.
DRINKING WATER SUPPLY WELL: A drinking water well that supplies water that has
been permitted or intended for consumptive use.
DRIVEWAY: A private access, the use of which is limited to persons residing,
employed or otherwise using or visiting the parcel on which it is located.
DWELLING UNIT: A building, or portion thereof, containing one or more rooms and
one kitchen, and including areas for living and sleeping, designed to be used
for human occupancy, and complying with all provisions of the building code.
The definition of a "dwelling unit" shall also include "dwelling unit,
manufactured" as defined in this section.
DWELLING UNIT, MANUFACTURED:
   (1)   A transportable factory built housing unit constructed on or after
June 15, 1976, according to the federal home construction and safety standards
act of 1974 (HUD code), in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode,
is eight feet (8') or more in width or forty feet (40') or more in length, or
when erected on site, is four hundred (400) or more square feet, and which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling unit,
with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems.
   (2)   To meet the requirements of this title and state laws, when erected on
the site, the home must be at least twenty four feet (24') in width at the
narrowest dimension, have exterior and roofing materials acceptable to the
building code, as adopted by Ivins City, have a minimum roof pitch of two to
twelve (2:12), and be located on a permanent foundation, in accordance with
plans providing for vertical loads, uplift and lateral forces, and frost
protection in compliance with the building code. All appendages, including
carports, garages, storage buildings, additions or alterations, must be built
in compliance with the building code. The manufactured dwelling must be
connected to the required utilities, including plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems. All manufactured dwelling units
constructed on or after June 15, 1976, shall be identifiable by the
manufacturer's data plate bearing the date the unit was manufactured and a HUD
label attached to the exterior of the home certifying the home was manufactured
to HUD standards. A manufactured dwelling unit shall be identified as real
property on the property assessment rolls of Washington County.
EPA: The United States environmental protection agency.
EASEMENT: That portion of a lot, parcel or tract reserved for present or future
use by a person or agency other than the fee owner of the property. The
easement may be for use under, on or above said lot, parcel or tract.
ELDERLY PERSON: A person who is sixty (60) years old or older, who desires or
needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable
of living independently.
ESCROW: A deposit of cash with the city, or approved alternate in lieu of cash,
held to ensure the performance of a task or a maintenance guarantee.
EXCAVATION: The removal of boulders, gravel, rocks, earth or similar naturally
occurring deposits from its natural position.
EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION: Lighting that illuminates a building or structure,
parking area or other outside area from a location outside of the building or
structure.
FAMILY: A person living alone, or any of the following groups living together
as a single housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking and
eating facilities: a) any number of people who are related by blood, marriage,
adoption or court sanctioned guardianship, together with any incidental
domestic or support staff who may or may not reside on the premises; or b) four
(4) unrelated people; or c) two (2) unrelated people and any children related
to either of them. "Family" does not include any group of individuals whose
association is temporary or seasonal in nature or who are in a group living
arrangement because of criminal offenses.
FENCE: A barrier or obstruction of any material, with the purpose or intent, or
having the effect, of preventing passage or view across the fence line.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence which permits vision through more than fifty percent (50%)
of each square foot more than eight inches (8") above the natural or finished
grade.
FENCE, SIGHT OBSCURING: A fence which permits no vision (zero percent) through
any part of the fence more than eight inches (8") above the natural or finished
grade.
FILL: The process of raising the natural grade of the ground, or the depth or
the volume of such material.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The Ivins City fire department.
FISCAL IMPACT ANALYSIS: An analysis that describes the current or anticipated
effect upon the public costs and revenues imposed by a development activity.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community on which the
United States federal emergency management agency has delineated areas of flood
hazard.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the United States
federal emergency management agency that includes flood profiles, the flood
boundary-floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   (1)   The overflow of inland waters, including streams, creeks and rivers;
and/or
   (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
FLOODPLAIN, 100-YEAR: An area where a peak flow magnitude has about a one
percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year. The area is based
on statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed and
analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general region of the
watershed. The flood would have an average frequency of occurrence of about
once in one hundred (100) years.
FLOOR AREA (GROSS FLOOR AREA): The sum of the footage contained within all
buildings or structures on a site measured from the outside wall surfaces and
including basements, garages, porches, utility rooms, stairways, recreation
rooms and storage rooms, but excluding unroofed balconies and patios.
FLOOR AREA (NET FLOOR AREA): The sum of the footage contained within all
buildings or structures on a site measured from the inside wall surfaces
including basements, but excluding garages, porches, utility rooms, stairways,
storage rooms and unroofed balconies and patios.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The total gross floor area of a building divided by the area
of the lot on which it is located.
FLOOR AREA (TOTAL): The sum of the gross floor area of all floors of a building
and its accessory buildings located on the same lot. All dimensions shall be
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls.
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit for measuring the amount of illumination on a surface.
FOOT-CANDLE, AVERAGE (AFC): The level of light measured at an average point of
illumination between the brightest and darkest areas, at the ground surface and
four feet (4') above the ground surface.
FOOT-CANDLE, HORIZONTAL (HFC): A unit of illumination produced on a horizontal
surface, all points of which are one foot (1') from a uniform point source of
one candle.
FOOT-CANDLE, VERTICAL (VFC): A unit of illumination produced on a vertical
surface, all points of which are one foot (1') from a uniform point source of
one candle.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of the street between
intersecting or intercepting streets, measured along the street line.
GARAGE: An accessory building used for the storage of motor vehicles.
GENERAL PLAN: The Ivins City general plan, as adopted.
GEOLOGIC HAZARD: A hazard inherent in the crust of the earth, or artificially
created, which is dangerous, or potentially dangerous to life, property or
improvements, due to the movement, subsidence or shifting of the earth. The
term includes, but is not limited to, unstable slopes, faults, landslides and
rock falls.
GRADE, FINISHED: The finished elevation of the surface of the land after the
completion of any development activity or other excavation.
GRADE, NATURAL: The elevation of the surface of the land prior to any
development activity or excavation.
GRADING: An excavation, cut or fill, or the act of excavating, either cutting
or filling.
GROUND WATER: Any water that may be drawn from the ground.
GROUND WATER DISCHARGE AREA: An area where the direction of ground water
movement is upward from the principal aquifer to the shallow unconfined
aquifer.
GRUBBING: The removal or destruction of vegetation, including disturbance to
the root system or soil surface by mechanical, chemical or other means.
GUARANTEE: Any form of security, including cash, a letter of credit, or an
escrow agreement in an amount and form satisfactory to the City.
HARD SURFACED: Covered with concrete, brick, asphalt or other impervious
material.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A material as defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Washington County Health Department.
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS: Displays of a primarily decorative nature commonly
associated with any national, local or religious holiday.
HOME BASED BUSINESS: A commercial or other nonresidential use conducted within
a dwelling unit that is incidental to the primary use of the dwelling unit.
IDENTICAL PLANS: Building plans submitted to Ivins City that are substantially
identical to building plans that were previously submitted to and reviewed and
approved by the Ivins City Building Department and describe a building that is:
   (1)   Located on land zoned the same as the land on which the building
described in the previously approved plans is located; and
   (2)   Subject to the same geological and meteorological conditions and the
same law as the building described in the previously approved plans.
INDIVIDUAL SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: An onsite solar power generation system
that backfeeds a primary structure either a commercial or a residential use.
Excess electricity produced can be distributed to the utility grid.
ILLEGAL BUILDING/STRUCTURE: A building or structure, or portion thereof,
established without securing the necessary approvals, permits or licenses, as
required by this title, the adopted Building Code, or their prior enactments.
ILLEGAL LOT: A lot created that has not received the necessary approvals,
permits or licenses, as required by the City land use ordinances.
ILLEGAL USE: A use established without receiving the necessary approvals,
permits or licenses, as required by the City land use ordinances.
IMPACT ANALYSIS: A determination of the potential effects, including, but not
limited to, environmental, fiscal, social matters, etc., upon the City or a
section of the City.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL OR SURFACE: Material that is impenetrable by water.
IMPROVEMENTS: Curbs, gutters, streets, roads, sidewalks, utilities, grading,
paving, landscaping, water and sewer systems, drainage systems, fences, fire
hydrants, streetlights, parks, public facilities, amenities and other such
requirements of this title.
INTENSITY: The degree of a quantitative or qualitative measurement associated
with a use of land or building.
INTERNAL ILLUMINATION: Lighting by means of a light source that is located
within a building structure, or other object, including a sign, or portions or
letters of a sign.
LAND USE: The manner in which land is occupied or used.
LAND USE APPLICATION: All applications required by this title, and the city's
other land use ordinances, required to initiate the review procedures for any
required approval, license or permit by a land use authority.
LAND USE APPROVAL: Any authorization received from a land use authority that
permits the commencement of a development activity.
LAND USE AUTHORITY: Means a person, board, commission, agency or other body
designated by the city council to act on a land use application.
LAND USE ORDINANCE: A planning, zoning, development or subdivision ordinance of
Ivins City, including this title, but does not include the Ivins City general
plan.
LANDSCAPING: Materials and treatments that include naturally growing elements
such as grass, trees, shrubs and flowers. "Landscaping" may also include the
use of rocks, fountains, benches and contouring of the earth when authorized by
a land use authority.
LATTICE TOWER: A self-supporting, multiple sided, open steel frame structure
used to support telecommunications equipment.
LEGAL BUILDING/STRUCTURE: A building or structure, or portion thereof,
established after receiving the necessary approvals, permits or licenses, as
required by the land use ordinances and complying with the requirements of the
land use ordinances and building code.
LEGAL LOT OF RECORD: Any lot, parcel or tract of land that existed, as recorded
in the office of the Washington County recorder, with a separate property
identification number as provided by the office of the Washington County
recorder and office of the Washington County assessor, prior to the date of the
adoption of the first Ivins City subdivision ordinance, and all lots, parcels
and tracts of land that were legally created pursuant to the subdivision
requirements of the city's land use ordinances and the laws of the state of
Utah after the date of the adoption of the first Ivins City subdivision
ordinance.
LEGAL USE: A use complying with the requirements of this title.
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The city council of Ivins, Utah.
LICENSED PREMISES: Any room, house, building, structure or place occupied by
any person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.
LICENSEE: Includes the person, firm, corporation or association to whom the
license is issued, and also means and includes the licensee's manager, agents,
servants and employees, and all other persons acting for him.
LIGHT SOURCE: A point of lumination that emits a measurable radiant energy in
or near the visible spectrum.
LIMITS OF DISTURBANCE: The area of a lot, parcel or tract of land in which all
development activity or construction must be contained, including all
impervious surfaces, buildings, structures, parking areas, driveways, etc.
LIQUOR: Alcohol, or any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or other
liquid, or combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous, vinous or
fermented, and all other drinks or drinkable liquids containing more than one-
half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume and is suitable to use for
beverage purposes. "Liquor" does not include "beer", as defined by the laws of
the state of Utah.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or proposed to be occupied by a building or
structure, together with such yards, open spaces, lot width and lot area as are
required by this title.
LOT AREA: The total land area of a lot, parcel or tract of land.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting streets where the interior
angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°).
LOT COVERAGE: The total horizontal area of a lot, parcel or tract of land
covered by any impervious surface, including buildings, structures, parking
areas, driveways, etc.
LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance from a front lot line to a rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot abutting two (2) parallel or approximately parallel
streets.
LOT, ILLEGAL: A lot that has not received the necessary approvals, permits or
licenses, as required by the city land use ordinances and state laws, or their
prior enactments.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot, parcel or tract of land, other than a corner lot.
LOT, IRREGULAR: A lot whose rear property line is not generally parallel to the
front property line such as a pie shaped lot on a cul-de-sac, or where the side
property lines are not parallel to each other.
LOT, LEGAL: A lot that has received the necessary approvals, permits or
licenses, as required by the city land use ordinances, or their prior
enactments.
LOT LINE: A line bounding a lot, parcel or tract of land that divides one lot,
parcel or tract from another, or from a street. See also definition of Property
Line.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: The relocation of the lot line or property boundary line
in a subdivision between two (2) adjoining lots with the consent and agreement
of the owners of record.
LOT LINE, FRONT: A lot line separating a lot from an existing street right of
way or, where a new street is proposed, the proposed street right of way line.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line generally opposite and most distant from the front
lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line that is not a front lot line or rear lot line. A
side lot line separating one lot from another is an interior side lot line.
LOT, NONCOMPLYING (ILLEGAL): A lot, parcel or tract of land that: a) was
created without receiving the necessary approvals, permits or licenses as
required by the city land use ordinances and state laws, and their prior
enactments; and b) does not conform with the requirements of the zoning
district in which the lot, parcel or tract is located.
LOT, NONCOMPLYING (LEGAL): A lot, parcel or tract of land that: a) legally
existed before its current zoning designation; and b) has been shown as a
separate lot, parcel or tract continuously on the records of the Washington
County recorder as an independent parcel since the time the zoning requirements
governing the lot, parcel or tract changed; and c) because of subsequent zoning
changes does not now conform with the requirements of the zoning district in
which the lot, parcel or tract is located.
LOT WIDTH: For an interior lot or parcel, the shorter of horizontal distance
between side lot lines, measured at the required front yard setback line or
rear setback line. For a corner lot, the distance between one of the front lot
lines and the opposite side yard line at the required setback line.
LUMEN: A measurement of light output or the amount of light emitting from a
luminaire.
LUMINAIRE: A lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary
mechanical, electrical, decorative, light shielding and hooded parts.
LUMINAIRE, CUTOFF TYPE: A luminaire with shields, reflectors, refractors or
other such elements that direct and cut off emitted light.
LUMINAIRE, SHIELDED, FULLY: Luminaires that are constructed so that no light
rays are emitted at angles above the horizontal plane, as certified by a
photometric test report.
LUMINAIRE, SHIELDED, PARTIALLY: Luminaires that are constructed so that no more
than ten percent (10%) of the light rays are emitted at angles above the
horizontal plane, as certified by a photometric test report.
MIXED USE: The location and arrangement of a combination of compatible
residential and nonresidential uses on the same lot or within the same
building, and complying with the requirements of this title.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING: Housing occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to or less than eighty percent
(80%) of the median gross income for households of the same size in Washington
County.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING PLAN: A written document conforming to the requirements
of the act.
MONOPOLE, WITH ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A self- supporting
single monopole tower on which antennas or an antenna structure are placed.
MONUMENT: A permanent survey marker established by the Washington County
surveyor and/or a survey marker set in accordance with the city engineer's
specifications and referenced to Washington County survey monuments.
MOTOR HOME: A unit primarily designed as a temporary dwelling for recreational
and vacation use, which is either self- propelled or is mounted on or pulled by
another vehicle, including, but not limited to, a travel trailer, a camping
trailer, a truck camper, a motor home, a fifth wheel trailer and a caravan.
MUNICIPALITY: The city of Ivins City, Utah, or other incorporated area.
NATURAL FEATURES: Nonmanmade land characteristics, including, but not limited
to, slopes, wetlands, streams, rock outcropping, lava fields, intermittent
drainage channels and vegetation.
NATURAL STATE: Land that has not been subjected to grading, removal of
vegetation or any development activity.
NATURAL VEGETATION: Vegetation existing on a lot or parcel prior to any
grading, development activity or manmade plantings.
NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas, varying in width, along the course of a
permanent or intermittent river, stream, creek or gully.
NOMINAL FEE: A fee that reasonably reimburses the city only for time spent and
expenses incurred in:
   (1)   Verifying that building plans are identical plans; and
   (2)   Reviewing and approving those minor aspects of identical plans that
differ from the previously reviewed and approved building plans.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: Any material that will not ignite at or below a
temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F) during an
exposure of five (5) minutes, and will not continue to burn or glow at that
temperature.
NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE: A structure that:
   (1)   Legally existed before its current land use designation; and
   (2)   Because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not
conform to the setback, height restrictions or other regulations, excluding
those regulations which govern the use of land.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of land that:
   (1)   Legally existed before its current land use designation;
   (2)   Has been maintained continuously since the time the land use ordinance
governing the land changed; and
   (3)   Because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not
conform to the regulations that now govern the use of the land.
NONRESIDENTIAL USES: The uses identified in the tables of uses, nonresidential
zoning districts.
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT/NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES: The commercial districts
and industrial districts.
OFF STREET: Entirely outside of any city right of way, street, access easement
or any private access drives.
OFFICIAL MAP: A map adopted by the city council and recorded in the Washington
County recorder's office that:
   (1)   Shows actual and proposed rights of way, centerline alignments and
setbacks for highways and other transportation facilities;
   (2)   Provides a basis for restricting development in designated rights of
way or between designated setbacks to allow the government authorities time to
purchase or otherwise reserve the land; and
   (3)   Has been adopted as an element of the Ivins City general plan.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP/ZONING DISTRICTS MAP: The map adopted by the city council
showing the geographic location of zoning districts.
OPEN SPACE: Land areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures, parking
areas, streets or roads. "Open space" may be devoted to landscaping,
preservation of natural features and recreational areas and facilities.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: A zoning district, with its accompanying requirements, that
is applied to an area that may place additional development standards on a
zoning district. Development in an overlay district must conform to the base
district as well as the overlay zoning requirements.
OWNER: Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others, has a legal or
equitable title to property.
PARCEL OF LAND: An area of land, with a separate property identification
number, as provided by the office of the Washington County recorder.
PARK: A playground, or other area or open space, providing opportunities for
active or passive recreational or leisure activities.
PARK STRIP: The area located between the edge of asphalt or curb and the
sidewalk, trail or property line.
PARKING AREA/PARKING LOT: An enclosed or unenclosed area, other than a street,
and used or designed for the parking of four (4) or more vehicles.
PARKING SPACE: An enclosed or unenclosed area used for parking or storage of
one automobile.
PATIO COVER/RESIDENTIAL PATIO COVER: A structure, not exceeding twelve feet
(12') in height, and that is entirely open on two (2) or more sides. Patio
covers may be attached or detached and shall be reviewed and approved as an
accessory use. Patio covers shall only be used for recreational and outdoor
living purposes, and not as carports, garages, storage areas or as habitable
space.
PERMITTED USE: For the purposes of this title, shall include class II and class
III uses.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, organization, association,
trust, governmental agency or any other legal entity.
PERVIOUS MATERIAL OR SURFACE: Material that is penetrable by water.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of Ivins City, Utah.
PLAT: A map or other graphical representation of lands being laid out and
prepared in accordance with the act.
PLAT, FINAL: A drawing prepared in accordance with the land use ordinances
showing the final design of a land division and complying with all standards
and requirements of best surveying practice and in a form required by the
Washington County recorder's office for recordation.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A drawing prepared in accordance with the land use
ordinances showing the design of a proposed land division.
PRIMARY BUILDING: The principal building located on a lot, parcel or tract of
land and designed or used to accommodate the primary use.
PRIMARY USE: The principal purpose for which a lot, parcel, tract or building
is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
PRIVATE DRIVE: A nondedicated thoroughfare used exclusively for private access
to a lot, parcel or tract of land.
PROPERTY: Any lot, parcel or tract of land, including improvements thereon, and
recorded as real property in the office of the Washington County recorder.
PROPERTY LINE: The boundary line of a lot, parcel or tract.
PROTECTION ZONE: The delineation zones of the drinking water source protection
overlay zone.
PUBLIC: That which is under the ownership or control of the United States
government, Utah state or any subdivision thereof, Washington County or Ivins
City (or any departments or agencies thereof).
PUBLIC HEARING: A hearing at which citizens of the city and members of the
public are provided a reasonable opportunity to comment on the subject of the
hearing.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any street dedications, installations of curb, gutter,
sidewalk, road base and asphalt, water, sewer and storm drainage facilities, or
other utility or service required to provide services to a lot, parcel,
building or structure.
PUBLIC MEETING: A meeting that is required to be open to the public under Utah
Code Annotated title 52, chapter 4, open and public meetings.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL: A professionally trained person with the requisite
academic degree, experience and professional certification or license in the
field or fields relating to the matter being studied or analyzed.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE: A use operated by a private nonprofit educational, religious,
recreational, charitable or philanthropic institution, serving the public.
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: A change in a rule, policy, practice or service
necessary to afford a person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. As
used in this definition, "reasonable" means a requested accommodation will not
undermine the legitimate purposes of existing zoning regulations,
notwithstanding the benefit that the accommodation would provide to a person
with a disability. "Necessary" means the applicant must show that, but for the
accommodation, one or more persons with a disability likely will be denied an
equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their choice. "Equal opportunity" means
achieving equal results as between a person with a disability and a nondisabled
person.
RECORD OF SURVEY MAP: A map of a survey of land prepared in accordance with the
laws of the state of Utah.
RECREATIONAL AND MANUFACTURED HOME STANDARD: A standard adopted by the American
National Standards Institute or the National Fire Protection Association for
recreational vehicles, and for mobile homes manufactured prior to June 15,
1976. For manufactured homes built after June 16, 1976, "standard" means the
standard adopted pursuant to the national manufactured housing construction and
safety standards act, 1974, as amended.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit primarily designed for recreational and
vacation use, which is either self-propelled or is mounted on or pulled by
another vehicle, including, but not limited to, a travel trailer, a camping
trailer, a truck camper, a motor home, boat, a fifth wheel trailer and a
caravan.
RESIDENCE: A dwelling unit or other place where an individual or family is
living at a given point in time and not a place of temporary sojourn or
transient visit.
RESIDENTIAL ACTIVITY: Any building, structure or portion thereof that is
designed for or used for residential purposes and any activity involving the
use of occupancy of a lot or structure for residential purposes.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS: A single-family or multiple-family
dwelling unit that meets the requirements of the act.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY: A residence:
   (1)   In which more than one person with a disability resides; and
   (2)   Is licensed or certified by the department of human services under
Utah Code Annotated title 62A, chapter 2, licensure of programs and facilities;
or is licensed or certified by the department of health under Utah Code
Annotated title 26, chapter 21, healthcare facility licensing and inspection
act.
RESIDENTIAL USES: The uses identified in the tables of uses, residential zoning
districts.
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT/RESIDENTIAL ZONES: The residential agriculture
districts, residential estates districts, single- family residential districts,
and multiple residential districts.
REVOCATION: An action by a land use authority that has the effect to terminate
any approval, permit or license required by the city land use ordinances,
including this title.
RIGHT OF WAY: Any area provided for conveying vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
ROOF MOUNTED ANTENNA: An antenna or series of individual antennas mounted on a
roof, or roof mounted mechanical equipment of a building or structure.
ROOFLINE: The highest point on any building or structure.
SANITARY SEWER AUTHORITY: The department, agency or public entity with
responsibility to review and approve the feasibility of sanitary sewer services
or on site wastewater systems.
SENSITIVE LANDS: The following lands:
   (1)   All areas subject to flooding, as identified by the Ivins City
sensitive lands map, incorporated herein by reference.
   (2)   All areas of wetlands, as identified by the Ivins City sensitive lands
map, or as may be identified by the U.S. army corps of engineers.
   (3)   All areas where the increase or decrease in the elevation of the
natural grade is equal to or greater than eight percent (8%) (1 foot of grade
change for every 121/2 feet of horizontal run) for a minimum distance of forty
feet (40').
   (4)   All areas within one hundred (100) vertical feet of a ridgeline, as
identified on the Ivins City ridgelines map, incorporated herein by reference.
   (5)   Habitat conservation plan areas, as identified by the Ivins City
sensitive lands map.
   (6)   Areas of lava fields and rock outcroppings with an area of eight
thousand (8,000) square feet, or larger, as identified by the Ivins City
sensitive lands map.
   (7)   Areas of known geologic hazard, as identified by the Ivins City
sensitive lands map, or as may be identified by a county, state or federal
agency with authority.
SENSITIVE LANDS DETERMINATION AND INVENTORY: An investigation and necessary
analysis required to determine the existence of any sensitive lands on a lot or
parcel, complying with the requirements of this title.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Businesses as defined by this code.
SIGN: A presentation or representation of words, letters, figures, designs,
picture or colors, publicly displayed so as to give notice relative to a
person, business, article or merchandise, service, assemblage, solicitation, or
a request for aid; also the structure or framework or a natural object on which
any sign is erected or is intended to be erected or exhibited or which is being
used or is intended to be used for sign purposes.
SIGN, A-FRAME: A portable sign, structure or configuration composed of one or
two (2) sign faces mounted or attached back to back in such a manner as to form
a triangular vertical cross section.
SIGN, ABANDONED: A sign that no longer correctly directs or influences any
person, advertises a business, product or activity conducted or available on
the premises where such sign is displayed.
SIGN ALTERATION/SIGN MODIFICATION: Any change or rearranging any structural
part, sign face, enclosure, lighting, coloring, copy, graphics, component or
location of a sign.
SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign with parts or sections which revolve or move or which
has flashing or intermittent lights.
SIGN AREA: The area of sign copy enclosed by the smallest square, circle,
triangle, rectangle, or combination thereof, that encompasses the extreme
limits of text, representation, insignia, logo or other advertising materials.
The total of all text, insignia, logo or other advertising or identification
materials shall be included in the calculation to determine sign area.
SIGN, BANNER: A sign made of fabric, plastic or other light pliable material.
SIGN, CONFORMING: A sign that meets all provisions of this title.
SIGN, COPY: Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals
identifying a street address.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign exclusively limited to guiding the circulation of
motorists or pedestrians onto or within a site (e.g., direction to parking
lots, restroom locations, exits, entrances, etc.).
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE: A sign on which the copy is changed electrically and
consisting of an array of light sources, panels or disks which are
electronically activated and controlled.
SIGN, FLAGS (OFFICIAL): A flag of the United States of America, or a flag of
the state of Utah or other government entity, or a flag officially adopted by
the person, institution, organization or corporation occupying a building.
SIGN, HAZARDOUS: A sign constituting a hazard to public safety because it no
longer meets the lateral and/or vertical load requirements as specified in the
city adopted building codes, or no longer meets the wiring and installation
standards of the city adopted electrical code.
SIGN HEIGHT: The highest point on the sign structure of any text, insignia,
logo, advertising or other site or building identification materials or other
message.
SIGN, ILLEGAL: Any sign which does not conform to the requirements of this
title and was constructed or installed without the necessary approvals, permits
or licenses required by this title, or prior enactments.
SIGN, INFLATABLE: Any advertising or attention getting device that is supported
by heated or forced air or lighter than air gases, including hot or cold air
balloons.
SIGN, LEGAL: A sign that conforms to the requirements of this title and has
received all necessary approvals, permits or licenses, as required by this
title, or prior enactments.
SIGN MAINTENANCE: The replacing, repairing or repainting of a portion of a sign
structure, periodic changing of bulletin board panels, or renewing of copy that
has been made unusable by ordinary wear and tear, weather or accident.
SIGN, MARQUEE: A structure that bears an advertisement and extends outward over
the entrance to a building or other structure and is supported by the building
or structure.
SIGN, MENU BOARD: A permanent outdoor sign that is used to advertise the
product available at a drive-through or drive-in restaurant.
SIGN, MOBILE: A sign constructed on wheels or designed to allow the sign to be
moved by vehicles. This includes any truck, trailer or other vehicle
conspicuously or regularly parked on or off premises, with an advertising
message or logo displayed to attract attention to a business, product or
promotion.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and/or occupation of a person or
persons legally occupying the premises.
SIGN, NONCOMPLYING: A sign or sign structure, or portion thereof, lawfully
existing at the time the ordinance codified herein became effective, but which
does not conform to all applicable requirements now provided by this title.
SIGN, NONMAINTAINED: A sign which, due to lack of repair, cleaning, painting,
oiling or changing of light bulbs has become deteriorated, hazardous or
nonfunctional.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: Any sign, including a billboard or general outdoor
advertising device, that advertises or directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, activity or matter conducted, sold or offered at a location
other than on the lot, parcel or tract upon which such sign is located.
SIGN, ON PREMISES: A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity,
product, use, service or other activity that is sold, offered or conducted on
the lot, parcel or tract upon which such sign is located.
SIGN, OPEN HOUSE: A temporary, off premises sign advertising the sale or lease
of property, providing directions thereto, and giving notice of availability
for the public to inspect the advertised property.
SIGN, POLITICAL: A sign informing the public of a candidate for elected office.
SIGN, PUBLIC NECESSITY: A sign informing the public of any danger or hazard.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A temporary, off premises sign directing the public towards
property for sale or lease.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected partly or wholly freestanding on the roof of a
building and/or extending above the roof line of a building.
SIGN STRUCTURE AREA: The area of the sign structure computed by multiplying the
highest point of the sign structure by the longest length of the sign
structure.
SIGN STRUCTURE HEIGHT: The height of the permanent, freestanding supporting
structure providing the location for a sign. The maximum sign structure height
shall be the vertical distance from the highest point of the structure to the
lowest point of the average finished grade immediately adjacent to the
structure. No ground shall be bermed, or other earthwork provided, that would
have the effect to exceed the maximum allowed sign structure height.
SITE PLAN: A schematic, scaled drawing of a lot, parcel or tract which
indicates, as may be required by this title, including, but not limited to, the
placement and location of buildings, setbacks, yards, property lines, adjacent
parcels, utilities, topography, waterways, irrigation, drainage, landscaping,
parking areas, driveways, trash containers, streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters,
signs, lighting, fences and other features of existing or proposed use,
activity, building or structure.
SLOPE: The level of inclination of land from the horizontal plane determined by
dividing the horizontal run, or distance, of the land into the vertical rise,
or distance, of the same land and converting the resulting figure in a
percentage value.
SLOPE, STEEP: Areas equal to, or greater than, eight percent (8%) (1 foot of
elevation change for every 121/2 feet of horizontal run) for a minimum distance
of forty feet (40').
SLOPE, VERY STEEP: Areas equal to, or greater than, fifteen percent (15%)
(equal to, or greater than, 1 foot of elevation change for every 62/3 feet of
horizontal run) for a minimum distance of forty feet (40').
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY: Any solid waste management facility which is the
final resting place for solid waste, including landfills and incineration
facilities that produce ash from the process of incinerating solid waste.
SPECIAL DISTRICT: An entity established under the authority of Utah Code
Annotated title 17A, special districts, as amended.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION: An adjustment to a development requirement and permitted as
an exception to the requirements of this title, such adjustment requiring
careful review. A special exception may or may not be appropriate depending on
the type and location of the primary use.
SPECIFIED PUBLIC UTILITY: An electrical corporation, gas corporation or
telephone corporation, as those terms are defined in Utah Code Annotated
section 54-2-1, as amended.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The issuance date of a building permit if construction,
repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement begins within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. "Begins" means the date of the
commencement of the first development activity on the site.
STORY: The space within a building, included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the ceiling next above.
STREET: A public right of way, including a highway, avenue, boulevard, parkway,
road, lane, walk, alley, viaduct, tunnel, bridge, public easement or other way.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground.
SUBDIVISION: Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be divided
into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or other division of
land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease or
development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions, and as further defined by the act.
SUBDIVISION APPLICATION: The applications required by the Ivins City
subdivision ordinance and required to initiate the review procedures for any
required subdivision approval.
SUBSTANTIAL ACTION: Action taken in good faith to diligently pursue any matter
necessary to obtain approval of an application filed pursuant to the provisions
of this title, or to exercise development rights authorized pursuant to such an
approval.
SWIMMING POOL: An artificial body of water having a depth in excess of eighteen
inches (18"), designed, constructed and used for swimming, dipping or immersion
purposes by any person or persons, together with all permanent structures,
equipment, appliances and other facilities used or intended for use in and
about the operation, maintenance and use of such pool.
TEMPORARY USE: A use allowed for a limited time, not to exceed forty five (45)
days, or less, as authorized by a class I use application, after which time the
use shall be discontinued. For the purposes of this title, temporary uses
include class I uses only.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable unit, mounted on wheels, not requiring
special highway movement permits when drawn by a motorized vehicle:
   (1)   Designed for travel, recreational and vacation use; and
   (2)   When factory equipped for the road, having a body width of not more
than eight feet (8') and a body length of not more than forty feet (40').
USGS: The United States geological survey.
UNINCORPORATED: The area of Washington County, Utah, and located outside of the
incorporated area of Ivins City, or another municipality.
USE: The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged,
intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
UTILITIES: Include, but are not limited to, natural gas, electric power, cable
television, telephone, telecommunication services, storm system, sewer system,
irrigation facilities, culinary water, streetlights and other services deemed
to be of a public utility nature by the City.
UTILITY EASEMENT: The area designated for access to construct or maintain
utilities on a lot, parcel or tract of land.
VARIANCE: A modification to a development standard with a finding of hardship,
as set forth in chapter 27 of this title.
VEHICLE: A licensed automobile, truck, trailer, boat or other device in which a
person or thing is or can be transported from one place to another.
VIOLATED OR VIOLATING: There exists reasonable cause to believe that an
ordinance, Code, statute or law has been, or is being, broken.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: A structure consisting of antennas,
antenna support structures, or other equipment used to provide personal
wireless services as set forth in section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of
1996, as amended.
YARD: An open space on a lot, parcel or tract of land, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings, except as otherwise provided
herein.
YARD, FRONT: An open space on the same lot with a building between the front
line of the building and the front lot line and extending across the full width
of the lot. The "depth" of the front yard is the minimum distance between the
front lot line and the front line of the building.
YARD, REAR: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building, between
the rear line of the building and the rear lot line and extending the full
width of the lot; except, on corner lots, the rear yard shall not include the
side yard bordering the street.
YARD, SIDE: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building, between
the rear line of the building and the front line of the building and extending
from the side line of the building to the side lot line; except, on corner
lots, the side yard bordering the street shall extend to the rear from the
front line of the building to the rear lot line, the same distance as is
required for side yard setbacks on corner lots in each zone.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The person charged with the responsibility for
administering and interpreting the provisions of this title.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area of the City that has been given a designation which
regulates the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of
buildings or structures, or the use of land as set forth in this title.
ZONING DISTRICTS MAP: The map, adopted as part of a land use ordinance,
including this title, that depicts and identifies the geographic location of
the zoning districts provided by this title.
ZONING ORDINANCE: This title of Ivins City, Utah, and as may be amended from
time to time. This title is determined and identified to be a land use
ordinance of Ivins City, Utah. (Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2007-35, 2008;
Ord. 2014-05, 2014; Ord. 2016-06, 2016; Ord. 2017-17, 2017; Ord. 2022-04, 2022)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 57-21-2(9)(a).
2 2. UCA § 57-21-2(9)(b).
TITLE 17
ANNEXATION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ANNEXATION PROCEDURE
SECTION:
17.01.101: Annexation Petition
17.01.102: Annexation Boundaries Identified
17.01.103: Filing With The City Council
17.01.104: Acceptance Or Rejection
17.01.105: Re-Filing Of Petitions
17.01.106: Petition Certification
17.01.107: Notice Of Certification - Publishing And Providing Notice Of
Petition
17.01.108: Notices Of Petition Certification
17.01.109: Annexation Of An Island Or Peninsula Without A Petition - Notice -
Hearing
17.01.110: Protests
17.01.111: Approval Or Denial
17.01.101:   ANNEXATION PETITION:
   (1)   An annexation process shall begin with an Annexation Petition by those
desiring annexation.
   (2)   Each petition shall be filed with the City Recorder, and shall contain
the signatures of the owners of private real property that:
      (a)   Is located within the area proposed for annexation;
      (b)   Covers a majority of the private land area within the area proposed
for annexation;
      (c)   Covers one hundred percent (100%) of the private land area that is
within an agriculture protection area created under Title 17, Chapter 41,
Agriculture Protection Area; and
      (d)   Is equal in value to at least one-third (1/3) of the value of all
private real property within the area proposed for annexation;
   (3)   If all the real property within the area proposed for annexation is
owned by a public entity other than the federal government, the owner(s) of all
the publicly owned real property must sign the petition;
   (4)   The petition shall be accompanied by: (a) an accurate and recordable
map, prepared by a licensed surveyor, of the area proposed for annexation; and
(b) a copy of the notice sent to affected entities and a list of the affected
entities to which notice was sent.
   (5)   The petition shall designate up to five (5) of the signers of the
petition as sponsors, one of whom shall be designated as the Contact Sponsor
and indicate the mailing address of each sponsor.
   (6)   A petition shall not propose the annexation of all or part of an area
which has already been proposed for annexation to another municipality where
the petition has not been denied, rejected, or granted. (Ord. 2025-09, 2025)
17.01.102:   ANNEXATION BOUNDARIES IDENTIFIED:
If practicable and feasible, the boundaries of an area proposed for annexation
shall be drawn:
   (1)   Along the boundaries of existing special districts for sewer, water,
and other services;
   (2)   Along the boundaries of school districts whose boundaries follow city
boundaries or school districts adjacent to school districts whose boundaries
follow city boundaries;
   (3)   Along the boundaries of other taxing entities;
   (4)   To eliminate islands and peninsulas of territory that is not receiving
municipal-type services;
   (5)   To facilitate the consolidation of overlapping functions of local
government;
   (6)   To promote the efficient delivery of services;
   (7)   To encourage the equitable distribution of community resources and
obligations. (Ord. 2025-09, 2025)
17.01.103:   FILING WITH THE CITY COUNCIL:
On the date of filing, the petition sponsors shall deliver or mail a copy of
the petition to:
   (1)   The City Recorder; and
   (2)   The County Clerk in which the area proposed for annexation is located.
(Ord. 2025-09, 2025)
17.01.104:   ACCEPTANCE OR REJECTION:
The City Council has the option to:
   (1)   Deny a petition filed; or
   (2)   Accept the petition for further consideration under this part and
forward it to the City Recorder for Certification as provided herein.
A petition shall be considered to have been accepted for further consideration
if the Council fails to act to deny or accept the petition at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Council that is at least fourteen (14) days
after the date the petition was filed.
If the Council denies a petition, it shall, within five (5) days of the denial,
mail written notice of the denial to the Contact Sponsor and the County Clerk,
stating the reasons for doing so.
If the Council accepts the petition, or is considered to have accepted the
petition, the City Recorder shall within thirty (30) days of that acceptance,
consult with the County Clerk and City Attorney to determine whether the
petition meets the requirements of law, certify the petition, and mail or
deliver written notification of the certification to the Council, the Contact
Sponsor, and the County Commission. (Ord. 2025-09, 2025)
17.01.105:   `RE-FILING OF PETITIONS:
If the City Recorder determines that the petition fails to meet any of the
necessary requirements, the petition shall be rejected, and written
notification stating the reasons for the rejection shall be mailed or delivered
to the Council, the Contact Sponsor, and the County Commission.
If the City Recorder rejects a petition, the petition may be modified to
correct the deficiencies for which it was rejected and then refiled.
If a petition is refiled after having been rejected by the City Recorder, the
refiled petition shall be treated as a newly filed petition. (Ord. 2025-09,
2025)
17.01.106:   PETITION CERTIFICATION:
If the City Recorder determines that the petition meets the requirements of
law, the City Recorder shall certify the petition and mail or deliver written
notification of the certification to the Council, the Contact Sponsor, and the
County Commission. (Ord. 2025-09, 2025)
17.01.107:   NOTICE OF CERTIFICATION - PUBLISHING AND PROVIDING NOTICE OF
PETITION:
After receipt of the notice of certification from the City Recorder, the
Council shall:
   (1)   Publish a notice at least once a week for three (3) successive weeks,
beginning no later than ten (10) days after receipt of the notice of
certification, in a newspaper of general circulation within the area proposed
for annexation and the unincorporated area within one-half (½) mile of the area
proposed for annexation; and
   (2)   Within twenty (20) days of receipt of the notice of certification,
mail written notice to each affected entity. (Ord. 2025-09, 2025)
17.01.108:   NOTICES OF PETITION CERTIFICATION:
The notice of certification shall:
   (1)   State that a petition has been filed with the City proposing the
annexation of an area;
   (2)   State the date of the Council's receipt of the notice of
certification;
   (3)   Describe the area proposed for annexation in the annexation petition;
   (4)   State that the complete annexation petition is available for
inspection and copying at the office of the City Recorder;
   (5)   State in conspicuous and plain terms that the City may grant the
petition and annex the area described in the petition unless, within the time
required, a written protest to the annexation petition is filed with the City
and the County Commission, and
   (6)   State the address of the County Boundary Commission, or, if one has
not yet been created, the address of the County Clerk, where a protest to the
annexation petition may be filed.
Such notice shall state the deadline for filing a written protest in terms of
the actual date rather than by reference to the statutory citation. (Ord. 2025-
09, 2025)
17.01.109:   ANNEXATION OF AN ISLAND OR PENINSULA WITHOUT A PETITION - NOTICE -
HEARING:
The Council may initiate annexations of an unincorporated area under this
section without an annexation petition if:
   (1)   The area to be annexed consists of one or more unincorporated islands
within, or unincorporated peninsulas contiguous to, the City;
   (2)   The majority of each island or peninsula consists of residential or
commercial development;
   (3)   The area proposed for annexation requires the delivery of municipal-
type services; and
   (4)   The municipality has provided most or all of the municipal-type
services to the area for more than one year.
The Council may also initiate annexations of an unincorporated area under this
section without an annexation petition if:
   (1)   The area to be annexed consists of one or more unincorporated islands
within the City, each of which has fewer than five hundred (500) residents; and
   (2)   The City has provided one or more municipal-type services to the area
for at least one year.
The Council may annex a portion of an island or peninsula, leaving
unincorporated the remainder of the unincorporated island or peninsula, if:
   (1)   In adopting the resolution, the Council determines that not annexing
the entire unincorporated island or peninsula is in the City's best interest.
      To annex an area under this section, the Council shall:
      (a)   Adopt a resolution indicating the Council's intent to annex the
area, describing the area proposed to be annexed, and the reasons for the
annexation;
      (b)   Publish notice at least once a week for three (3) successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation within the area proposed for annexation;
      (c)   Hold a public hearing on the proposed annexation no earlier than
sixty (60) days after the adoption of the resolution of annexation.
      (d)   The first publication of the notice required shall be within
fourteen (14) days of the Council's adoption of the resolution of annexation.
         Each notice required above shall:
         (i)   State that the Council has adopted a resolution indicating its
intent to annex the area proposed for annexation;
         (ii)   State the date, time, and place of the public hearing;
         (iii)   Describe the area proposed for annexation, and
         (iv)   State in conspicuous and plain terms that the Council shall
annex the area unless, at or before the public hearing, written protests to the
annexation are filed by the owners of private real property that: (a) is
located within the area proposed for annexation; (b) covers a majority of the
total private land area within the entire area proposed for annexation; and (c)
is equal in value to at least one-half (½) the value of all private real
property within the entire area proposed for annexation.
Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the Council may adopt an ordinance
annexing the area proposed for annexation under this section unless, at or
before the hearing, written protests to the annexation have been filed with the
City Recorder by the owners of private real property that: (a) is located
within the area proposed for annexation; (b) covers a majority of the total
private land area within the entire area proposed for annexation; and (c) is
equal in value to at least one- half (½) the value of all private real property
within the entire area proposed for annexation.
If protests are filed in a timely manner and comply with the requirements of
law, the municipal legislative body shall not adopt an ordinance annexing the
area proposed for annexation, and the annexation proceedings under this section
shall be considered terminated. (Ord. 2025-09, 2025)
17.01.110:   PROTESTS:
   (1)   A protest to an annexation petition may be filed by the legislative
body or governing board of an affected entity.
   (2)   Each protest shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the
Council's receipt of the notice of certification from the City Recorder and
shall be also filed with the County Boundary Commission or the County Clerk
when a Boundary Commission has not been appointed yet.
   (3)   Each protest shall: (a) state the reasons for the protest of the
annexation petition and justification for the protest under the standards
established by state law and the Ordinance upon which this title is based; (b)
other information that the Boundary Commission by rule requires or that the
party filing the protest considers pertinent; and (c) the name and address of a
contact person who is to receive notices sent by the Boundary Commission with
respect to the protest proceedings.
   (4)   The party filing a protest under this section shall on the same date
deliver or mail a copy of the protest to the City Recorder.
   (5)   Each clerk who receives a protest hereunder shall immediately notify
the County Commission of the protest and shall deliver the protest to the
Boundary Commission within five (5) days of its creation. (Ord. 2025-09, 2025)
17.01.111:   APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
   (1)   If a protest is filed hereunder, the Council may, at its next regular
meeting after expiration of thirty (30) days after the Council's receipt of the
notice of certification, deny the annexation petition or take no further action
on the annexation petition until after receipt of the Boundary Commission's
notice of its decision on the protest.
   (2)   If the Council denies the annexation petition as a result of a
protest, the Council shall, within five (5) days of the denial, send notice of
the denial in writing to: (a) the Contact Sponsor of the annexation petition;
(b) the Boundary Commission; and (c) each entity that filed a protest.
   (3)   If no timely protest is filed, the Council may grant the petition and,
by ordinance, annex the area that is the subject of the annexation petition.
   (4)   Before granting an annexation petition, the Council shall:
      (a)   Hold a public hearing; and
      (b)   At least seven (7) days before the public hearing, publish notice
of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and the
area proposed for annexation. (Ord. 2025-09, 2025)
APPENDIX A
WRITTEN TEXT DOCUMENTS
TABLE A-1
WRITTEN TEXT PROVISIONS
SUMMARY INFORMATION MATRIX
Unless specifically amended by the provisions of the Written Text documents,
the requirements of the city's land use ordinances shall apply. See Written
Text documents for complete detail.
Specific                                         Padre Canyon
Development Chancel Citadel Copper Eagle Rock At Estates      Red Mountain
Standard    Cliffs  Estates Canyon Snow Canyon   Phases 1, 2, West
                                                 3
Specific                                                                                            Eagle Rock   Padre Canyon  Red
Development    Chancel      Citadel Estates                                            Copper       At Snow      Estates       Mountain
Standard       Cliffs                                                                  Canyon       Canyon       Phases 1, 2,  West
                                                                                                                 3
   Permitted Project Density
                                                                                                    September 9,
                                                                                                    1997,
               Revised                                                                              revised
               January 13,                                                                          December 11,
               1997 (no                                                                             1997,
Date Written   definitive                                                                           revised      Approved July
Text (approval approval                                                                           January 2,   13, 1995, and  
date)          date -                                                                               1998 (no     amended July
               research                                                                             definitive   27, 1995
               meeting                                                                              approval
               minutes)                                                                             date -
                                                                                                    research
                                                                                                    meeting
                                                                                                    minutes)
Maximum                                                                                                                        35 lots
allowed        29 lots      21 lots                                                    74 lots on   92 lots                   (6 units
subdivision                                                                            16.96 acres                             per acre)
density
Minimum lot                                                                            Average lot                             5,000
size                                                                                 size 6,800                            square
                                                                                       square feet                             feet
   Siting Requirements For Primary Buildings
Minimum front              Lots 1–8 (inclusive) 35 feet; lots 9–21 (inclusive) 30 18 feet      18 feet to   30 feet        
yard setback                feet                                                                    22 feet
Minimum rear               Lots 1–8 (inclusive) 25 feet; lots 9–21 (inclusive) 20 10 feet      10 feet      30 feet        
yard setback                feet
Minimum side                Lots 1–8 (inclusive) 10 feet; lots 9–21 (inclusive) 10 City
yard setback               feet                                                       ordinance    10 feet      15 feet       10 feet
                                                                                       requirements
Maximum        35 feet to
building       top of roof  25 feet                                                    25 feet      25 feet                   35 feet
height
               Unacceptable
               materials -
               log homes,
               relocated
               homes. Earth
               or berm
               houses,
Building       aluminum or
materials      vinyl                                                                                                        
               siding,
               dome.
               Roofing
               materials
               allowed -
               slate, clay,
               concrete
               tiles
   Siting Requirements For Accessory Buildings
                                                                                                                               Minimum
Minimum front                                                                                                30 feet       rear yard
yard setback                                                                                                                   setback30
                                                                                                                               feet
Minimum side                                                                                                 15 feet        
yard setback
Maximum
accessory                                                                                                                  
building
height
Accessory
building                                                                                                                   
materials
   Siting Requirements For Barns, Stables, Corrals, Coops, Runs
                                                                                                                 At least 100
Location                                                                                                     feet from any  
                                                                                                                 residential
                                                                                                                 structure
Minimum front                                                                                                              
yard setback
Minimum rear                                                                                                               
yard setback
Minimum side                                                                                                               
yard setback
Maximum size                                                                                                 400 square     
                                                                                                                 feet
Maximum height                                                                                               20 feet        
   Requirements For Outbuildings Or Storage Sheds
                                                                                                                 100 square
                                                                                                                 feet
Maximum size                                                                                                 individually   
                                                                                                                 or 200 square
                                                                                                                 feet in
                                                                                                                 aggregate
Maximum height                                                                                               20 feet        
   Requirements For Off Street Parking
                                                                                       Garage
                                                                                       providing
                                                                                       not less
                                                                                       than 2 or
                                                                                       more than 3
Minimum                     Garage providing not less than 2 or more than 4 off street off street                2 off street
requirements               parking spaces. No carports or partially enclosed garages  parking                  parking        
                            allowed                                                    spaces. No                spaces
                                                                                       carports or
                                                                                       partially
                                                                                       enclosed
                                                                                       garages
                                                                                       allowed
                                                                                                                 No off street
                                                                                                                 parking
                                                                                                                 allowed in
Location                                                                                                     front yard     
                                                                                                                 setback of 30
                                                                                                                 feet, except
                                                                                                                 on driveways
   Building Requirements
                                                                                                                 Yes, in
                                                                                                                 writing. If
Architectural  Exact                                                                                             written
committee      roofing                                                                                           approval not
review and     materials to Yes                                                        Yes                      received in    
approval       be approved                                                                                       30 days,
required       by city                                                                                           plans shall
                                                                                                                 be deemed
                                                                                                                 approved
                                                                                                                 City
                                                                                                                 responsible
                                                                                                                 to notify
                                                                                                                 Architectural
City                                                                                                         Control        
responsibility                                                                                                   Committee of
                                                                                                                 plans
                                                                                                                 received and
                                                                                                                 permits
                                                                                                                 issued
   Landscaping Requirements
Architectural
Committee                                                                              Yes
review and     Yes          Yes (paragraph B)                                          (paragraph                             
approval                                                                               B)
required
                                                                                                    Any portion
                                                                                                    of the lot
                                                                                       Any portion  not used for
                                                                                       of the lot   structures,
                                                                                       not used for driveways,
                                                                                       structures,  walks, or
                                                                                       driveways,   other site
                            Any portion of the lot not used for structures, driveways, walks, or    improvements
Minimum                     walks, or other site improvements shall be landscaped.     other site   shall be
landscaping                Front yard shall have a maximum of 50% lawn. Minimum of    improvements landscaped.                
requirements                20% to maximum of 70% lawn                                 shall be     Combinations
                                                                                       landscaped.  of desert
                                                                                       Minimum of   landscape
                                                                                       20% to       (70%) and
                                                                                       maximum of   lawn (30%).
                                                                                       70% lawn     Minimum of
                                                                                                    20% to
                                                                                                    maximum of
                                                                                                    70% lawn
   Pets, And Animals
Keeping of                                                                                                   Paragraph 11   
household pets                                                                                                   (B)
                                                                                                                 Not more than
                                                                                                                 2 animals, 10
                                                                                                                 fowl, or 1
                                                                                                                 turkey
                                                                                                                 (excluding
                                                                                                                 peacocks,
                                                                                                                 geese and
                                                                                                                 guinea fowl)
                                                                                                                 or
                                                                                                                 combination
                                                                                                                 thereof for
Keeping of                                                                                                   personal use.  
animals                                                                                                          Animals
                                                                                                                 include
                                                                                                                 horses, cows,
                                                                                                                 sheep, goats,
                                                                                                                 excluding
                                                                                                                 pigs and
                                                                                                                 exotic
                                                                                                                 animals.
                                                                                                                 Regarding
                                                                                                                 horses: See
                                                                                                                 subsection
                                                                                                                 16.12.113(5)
                                                                                                                 No commercial
                                                                                                                 businesses or
                                                                                                                 commercial
                                                                                                                 uses
Prohibited                                                                                                       permitted,
activities                                                                                                   including the  
                                                                                                                 raising and
                                                                                                                 breeding of
                                                                                                                 animals for
                                                                                                                 commercial
                                                                                                                 purposes
   On Street Parking Requirements
                                                                                       Parking
                                                                                       shall be on
On street                                                                              1 side of
parking                                                                              private                                
                                                                                       streets only
                                                                                       (paragraph
                                                                                       O)
   Project Facilities, Utilities, Amenities
                                                                                                    As per
Project                                                                                Paragraph G  Written Text
amenities to   Paragraph I  Paragraph G                                                Paragraph I  sections                   
be provided                                                                            Paragraph L  16.6.1,
                                                                                                    16.6.2,
                                                                                                    16.6.4
                                                                                                    All
                                                                                                    utilities
Utilities      Paragraph G  Paragraph H                                                Paragraph H  underground                
               (H)                                                                                  and
                                                                                                    transformers
                                                                                                    screened
Lighting       Paragraph F  Paragraph F                                                Paragraph F  Section                    
                                                                                       Paragraph N  16.6.10
Street design  Paragraph G  Paragraph A                                                Paragraph A  Section                    
                                                                                                    16.6.11
Signage                    Paragraph J                                                Paragraph J                            
Note:
1.   Unless amended by the provisions of the Written Text documents, the
requirements of the City's land use ordinances shall apply.
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005; amd. Ord. 2007-35, 2008; Ord. 2012-05, 2012; Ord. 2017-17,
2017)
APPENDIX B
PD-SE OVERLAY DISTRICT AND EXAMPLE CALCULATIONS
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (PD) AND SUBDIVISION ENHANCEMENT OVERLAY
DISTRICT (SE)
EXAMPLE CALCULATIONS OF BASE DENSITY, DENSITY INCENTIVES AND TOTAL ALLOWED
DENSITY
Example 1: Planned Development Overlay District (PD)
(1)   Base Density:
                                Total area of subdivision site minus 20% of
Total area available for lots = total site area minus all areas encum bered for
                                other uses (including schools, churches, public
                                facilities, etc.)
Base density                  = Total area available for lots divided by
                                minimum lot size requirement of zoning district
                             = Total allowed base density
Example, with 20 acres of total area of subdivision site and zoning district of
RE-25.0, and no areas encumbered by other uses:
Total area available for lots = 20 acres - 4 acres - 0 acres
                             = 16 acres
Base density                  = 16 acres (696,960 square feet) ÷ 25,000 square
                                feet
Total allowed base density    = 27.88 lots
 
(2)   Density Incentives:
 
                                         Total allowed base density multiplied
Maximum density incentive              = by allowed density incentives (not to
                                         exceed 30% of base density)
Provision of open space                = Maximum density incentive available is
                                         20% of total allowed base density
Improvements and enhance ments to open = Maximum density incentive available is
space areas                              5% of total allowed base density
Consistency in design elements         = Maximum density incentive available is
                                         5% of total allowed base density
Example, with a 20 acres of total area of subdivision site, total allowed base
density of 27.88 lots, and allowed density incentives of 20%:
Maximum density incentive              = 27.88 lots x 20%
Maximum density incentive              = 5.58 lots
 
(3)   Total Allowed Density:
 
Total allowed density = Total allowed base density plus maxi mum density
                        incentive
Example, with a 20 acres of total area of subdivision site, total allowed
base density of 27.88 lots and maximum density incentive of 5.58 lots:
Total allowed density = 27.88 lots + 5.58 lots
Total allowed density = 33.46 lots
Total allowed density = 33 lots (rounded down per section 16.03.112 of this
                        title)
 
 
Example 2: Subdivision Enhancement Overlay District (SE)
(1)   Base Density:
                                Total area of subdivision site minus 20% of
Total area available for lots = total site area minus all areas encum bered for
                                other uses (including schools, churches, public
                                facilities, etc.)
                                Total area available for lots divided by
Base density                  = minimum lot size requirement of base zoning
                                district
                             = Total allowed base density
Example, with a 20 acres of total area of subdivision site and zoning district
of RE-12.5, and no areas encumbered by other uses:
Total area available for lots = 20 acres - 4 acres - 0 acres
                             = 16 acres
Base density                  = 16 acres (696,960 square feet) ÷ 12,500 square
                                feet
Total allowed base density    = 55.76 lots
 
(2)   Density Incentives:
 
 
                                        Total allowed base density multiplied
Maximum density incentive             = by allowed density incentives (not to
                                        exceed 25% of base density)
Provision of open space               = Maximum density incentive available is
                                        10% of total allowed base density
Consistency in design elements        = Maximum density incentive available is
                                        5% of total allowed base density
Convenience in layout variety of lot  = Maximum density incentive available is
sizes and unique subdivision features   10% of total allowed base density
Example, with a 20 acres of total area of subdivision site, total allowed base
density of 55.76 lots and allowed density incentives of 20%:
Maximum density incentive             = 55.76 lots x 20%
Maximum density incentive             = 11.15 lots
 
(3)   Total Allowed Density:
 
Total allowed density = Total allowed base density plus maximum density
                        incentive
Example, with a 20 acres of total area of subdivision site, total allowed
base density of 55.76 lots and a maximum density incentive of 11.15 lots:
Total allowed density = 55.76 lots + 11.15 lots
Total allowed density = 66.91 lots
Total allowed density = 66 lots (rounded down per section 16.03.112 of this
                        title)
 
(Ord. 2005-13, 2005)
 
