CITY CODE
of
LAVERKIN CITY, UTAH
1998
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-05, passed September 3, 2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of LaVerkin City, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 2025-05, passed September 3, 2025. Ordinances of the
City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 98-08
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY OF LAVERKIN, UTAH MUNICIPAL CODE
   BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of LaVerkin, Utah,
as follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city
code of the city of LaVerkin, Utah as prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the city, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official
code and law of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous codifying of each
newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering,
adding or deleting provisions of the official city code each of which is
identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each
of the official copies, one copy of which shall be maintained in the office of
the city recorder, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at
any and all times that said office is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
   PASSED this 5th day of August, 1998.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1728.gif]
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-5: Incorporation Of Statutes
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official code of LaVerkin. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the LAVERKIN CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (1982 Code § 1-001; amd. 1998 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1998 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(1998 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions. The city clerk/recorder
shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official
copies maintained in the office of the city clerk/recorder. Any person having
custody of a copy of this code shall make every effort to maintain said code
current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person shall see to the
immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered or made
available to such person through the office of the city clerk/recorder. Said
code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to
the office of the city clerk/recorder when directed so to do by order of the
city council. (1998 Code)
1-1-5: INCORPORATION OF STATUTES:
Any reference or citation to any statute shall not be interpreted or construed
to include, incorporate or make the citation or statute part of this code,
unless the provisions of this code specifically include, incorporate or make
the citation or statute part of this code by reference or incorporation, and
any such reference or citation not specifically included or incorporated may be
changed, amended or deleted without publication on an order of the city
council. (1982 Code § 1-009)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the city passed prior
to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included
in this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal
(subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances. (1998 Code)
   B.   Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of the ordinances provided
in subsection A of this section, shall not affect any debt or fee which is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office
of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance
heretofore repealed or superseded. (1982 Code § 1-003)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to streets and other public ways, or relating to the
conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by
virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the preceding section,
excepting as this code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case,
this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in
respect to such provisions only. (1998 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Scope Of Section: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Actions Now Pending: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (1998 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1982 Code § 1-007; amd.
1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only,
or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite
gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto. The use of any verb in the
present tense shall include the future and past tense when applicable. (1998
Code)
   B.   All words and phrases shall be constructed and understood according to
the common use and understanding of the language; the technical words and
phrases and such other words and phrases as may have acquired a particular
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such particular
meaning. (1982 Code § 1-005A)
   C.   The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been
changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1998 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BUSINESS: Includes any trade, profession, calling, activity, operation or
enterprise for which a license is required by any ordinance of the city.
CITY: The city of LaVerkin, Washington County, Utah.
CITY CLERK/RECORDER: The individual appointed to act as the city clerk/recorder
of the city.
CITY COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the city of
LaVerkin, Utah.
CODE: The city code of the city of LaVerkin, Utah.
COUNTY: Washington County, Utah.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
LaVerkin".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.
HIGHWAY; ROAD: Includes public bridges, and may be equivalent to the words
"county way", "county road", "common road", and "state road".
IMPACT FEE: A payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition
of development approval.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation. The term "license" includes any certificate, permit or license
issued by the city.
LOCATION: Whenever any act, conduct or offense is prohibited or required and no
reference is made to location, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the act, conduct or offense prohibited or required shall be within
the boundaries of this city.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS OR OFFICIALS: Any elected or appointed person employed by the city,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Whenever reference is made in
this code to a city officer or official by title only, this shall be construed
as though followed by the words "of the city of LaVerkin".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.
REASONABLE TIME: In all cases where any ordinance requires that an act be done
in a reasonable time or that reasonable notice be given, such reasonable time
for such notice shall be deemed to mean such time as may be necessary for the
expeditious performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Utah.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places, sidewalks, gutters and culverts, crosswalks and
intersections.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
TIME COMPUTED: The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any
ordinance or in any resolution or order of the city, when expressed in days,
shall be determined by excluding the first day and including the last day,
except if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, then the last day shall
be the day next following such Sunday or legal holiday which is not a Sunday or
legal holiday. When time is expressed in hours, Sunday and all legal holidays
shall be excluded.
WEEK: Shall be construed to mean any seven (7) day period.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (1982 Code § 1-005; amd. 1998 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (1982 Code § 1-006; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Sentencing
1-4-2: Offenses Designated; Classified
1-4-1: SENTENCING:
   A.   Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance 1 : Unless otherwise specifically
authorized by statute, the city council may provide a penalty for the violation
of any city ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor
fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301, or by a term of imprisonment
up to six (6) months, or by both the fine and term of imprisonment. The city
council may prescribe a minimum penalty for the violation of any city ordinance
and may impose a civil penalty for the unauthorized use of city property,
including, but not limited to, the use of parks, streets, and other public
grounds or equipment. Rules of civil procedure shall be substantially followed.
(1998 Code)
   B.   Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors 2 : A person who has been
convicted of a misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
      1.   Class B: In the case of a class B misdemeanor, for a term not
exceeding six (6) months;
      2.   Class C: In the case of a class C misdemeanor, for a term not
exceeding ninety (90) days. (1982 Code § 1-322)
   C.   Infractions 3 :
      1.   A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be
subject to a fine, forfeiture, and disqualification, or any combination. (1982
Code § 1-323; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is
specified, the person may be fined as for a class C misdemeanor. (1982 Code §
1-323)
   D.   Fines Of Persons 4 : A person convicted of an offense may, in addition
to any term of imprisonment imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed:
      1.   Class B: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the conviction is of
a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C; Infraction: Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) when the
conviction is of a class C misdemeanor conviction or infraction conviction.
(1982 Code § 1-331; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Fines Of Corporations 5 : The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon
a corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an
offense defined in this code, or the ordinances of the city, or for an offense
defined outside of this code over which this city has jurisdiction, for which
no special corporate fine is specified, shall be to pay an amount fixed by the
court, not exceeding:
      1.   Class B: Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the conviction is
for a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C; Infraction: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the
conviction is for a class C misdemeanor conviction or for an infraction
conviction. (1982 Code § 3-332; amd. 1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-3-703.
2 2. UCA § 76-3-204.
3 3. UCA § 76-3-205.
4 4. UCA § 76-3-301.
5 1. UCA § 76-3-302.
1-4-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED; CLASSIFIED:
   A.   Sentencing In Accordance With Chapter:
      1.   A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this code or the
ordinances of this city shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      2.   Ordinances enacted after the effective date of this code which
involve an offense should be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance
with this chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided. (1982 Code § 1-311)
   B.   Designation Of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or
infractions. (1982 Code § 1-312)
   C.   Misdemeanors Classified 1 :
      1.   Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
         a.   Class B misdemeanors;
         b.   Class C misdemeanors.
      2.   An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful in this code or any ordinance of this city when no
other specification as to punishment or category is made, is a class B
misdemeanor. (1982 Code § 1-313)
   D.   Infractions:
      1.   Infractions are not classified.
      2.   Any offense which is made an infraction in this code or other
ordinances of this city, or which is expressly designated an infraction and any
offense designated by this code or other ordinances of this city which is not
designated as a misdemeanor and for which no penalty is specified is an
infraction. (1982 Code § 1-314)
   E.   Continuing Violation: In all instances where the violation of this code
or any ordinance hereinafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation
occurs or continues to occur. (1982 Code § 1-315)
 
Notes
1 2. UCA § 76-3-104.
ARTICLE A. REQUIRED ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
1-4A-1: Cost Reimbursement
1-4A-1: COST REIMBURSEMENT:
   A.   Authorized: Any required enforcement of city and/or zoning ordinances
resulting in incurring additional and city expense of an attorney, court or
other enforcement cost shall be reimbursed to the city by the defaulting party,
including both before and after court costs.
   B.   Remedies Additional: These remedies are in addition to any other
remedies allowable by specific ordinances or sections of ordinances.
   C.   Lien Upon Property: Should the defaulting party be a property owner or
have an interest in property within the city, all enforcement costs become a
lien upon that person's property and/or interest in that property. (Ord. 96-09,
8-7-1996)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Eligibility And Residency Requirements
1-5-2: Membership; Terms
1-5-3: Mayor As Member Of City Council
1-5-4: Municipal Administration
1-5-5: Meetings; Procedure And Conduct
1-5-6: Ordinances And Resolutions; Procedures
1-5-1: ELIGIBILITY AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Declaration Of Candidacy: A person filing a declaration of candidacy
for a city office shall:
      1.   Have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately
before the date of the election; and
      2.   Meet the other requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-
203.
   B.   Annexed Areas: A person living in an area annexed to the city meets the
residency requirement of this subsection if that person resided within the area
annexed to the city for at least one year before the date of the election.
   C.   Registered Voter: Any person elected to city office shall be a
registered voter in the city.
   D.   Residency Maintained: Each elected officer of the city shall maintain
residency within the boundaries of the city during his term of office.
   E.   Residence Outside City: If an elected officer of the city establishes
his principal place of residence as provided in Utah Code Annotated section
20A-2-105 outside of the city during his term of office, the office is
automatically vacant.
   F.   Continuous Absence From City: If an elected city officer is absent from
the city any time during his term of office for a continuous period of more
than sixty (60) days without the consent of the city council, the city office
is automatically vacant. (1982 Code § 3-301; amd. 1998 Code)
1-5-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
   A.   Composition: The city council shall be a council of six (6) persons,
one of whom shall be the mayor and the remaining five (5) shall be council
members. (1982 Code § 3-105; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Election; Terms: The election and terms of office of the officers shall
be as follows:
      1.   The offices of mayor and two (2) council members shall be filled in
municipal elections held in 1977. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These
offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal elections.
      2.   The offices of the other three (3) council members shall be filled
in a municipal election held in 1979. The terms shall be for four (4) years.
These offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal elections.
      3.   The offices shall be filled in at large elections which shall be
held at the time and the manner provided for electing municipal officers. (1982
Code § 3-205; amd. 1998 Code)
      4.   Where both two (2) year and four (4) year terms are to be filled by
election or appointment, the election ballot or appointment shall clearly state
which persons are to be elected or appointed to the shorter term and to the
longer term. (1982 Code § 3-207; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Vacancy In Office: Mayor or city council vacancies shall be filled as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-1-510. (1982 Code § 3-302; amd.
1998 Code)
1-5-3: MAYOR AS MEMBER OF CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Presiding Officer; Mayor Pro Tempore: The mayor shall be the
chairperson and preside at the meetings of the city council. In the absence of
the mayor, or because of his inability or refusal to act, the city council may
elect a member of the city council to preside over the meeting as mayor pro
tempore, who shall have all the powers and duties of the mayor during his
absence or disability. The election of a mayor pro tempore shall be entered in
the minutes of the meeting.
   B.   Voting; No Vote Except In Tie:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B2 of this section, the mayor is a
nonvoting member of the city council.
      2.   The mayor votes as a voting member of the city council:
         a.   On matters where there is a tie vote of the other council members
present at a city council meeting; and
         b.   When the city council is voting on: 1) whether to appoint or
dismiss a municipal manager; or 2) any ordinance that enlarges or restricts the
mayor's powers, duties, or functions.
   C.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The mayor shall:
         a.   Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the municipality;
         b.   Ensure that all applicable statutes and municipal ordinances and
resolutions are faithfully executed and observed;
         c.   If the mayor remits a fine or forfeiture under subsection C2 of
this section, report the remittance to the council at the city council's next
meeting after the remittance;
         d.   Perform all duties prescribed by statute or municipal ordinance
or resolution;
         e.   Report to the city council the condition and needs of the
municipality; and
         f.   Report to the city council any release granted under subsection
C2 of this section.
      2.   The mayor may:
         a.   Recommend for council consideration any measure that the mayor
considers to be in the best interests of the municipality;
         b.   Remit fines and forfeitures;
         c.   When and if necessary, call on residents of the municipality over
the age of twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the state
and ordinances of the municipality;
         d.   Release a person imprisoned for a violation of a municipal
ordinance;
         e.   At any reasonable time, examine and inspect the official books,
papers, records, or documents of: 1) the municipality; or 2) any officer,
employee, or agency of the municipality; and (Ord. 2009-01, 2-4-2009)
         f.   Without a vote of the city council and at any time, and during or
outside of a meeting of the city council, but subject to the provisions of
subsection 1-5-5A of this chapter, cancel a regularly or specially scheduled
meeting of the city council if he deems that there is insufficient reason or
workload to warrant or otherwise justify holding said meeting. (Ord. 2013-07,
7-17-2013)
      3.   The mayor may, with the advice and consent of the city council:
         a.   Assign or appoint a member of the city council to administer one
or more departments of the municipality; and
         b.   Appoint a person to fill:
            (1)   A municipal office; or
            (2)   A vacancy on a commission, board, committee, or agency of the
municipality.
      4.   The mayor exercises the ceremonial functions for the municipality.
      5.   The mayor may, within budget constraints, appoint one or more
administrative assistants to the mayor. (Ord. 2009-01, 2-4-2009)
1-5-4: MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Prescribe Additional Powers And Duties: The city council may, by
resolution, prescribe additional duties, powers and responsibilities for any
elected or appointed official which are not prohibited by any specific statute,
except that the mayor may not serve as city clerk/recorder and neither the
mayor nor the city clerk/recorder may serve as city treasurer. A justice court
judge may not hold any other city office or position of employment with the
city. (1982 Code § 3-810; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Personnel Assigned To One Or More Departments: The city council may
assign any individual to one or more positions in one or more departments.
(1982 Code § 3-814; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Rules And Regulations For Administration: The city council shall adopt
rules, regulations and policies which are not inconsistent with the laws of
this state, as it deems best for the efficient administration, organization,
conduct and business of the city. (1982 Code § 3-815; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Appointed Officers; Residency Requirements: The city council may
require by ordinance that any or all appointed officers reside in the city.
(1982 Code § 3-816; amd. 1998 Code)
1-5-5: MEETINGS; PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT:
   A.   Regular Meetings:
      1.   The city council shall conduct at least one regular meeting per
month, as provided in section 10-3-502(1)(b), Utah Code Annotated (1953,
amended), which meeting shall be held on the first and/or third Wednesday in
the city council chambers located at 111 South Main, LaVerkin, Utah, commencing
promptly at six o’clock (6:00) P.M.; provided that: 1) such meeting may be
canceled or rescheduled by the mayor and/or city council if said meeting date
is a legal holiday, or immediately preceding or following such; and 2) the
mayor may cancel such meeting, pursuant to the provisions of subsection
1-5-3C2f of this chapter, so long as at least one regular meeting of the
council is scheduled and held during the calendar month in which such meeting
is canceled.
      2.   Notwithstanding the terms and provisions of subsections A.1 and F of
this Section, the City Council may delay or reschedule a regular meeting of the
City Council to another date or time within the calendar month; provided that:
         a.   Conflicts or conditions prevent or reasonably appear to prevent
the Council from personally meeting or having a quorum present on-site at any
normally-scheduled regular meeting during the month; and
         b.   Not more than one regular meeting during the month shall be
delayed or rescheduled; and
         c.   Such delay or rescheduling shall be ordered by motion or
resolution of the City Council during a duly called and held regular meeting of
the Council, and
         d.   Notice of such delay or rescheduling shall be published in a
local newspaper of general circulation not later than ten (10) days prior to
said meeting, posted in at least two (2) locations throughout the municipality,
and posted on the City’s website.
   B.   Special Meetings: If at any time the business of the city requires a
special meeting of the city council, such meeting may be ordered by the mayor
or any two (2) members of the city council. The order shall be entered in the
minutes of the city council. The order shall provide at least three (3) hours’
notice of the special meeting and notice thereof shall be served by the city
clerk/recorder on each member who did not sign the order by delivering the
notice personally or by leaving it at the member’s usual place of abode. The
personal appearance by a council member at any specially called meeting
constitutes a waiver of the notice required in this subsection.
   C.   Open Meetings: Every meeting is open to the public, unless closed
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 52-4-4 and 52-4-5.
   D.   Quorum:
      1.   Defined: The number of members of the city council necessary to
constitute a quorum is three (3) or more.
      2.   Necessary: No action of the city council shall be official or of any
effect, except when a quorum of the members are present. Fewer than a quorum
may adjourn from time to time.
   E.   Voting:
      1.   How Vote Taken: A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all
ordinances, resolutions and any action which would create a liability against
the city and in any other case at the request of any member of the city council
or mayor by a “yes” or a “no” vote and shall be recorded. Every resolution or
ordinance shall be in writing before the vote is taken.
      2.   Minimum Vote Required: The minimum number of votes required to pass
any ordinance, resolution or to take any action by the city council, unless
otherwise prescribed by law, shall be a majority of the members of the quorum,
but shall never be less than three (3).
         a.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion of the city council having
fewer favorable votes than required herein shall be deemed defeated and
invalid, except a meeting may be adjourned to a specific time by a majority
vote of the city council even though such majority vote is less than that
required herein.
         b.   A majority of the members of the city council, regardless of
number, may fill any vacancy in the city council.
      3.   Reconsideration: Any action taken by the city council shall not be
reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting unless the number of members
of the city council present at the special meeting is equal to or greater than
the number of members present at the meeting when the action was approved.
   F.   Electronic Meetings: While LaVerkin City encourages the physical
attendance of all of its elected officials at the meeting anchor location there
is, from time to time, a need for elected officials to connect to the meetings
via electronic means. Acceptable means of connection include telephone,
computer, satellite, or wireless communications. At a minimum, one elected
official must be in attendance at the meeting anchor site. All other elected
officials must give notice to the city recorder forty eight (48) hours in
advance of the meeting as to what electronic means they intend to utilize to
attend the meeting. The city recorder must give proper public notice of the
meeting twenty four (24) hours in advance which shall include the name and
connection method of all elected leaders who intend to connect electronically
to the meeting. Once three (3) or more members of the city council are in
attendance at the meeting, either physically or electronically, the council is
considered to be in full quorum. (1982 Code §§ 3-503, 3-504, 3-505, 3-507, 3-
508, 3-509, 3-601; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2006-21, 7-5-2006; Ord. 2013-07, 7-17-
2013; Ord. 2022-09, 9-7-2022)
1-5-6: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROCEDURES:
   A.   Power Exercised By Ordinance: The city council may pass any ordinance
to regulate, require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity,
business, conduct or condition authorized by statute or any other provision of
law. An officer of the city shall not be convicted of a criminal offense where
he relied on or enforced an ordinance he reasonably believed to be a valid
ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for punitive damages that the
official acted in good faith in enforcing an ordinance or that he enforced an
ordinance on advice of legal counsel. (1982 Code § 3-702; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Penalty For Violation: Unless otherwise specifically authorized by
statute, the city council may provide a penalty for the violation of any city
ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor fine under
Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a term of imprisonment up to six (6)
months, or by both the fine and term of imprisonment. The city council may
prescribe a minimum penalty for the violation of any city ordinance and may
impose a civil penalty for the unauthorized use of city property, including,
but not limited to, the use of parks, streets and other public grounds or
equipment. Rules of civil procedure shall be substantially followed. (1982 Code
§ 3-703; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Form Of Ordinance: Any ordinance passed by the city council shall
contain and be in substantially the following order and form:
      1.   A number;
      2.   A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the
ordinance;
      3.   A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance;
      4.   An ordaining clause which states "be it ordained by the city of
LaVerkin:";
      5.   The body or subject of the ordinance;
      6.   When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of
the ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance
which prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of the
city ordinance; or, the penalty may establish a classification of penalties and
refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such violation is established;
      7.   A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the
date when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting as
required by this section;
      8.   A line for the signature of the mayor or acting mayor to sign the
ordinance; and
      9.   A place for the city clerk/recorder to attest the ordinance. (1982
Code § 3-704; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Requirements As To Form; Effective Date:
      1.   Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be signed by
the mayor, or if he is absent, by the mayor pro tempore, or by a quorum of the
city council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be
void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3-704(1), (2), (3) or (4). (1982 Code § 3-705; amd.
1998 Code)
      2.   Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication
or posting or thirty (30) days after final passage by the city council,
whichever is closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become
effective at an earlier or later date after publication or posting if so
provided in the ordinance. (1982 Code § 3-712; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Publication And Posting Of Ordinances: All ordinances, except those
enacted pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-706 to 10-3-710, before
taking effect shall be deposited in the office of the city clerk/recorder and a
short summary of the ordinance published at least once in a newspaper published
within the city, or if there is no newspaper published therein, then by posting
complete copies in three (3) public places within the city. Any ordinance, code
or book, other than the state code, relating to building or safety standards,
city functions, administration, control or regulations, may be adopted and
shall take effect without further publication or posting, if reference is made
to the code or book and at least three (3) copies have been filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the city clerk/recorder prior to the
adoption of the ordinance by the city council. Any state law relating to
building or safety standards, city functions, administration, control or
regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further publication
or posting if reference is made to the state code. The ordinance adopting the
code or book shall be published in the manner provided in Utah Code Annotated
sections 10-3-709 and 10-3-710. (1982 Code § 3-711; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Passage:
      1.   The city clerk/recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for
that purpose, all ordinances passed by the city council. The city clerk/
recorder shall give each ordinance a number, if the city council has not
already so done. Immediately following each ordinance, or codification of
ordinances, the city clerk/recorder shall make or cause to be made a
certificate stating the date of passage and of the date of publication or
posting, as required. The record and memorandum, or a certified copy thereof,
shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage and publication or
posting of the ordinance or codification. (1982 Code § 3-713; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   Failure to comply with this subsection shall not affect or render
invalid any ordinance of the city. (1982 Code § 1-008; amd. 1998 Code)
   G.   Resolutions:
      1.   Purpose: Unless otherwise required by law, the city council may
exercise all administrative powers by resolution, including, but not limited
to: a) establishing water and sewer rates; b) charges for garbage collection
and fees charged for city services; c) establishing personnel policies and
guidelines; and d) regulating the use and operation of the city property.
Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution. (1982 Code §
3-717; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   Form: Any resolution passed by the city council shall be in a form
and contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
(1982 Code § 3-718; amd. 1998 Code)
      3.   Publication; Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective
without publication or posting and may take effect on passage or at a later
date as the city council may determine, but resolutions may not become
effective more than three (3) months from the date of passage. (1982 Code § 3-
719; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 5A
EMERGENCY INTERIM EXECUTIVE SUCCESSION ORDINANCE
SECTION:
1-5A-1: Title
1-5A-2: Statutory Authority
1-5A-3: Purpose
1-5A-4: Definitions
1-5A-5: Order Of Succession; List
1-5A-6: Oath Of Office
1-5A-7: Exercise Of Powers And Discharge Of Duties
1-5A-8: Removal Or Replacement
1-5A-9: Enforcement
1-5A-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the EMERGENCY INTERIM EXECUTIVE SUCCESSION
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2003-09, 7-2-2003)
1-5A-2: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
The statutory authority for enacting this article is Utah Code Annotated,
sections 63-5b-401, 501, and 502 (1953, as amended). (Ord. 2003-09, 7-2-2003)
1-5A-3: PURPOSE:
The LaVerkin City council hereby declares that this ordinance is adopted to
achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions
hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish these purposes:
   A.   To provide for emergency interim successors for all LaVerkin City
officers in the event any or all of such officers and duly appointed deputies
become unavailable as the result of a disaster; and
   B.   To provide for the manner in which vacancies of LaVerkin City officer
positions shall be filled. (Ord. 2003-09, 7-2-2003)
1-5A-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ATTACK: A nuclear, conventional, biological, or chemical warfare action against
the United States of America or the state of Utah.
DISASTER: A situation causing, or threatening to cause, widespread damage,
social disruption, or injury or loss of life or property resulting from attack,
internal disturbance, natural phenomenon, or technological hazard.
DIVISION: The division of emergency services and homeland security established
in title 53, chapter 2, emergency services and homeland security act.
EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR: A person designated by this chapter to exercise
the powers and discharge the duties of an office when the person legally
exercising the powers and duties of the office is unavailable.
INTERNAL DISTURBANCE: A riot, prison break, disruptive terrorism, or strike.
NATURAL PHENOMENON: Any earthquake, tornado, storm, flood, landslide,
avalanche, forest or range fire, drought, or epidemic.
OFFICER: All LaVerkin City officers, the duties of which are defined by the
constitution, statutes, or ordinances.
TECHNOLOGICAL HAZARD: Any hazardous materials accident, mine accident, train
derailment, truck wreck, air crash, radiation incident, pollution, structural
fire, or explosion.
UNAVAILABLE: Either a vacancy in office exists or there is no deputy authorized
to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of the office, or the
lawful incumbent of the office, including any vacancy, and his duly authorized
deputy, are absent or unable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of
the office. (Ord. 2003-09, 7-2-2003)
1-5A-5: ORDER OF SUCCESSION; LIST:
By July 1 of each year, all LaVerkin City officers shall designate by title or
by named person, three (3) emergency interim successors and specify their order
of succession. Each officer upon completion of such list shall furnish the
LaVerkin City legislative body with the original and shall furnish each
designee with a copy of said list. The LaVerkin City legislative body shall
provide a list of the successors for LaVerkin officer to the division. (Ord.
2003-09, 7-2-2003)
1-5A-6: OATH OF OFFICE:
At the time that the emergency interim successors are appointed, emergency
interim successors shall sign prospectively whatever oath is required to enable
them to exercise the powers and duties of the office to which they may succeed.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person is required to comply
with any other provision of law relative to taking office as a prerequisite to
the exercise of the powers or discharge the duties of an office to which he
succeeds. (Ord. 2003-09, 7-2-2003)
1-5A-7: EXERCISE OF POWERS AND DISCHARGE OF DUTIES:
In the event that a LaVerkin City officer, or his deputy provided for pursuant
to law, is unavailable, emergency interim successors, in the order specified,
shall exercise the powers and duties of the office to which they succeed only
when a disaster, as defined herein, has occurred. The emergency interim
successor shall exercise the powers and duties of the office until the vacancy
is filled in accordance with the constitution or statutes; or until the
officer, his deputy, or a preceding emergency interim successor again becomes
available to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office. (Ord.
2003-09, 7-2-2003)
1-5A-8: REMOVAL OR REPLACEMENT:
Until such time as the persons designated as emergency interim successors are
authorized to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of an office in
accordance with this chapter, said persons shall serve in their designated
capacities at the pleasure of the designating authority and may be removed and
replaced by said designating officer at any time, with or without cause. (Ord.
2003-09, 7-2-2003)
1-5A-9: ENFORCEMENT:
The LaVerkin City legislative body shall be responsible to ensure that the
provisions of this chapter are complied with and to ensure that emergency
interim successors are notified as to the unavailability of their designators.
(Ord. 2003-09, 7-2-2003)
CHAPTER 6
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Creating Offices; Filling Vacancies
1-6-2: Hiring Procedures
1-6-3: Compensation
1-6-4: Bond Requirements
1-6-5: Oaths
1-6-6: Official Neglect And Misconduct
1-6-7: City Clerk/Recorder And City Treasurer
1-6-8: City Attorney
1-6-1: CREATING OFFICES; FILLING VACANCIES:
   A.   Offices Created By Council: The city council may create any office
deemed necessary for the government of the city and provide for filling
vacancies in elective and appointive offices.
   B.   Mayor Appointments:
      1.   The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall
appoint qualified individuals to serve as a city recorder (also known herein as
the city clerk/recorder) and city treasurer.
      2.   The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may
appoint qualified individuals to serve as city administrator, city attorney,
city engineer, chief of police, deputy recorder, and/or deputy treasurer.
      3.   The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may
appoint qualified individuals to serve in director level positions in each of
the four (4) divisions of the city, viz., administrative services, operations,
recreation and events, and public safety.
   C.   City Organizational Structure:
      1.   The officers of the city shall include:
         a.   The six (6) member council, one of whom is the mayor, with all
the powers, authority, duties, functions and responsibilities provided for said
offices by the Utah constitution and title 10 of the Utah Code Annotated
(including, but not limited to, sections 10-3b-101 et seq., and 10-3b-301 et
seq., Utah Code Annotated [1953, as amended], and their successors), except as
otherwise provided herein.
         b.   The city recorder (who shall answer to the mayor and be a part of
the city's administrative services division) (see section
1-6-7 of this chapter).
         c.   The city treasurer (who shall answer to the mayor and be a part
of the city's administrative services division) (see section
1-6-7 of this chapter).
      2.   The officers of the city may also include the following personnel:
         a.   Contract or exempt service personnel:
            (1)   The city administrator (see subsection D of this section and
article A of this chapter).
            (2)   The chief of police (see title 1, chapter 12 of this code).
            (3)   The city attorney (see section
1-6-8 of this chapter).
            (4)   The city engineer.
            (5)   Division directors or coordinators (see subsection C3 of this
section).
         b.   Contract or nonexempt service personnel:
            (1)   Deputy city recorder.
            (2)   Deputy city treasurer.
      3.   The city is hereby divided into four (4) divisions, each supervised
by an exempt service director level employee of the city (designated as
directors or coordinators, as appropriate, but referred to generally as
division directors herein), as follows:
         a.   City administrative services: Consisting of the coordinator of
administrative services, the city recorder, city treasurer, and clerks (whether
designated as clerks, secretaries, receptionists, or administrative
assistants). Coordinates the provision of recorder and treasurer services,
utility customer services, and human resources services for the city.
         b.   Operations: Consisting of the director of operations and public
works and operational personnel of the city (see article B of this chapter).
         c.   Recreation and events: Consisting of the recreation and events
director, and all employed and volunteer staff assigned or detailed to work
with the city’s recreation programs, events, and festivals.
         d.   Public safety: Consisting of the public safety director (also
designated as the chief of police), and all law enforcement, fire and/or rescue
service personnel of the city (see chapter 12 of this title).
   D.   City Administrator:
      1.   The position of city administrator is hereby established.
      2.   The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may hire
and appoint a city administrator, who shall qualify by taking, subscribing and
filing the constitutional oath of office.
      3.   The city administrator shall perform the duties, functions and
responsibilities: a) specifically set forth in article A of this chapter; and
b) otherwise set forth or referenced in and throughout this code and the city's
personnel policies for the positions variously described or entitled city
administrator, city manager, manager, and full time chief administrative
officer.
      4.   The mayor shall function as, and have all of the duties, functions,
responsibilities, and authority of, the city administrator: a) until one is
initially hired and appointed, b) at any time that there is a vacancy in the
city administrator's office, c) during the absence or disability of the city
administrator, and/or d) during such periods when the council has determined
that it is not necessary or prudent to fill a vacancy in the position of city
administrator; provided that, while so serving, the mayor shall not be entitled
to receive or be paid any additional compensation for such service (beyond that
established and provided for the office and duties of mayor).
   E.   Continuation In Office: Except as otherwise specifically provided
herein, all appointed officers shall continue in office until their successors
have been appointed and qualified. (Ord. 2009-01, 2-4-2009; amd. Ord. 2023-11,
7-5-2023)
1-6-2: HIRING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Applicability: This section shall apply to the hiring of all city
employees, other than the city administrator, city recorder, city treasurer,
city attorney and city engineer.
   B.   Hiring: All city employees shall be hired by the city administrator.
(Ord. 155, 10-27-1982; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2023-11, 7-5-2023)
1-6-3: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Elected Officials:
      1.   The monthly compensation of the elected officers is and shall be as
follows:
 
Mayor          $533.33
Council member 266.67
 
(Ord. 2010-04, 3-3-2010)
      2.   The city treasurer shall pay each elected officer on the first
regular business day of each month by delivery of a check drawn on the city
checking account to the elected officer personally or by mailing the check to
the elected officer at his home, postage prepaid.
      3.   Each member of the city council shall receive mileage and per diem
for all trips approved by the city council according to the schedules adopted
by the city council. (Ord. 97-14, 1-1-1998, eff. 1-1-1998)
   B.   Officers And Employees: The salary of the officers and employees of
this city shall be paid in the amount and at such times as is established by
the city council.
   C.   Benefits: In addition to the salary paid the officers and employees of
the city, they shall receive benefits as outlined in the personnel policies
manual.
   D.   Serving Two Or More Positions: Whenever any person serves in two (2) or
more positions either as officers or employees of this City, unless otherwise
specifically provided in the employment agreement, by ordinance or by
resolution, that person shall receive the salary or compensation prorated to
the percent of time spent in each position. (1982 Code § 3-818; amd. 1998 Code)
1-6-4: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Bonds And/Or Insurance Coverage: The Mayor, City Council, City
Treasurer, and such other officers (if any) as may be required under the
provisions of subsection D of this section, shall execute one or more public
officials bonds in accordance with (and satisfying the conditions of) the
provisions of section 10-3-819, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended), and/or
be covered - during their term(s) of service - by adequate theft/crime
insurance coverage of the City, in such amounts as may be required by law. To
the extent allowed by applicable State law, either the bond(s) or the theft/
crime insurance coverage (either as stand-alone insurance coverage or as a
subset of blanket insurance coverage) shall be sufficient to satisfy the
requirements of this section.
   B.   Approval Of Bonds: The bonds and/or theft/crime insurance coverage of
and pertaining to the Council members shall be approved by the Mayor; and the
bond and/or theft/crime insurance coverage of and pertaining to the Mayor shall
be approved by the City Council at the first meeting of the City Council in
January following a City election. Council approval may be by separate motion
or as part of the consent agenda motion at said meeting.
   C.   Premium Paid By City: The premium charged by a corporate surety for any
bond and/or crime/theft insurance coverage required by the City shall be paid
by the City.
   D.   Additional Bonds: If and to the extent that bonds are required/
utilized, the City Council may at any time require further and additional bonds
of any or all officers elected or appointed. All bonds given by the officers,
except as otherwise provided by law, shall be filed with the City Clerk/
Recorder, except that the bond of the City Clerk/Recorder shall be filed with
the City Treasurer.
   E.   Bond Amounts: Before taking the oath of office and entering on the
duties of their respective office, the Mayor and City Council members shall be
covered by the City's blanket bond or insurance coverage (including theft/
criminal coverage).
   F.   Treasurer's Bond:
      1.   The City Treasurer's bond, or the bond of any person who acts as
City Treasurer, and/or crime/theft insurance coverage covering the acts of or
by the City Treasurer, may not be less than that established by the State Money
Management Council.
      2.   The Treasurer's bond and/or crime/theft insurance coverage shall be
superseded by any rule, regulation or directive of the State Money Management
Council when such rule, regulation or directive is binding on the City.
   G.   Blanket Bond: Any bond required in this section may be a blanket bond
or, to the extent allowed by applicable State law, by the City's theft/crime
insurance and/or blanket insurance coverage. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-16-2019)
1-6-5: OATHS:
   A.   Constitutional Oath Of Office: All officers, whether elected or
appointed, before entering on the duties of their respective offices shall
take, subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office. (1982 Code § 3-827;
amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Oath; Filing: The oath of office required under this section shall be
administered by any judge, notary public or by the City Clerk/Recorder. Elected
officials shall take their oath of office at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the
first Monday in January following their election or as soon thereafter as is
practical. Appointed officers shall take their oath at any time before entering
on their duties. All oaths of office shall be filed with the City Clerk/
Recorder. (1982 Code § 3-828; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Acts Of Officials Not Voided: No official act of any City officer shall
be invalid for the reason that he failed to take the oath of office. (1982 Code
§ 3-829; amd. 1998 Code)
1-6-6: OFFICIAL NEGLECT AND MISCONDUCT:
In case any City officer shall at any time wilfully omit to perform any duty,
or wilfully and corruptly be guilty of oppression, misconduct, misfeasance or
malfeasance in office, the person is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor 1 , shall
be removed from office and is not eligible for any City office thereafter.
(1982 Code § 3-826; amd. 1998 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 76-3-204.
1-6-7: CITY CLERK/RECORDER AND CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Vacancies: On or before the first Monday in February following a City
election, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall
appoint a qualified person to each of the offices of City Clerk/Recorder and
City Treasurer.
   B.   Ex Officio Auditor: The City Clerk/Recorder is ex officio the City
Auditor and shall perform the duties of that office. (1982 Code § 3-916; amd.
1998 Code)
1-6-8: CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   The City may appoint a City Attorney to provide legal services,
assistance, and representation to and for the City. The attorney shall either
be a contract attorney or an exempt service employee of the City.
   B.   The City Attorney may also civilly prosecute violations of City
ordinances.
   C.   The City Attorney shall attend City Council, Board of Adjustment, and
planning related meetings of the City; advise and counsel City officials and
staff on legal issues and matters; represent and defend, or assist in
representing and defending, the City in civil litigation and prelitigation
matters against or involving the City and/or its interests; represent the City
and zealously investigate, enforce, and criminally, civilly and/or
administratively prosecute (and/or supervise the prosecution of) civil and
criminal violations of City ordinances and State laws committed within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the City (and shall have the same powers in
respect to the violations as are exercised by a County Attorney, including, but
not limited to, granting immunity to witnesses); represent, oversee, and/or
coordinate the representation of the City's interests in the appeal of
administrative or judicial orders or judgments; draft and/or review law and
policy of the City, as well as contracts, correspondence and other legal
documents requested by or beneficial to the City; and maintain professional
competence in the areas of law and procedure which affect or impact
municipalities. (Ord. 2009-01, 2-4-2009)
ARTICLE A. CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Appointment, Vacancies, And Dismissal
1-6A-2: Classification Of Position
1-6A-3: Compensation
1-6A-4: Powers, Duties, Functions, And Responsibilities
1-6A-5: Term
1-6A-6: Termination And Severance Pay
1-6A-1: APPOINTMENT, VACANCIES, AND DISMISSAL:
   A.   See subsection 1-6-1B of this chapter.
   B.   The city administrator shall work under and be answerable to the mayor.
(Ord. 2009-01, 2-4-2009)
1-6A-2: CLASSIFICATION OF POSITION:
The city administrator position shall be classified as an exempt position with
at will status, pursuant to and in accordance with all guidelines set forth in
the fair labor standards act and other applicable laws and regulations. (Ord.
2009-01, 2-4-2009)
1-6A-3: COMPENSATION:
The city administrator shall receive compensation at the rate and in a form to
be determined by the city council and established by resolution and/or
contract. Where a contract is used, the city attorney shall assist in drafting
and approving a contract mutually agreed upon and properly executed by the city
council and the city administrator. (Ord. 2009-01, 2-4-2009)
1-6A-4: POWERS, DUTIES, FUNCTIONS, AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
In addition to any powers, duties, functions, and responsibilities set forth or
referenced in other provisions of this code, other ordinances and resolutions
of the city council, and the city's personnel policies for the positions
variously described or entitled city administrator, city manager, manager, and
full time chief administrative officer (see subsection 1-6-1D of this chapter),
the city administrator shall have and exercise the following powers, duties,
functions, and responsibilities:
   A.   Discharge Duties With Fidelity: Discharge the duties of city
administrator with fidelity.
   B.   Work With Mayor And Council: Timely communicate and work with the mayor
and city council.
      1.   Attend meetings and hearings of the city council and planning
commission.
      2.   Consult with and keep the mayor informed regarding the day to day
operations of the city and its various divisions.
      3.   Coordinate with and work under the direction of the mayor and the
city council.
      4.   Represent and defend the decisions of the mayor and council, and
keep the mayor and council informed of all important decisions and activities
affecting the city.
      5.   Advise the mayor and city council on matters of policy, procedure
and business requiring the awareness or approval of the mayor and council.
      6.   Promptly and efficiently carry out assignments from the mayor and/or
city council.
   C.   Administrative Duties:
      1.   Oversee and provide guidance for the day to day operations of the
city and its various divisions.
      2.   Work and coordinate with the division directors, city attorney, city
recorder, and city treasurer.
         a.   Oversee the work of the employees of the city through their
respective directors.
         b.   Oversee the proper use, care, preservation and accountability of
and for all machinery, tools, appliances and property (real, fixed, and
personal) belonging to the city.
      3.   Hold staff meetings with division directors and city attorney (and
city recorder and/or city treasurer, as needed) to coordinate and provide
overall direction to city affairs.
      4.   Be and remain informed of the activities, functions, and manpower
and resource needs of all city commissions, boards, committees, agencies,
divisions and departments.
   D.   Personnel:
      1.   Mentor and provide first line job related direction and assistance
to the division directors, city recorder, and city treasurer; and ensure that
they receive appropriate technical, managerial, and/or professional training
and development opportunities.
      2.   In consultation with the mayor, ensure that the city attorney
receives appropriate technical and professional training and development
opportunities.
      3.   Meet with division directors on no less than a quarterly basis, to
discuss goals, progress, and deficiencies, with respect to each director's area
of responsibility.
      4.   Evaluate the division directors; senior rate city employees within
the various city divisions (with the exception of the city recorder and city
treasurer); and provide input to the mayor regarding the performance of the
city recorder and city treasurer.
      5.   In coordination with and subject to the advice and consent of the
mayor, make and be responsible for decisions relating to the advancement,
dismissal, suspension, demotion, hiring, transfer, wage increases, leaves of
absence, travel, and job training of part time and full time nonexempt city
employees below the levels of division director (other than the city recorder
and city treasurer).
      6.   Approve or disapprove requests by division directors for the hiring,
firing, or laying off of part time personnel of the city.
      7.   With the input of the mayor, council, and staff, prepare job
descriptions for each position within the city, as well as appropriate salary
ranges for each.
   E.   Planning:
      1.   Serve as city planning administrator for the city, providing
administrative support and planning related advice, as needed, to city staff,
the city council, and the planning commission.
      2.   Assist the mayor and city council in formulating and developing a
long range plan and supporting budget for the city.
   F.   Fiscal:
      1.   In accordance with the guidelines approved by the city council and
mayor, develop and submit to the city council a proposed budget for the city no
later than the first meeting of May of each fiscal year.
      2.   Monitor revenues and expenditures of the city to ensure that actual
expenditures do not exceed approved budgets and expenditures are appropriately
reduced if actual revenues collected are less than budgeted revenues; and
report, on a monthly basis, the status of city budgets and cost effective
measures implemented, if any.
   G.   Purchasing: Function as the city's purchasing agent, the duties of
which shall include, but not be limited to: 1) receiving purchase requisitions
from division directors; 2) determining, through solicitation of bids by
telephone or through formal bid procedure as required by law, vendors offering
the best price; 3) checking current budget status to determine availability of
funds for each purchase; 4) completing purchase requisitions and forwarding to
data processing for preparation of purchase order and entry in computer; and 5)
maintaining records and catalogues on various vendors along with updated price
lists. (Ord. 2009-01, 2-4-2009)
1-6A-5: TERM:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of subsection B of this section:
      1.   The term of the initial city administrator appointed on or after the
effective date hereof shall run until January 31 following the next municipal
general election of the city.
      2.   Each succeeding appointment shall run until January 31 of each
succeeding municipal general election of the city.
   B.   Provided that, prior to the end date as established under subsection A
of this section:
      1.   The mayor, with the concurring vote of a majority of the city
council, may dismiss, remove, or otherwise terminate the services of the city
administrator at any time, subject to the provisions of section
1-6A-6 of this article.
      2.   The city council, by unanimous vote (with or without the concurrence
of the mayor) may dismiss, remove, or otherwise terminate the services of the
city administrator at any time, subject to the provisions of section
1-6A-6 of this article.
      3.   The city administrator may resign his or her position with the city
upon not less than thirty (30) days' written notice to the mayor and city
council.
      4.   The city administrator and city may mutually agree, in writing, to
terminate the services of the city administrator.
   C.   If the services of the city administrator are terminated (voluntarily
or involuntarily) prior to the end of the term as set forth in subsection A of
this section:
      1.   The end date of the city administrator's term, unless otherwise
mutually agreed by the city administrator and city council, shall be the date
of the action to terminate under subsections B1 and B2 of this section, the
date set forth in the written notice of resignation as the date that the
resignation is effective under subsection B3 of this section, or the date
mutually agreed to and set forth in writing under subsection B4 of this
section.
      2.   The qualified and appointed successor city administrator shall then
fill the remainder of his or her predecessor's term, as set forth in subsection
A of this section (unless that period is less than 1 year, in which case, the
term shall extend to January 31 following the second municipal general election
following said appointment). (Ord. 2009-01, 2-4-2009)
1-6A-6: TERMINATION AND SEVERANCE PAY:
   A.   In the event that the services of the city administrator are terminated
for cause, including, but not limited to, malfeasance in office and/or the
commission of a crime of moral turpitude, the city shall have no obligation to
pay any severance pay to the city administrator. He shall only be entitled to
receive such earned pay and allowances as that of other employees of the city
who are ending their employment with the city, including, but not limited to,
any unpaid wages and accrued and unused vacation leave.
   B.   In the event that the services of the city administrator are otherwise
terminated by the city, the city shall pay to the city administrator a lump sum
payment equal to one month's salary, plus one additional month's salary for
each full year of service as city administrator, up to a maximum sum total of
three (3) months' salary, plus accrued and unpaid pay and benefits. (Ord. 2009-
01, 2-4-2009)
ARTICLE B. DIRECTOR OF OPERATIONS
SECTION:
1-6B-1: Classification Of Position
1-6B-2: Compensation
1-6B-3: Powers And Duties
1-6B-4: Relationship Of City Council To Administrative Service
1-6B-1: CLASSIFICATION OF POSITION:
The position of city director of operations shall be classified as an exempt
position pursuant to all guidelines identified in the fair labor standards act,
as well as all other applicable laws and guidelines. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-7-2006;
amd. Ord. 2023-11, 7-5-2023)
1-6B-2: COMPENSATION:
The director of operations shall receive compensation at the rate and in a form
to be determined by the city administrator in conjunction with budgetary
approvals of the city council. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-7-2006; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 7-5-
2023)
1-6B-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The director of operations shall have and exercise such powers and perform such
duties as specified in this section, or such other ordinances as specified by
the city council. Specifically, the powers and duties of the city director of
operations shall be:
   A.   Execute And Enforce Laws: To faithfully execute and enforce all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city in regard to
field operations of the city (i.e., public works, water, irrigation,
inspection, building, and parks operations). To act in the capacity of the land
use administrator representing the city regarding all land use issues.
   B.   Chief Operations Officer (COO): To function as the chief of operations
officer of the city having authority, supervision and direction over the daily
operations, assets, budgets, and personnel decisions in the public works,
water, irrigation, inspection, building, and parks departments. Department
heads and employees of these departments shall answer directly to the director
of operations. The director of operations shall also have authority to give
recommendations to the city administrator regarding hiring, suspension,
transfers, and removal of all nonelective city employees within these
departments. Furthermore, the director of operations shall have recommendation
authority regarding employee compensation within these departments.
   C.   Attend Meetings: To attend the meetings of the city council and
planning commission with the right to take part in the discussion, but not to
vote; the director of operations shall also recommend to the city council and
planning commission for adoption such measures as the director of operations
may deem necessary or expedient.
   D.   Departmental Budget Oversight: To adhere to the annual budget of the
public works, water, irrigation, inspection, building, and parks departments.
To offer recommendations during the annual budget preparations and periodic
budget amendments.
   E.   Consult Council Members: To consult with city council, in conjunction
with the city administrator, about the activities of his or her assigned
departments (budgets, liability issues, major repairs and purchases, etc.)
prior to bringing these items to vote or discussion of the city council as a
whole and to keep them informed of actions and projects undertaken.
   F.   Purchasing Agent: To act as the purchasing agent for the city public
works, water, irrigation, inspection, building, and parks departments, to
approve all claims before payment, and to see that all goods purchased by or
for the city operational departments are received as per contract.
   G.   Personnel Policies: To perform the city director of operation's
responsibilities in accordance with the city's personnel and policy manual and
shall promulgate policies and procedures for efficient operation of the city.
   H.   Oversee Property Of City: To oversee the proper care for and preserve
all machinery, tools, appliances and property belonging to the city under the
public works, water, irrigation, inspection, building, and parks departments,
and to establish and update as needed a fixed assets inventory of all assets
belonging to these departments.
   I.   Emergency Situation; Notification To City Administrator: To notify the
city administrator immediately of any emergency situation existing in any
department or office under his/her supervision where the emergency conditions
require, or may likely require, future action on the part of the city council
or where the emergency threatens to interrupt normal city operations.
   J.   Informed Of Activities And Functions: To be fully informed of the
activities and functions of committees, departments and agencies under the
public works, water, irrigation, inspection, building, and parks departments of
the city, especially with reference to proposed policy or ordinance changes,
and to offer advice, counsel and/or instruction to the above entities regarding
proper execution of their duties.
   K.   Other Required Duties: To discharge any other duties specified by
statute or imposed by the city administrator, mayor, and city council. (Ord.
2006-17, 6-7-2006; amd. Ord. 2023-11, 7-5-2023)
1-6B-4: RELATIONSHIP OF CITY COUNCIL TO ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE:
To promote effective management practices and establish appropriate lines of
authority and communication, the interrelationship of the city council and
administrative service shall be as follows:
   A.   Daily Administration; Overturning Decision: The city council, its
members and the mayor, and any city council committee, shall allow the
operations of all operational departments of the city to be conducted by and
through the director of operations, in conjunction with the city manager. No
individual member of the city council shall be involved with the daily
operations of the city, either in directing the work of employees or in the
expenditure of funds. Neither shall the city council, except as a whole,
interfere with the director of operations to prevent him or her from exercising
his or her judgment in the direction of employees in the operational
departments of the city. If a decision of the director of operations is deemed
improper by the city administrator, mayor, or a majority vote of the city
council, the decision will be overturned.
   B.   Answerable To City Administrator: The director of operations shall be
answerable to the city administrator for the day to day operations of the city
pursuant to the duties outlined herein. (Ord. 2006-17, 6-7-2006; amd. Ord.
2023-11, 7-5-2023)
ARTICLE C. RECREATION AND EVENTS DIRECTOR
SECTION:
1-6C-1: Classification Of Position
1-6C-2: Compensation
1-6C-3: Powers And Duties
1-6C-1: CLASSIFICATION OF POSITION:
The position of recreation and events director shall be classified as an exempt
position pursuant to all guidelines identified in the fair labor standards act,
as well as all other applicable laws and guidelines. (Ord. 2023-11, 7-5-2023)
1-6C-2: COMPENSATION:
The recreation and events director shall receive compensation at the rate and
in a form to be determined by the city administrator in conjunction with
budgetary approvals of the city council. (Ord. 2023-11, 7-5-2023)
1-6C-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Brief Description: Under the direct supervision of the city
administrator, the director is responsible for the management and leadership of
the recreation and events division of the city, and any full-time, part-time,
seasonal temporary staff, and volunteers assigned or detailed to work within
the division and its programs, events, and festivals.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities:
      1.   The recreation and events director shall have and exercise such
powers and perform such duties as specified in this section, or such other
ordinances as specified by the city council.
      2.   Specifically, the powers and duties of the recreation and events
director shall be:
         a.   To plan, manage, supervise, oversee, and provide leadership for
all city events, and facilities, staff, and programs and activities of and
sponsored by the recreation and events division.
         b.   To establish rules and regulations for recreational programs and
facilities.
         c.   To effectively multi-task, exhibit good organizational skills,
and work a varied and flexible schedule -- to include evenings and weekends
(depending on the season and activities).
         d.   To prepare and distribute (or oversee the preparation and/or
distribution) of program, event, and festival information to the community.
         e.   To work with and advertise on social media and to utilize website
applications.
         f.   To search out, seek, write, and submit applications for
applicable, available, and relevant grants.
         g.   And to perform such other duties, tasks, and responsibilities
within the purview of recreation, events, and/or festivals, as deemed necessary
or prudent, and/or assigned by the city administrator, mayor, and/or city
council. (Ord. 2023-11, 7-5-2023)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Conduct Of Municipal Elections
1-7-1: CONDUCT OF MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS:
All elections of city officers and other elections conducted within the city
shall be in accordance with the Utah election code, as set out in Utah Code
Annotated title 20A. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 8
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Request
1-8-2: Form Of Request
1-8-3: Procedure
1-8-4: Not Additional Remedy
1-8-1: REQUEST:
Unless otherwise specifically provided in any ordinance of the city or any code
adopted by reference, a hearing before the city council may be requested by any
person:
   A.   Who is denied or refused a permit or license by any officer, agent or
employee of this city.
   B.   Whose permit or license is revoked, restricted, qualified or limited
from that for which it was first issued. (1982 Code § 1-411)
1-8-2: FORM OF REQUEST:
The request for hearing must be made in writing to the mayor or city clerk/
recorder and made within thirty (30) days following the date notice denying,
refusing, revoking, qualifying or restricting the license or permit is mailed
by the city to the applicant or license holder at his address as it appears on
the application or license. (1982 Code § 4-412)
1-8-3: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Time And Place: Following receipt of a request for hearing, the city
council shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the time and place the
hearing is to be held.
   B.   Witnesses; Evidence: At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall have the
right to hear and examine any witnesses the city may produce to support its
decision and to present his own evidence in support of his contention.
   C.   Decision Of City Council: The city council shall, within ten (10) days
following the conclusion of the hearing, in writing, inform the person who
requested the hearing of the decision of the city council. (1982 Code § 1-413)
1-8-4: NOT ADDITIONAL REMEDY:
This chapter shall not be construed so as to afford any aggrieved party more
than one hearing before the city council, nor shall the hearing provided in
this chapter apply to any criminal complaint or proceeding. (1982 Code § 1-414)
CHAPTER 9
RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
1-9-1: Title
1-9-2: Purpose; Intent
1-9-3: Definitions
1-9-4: Administration
1-9-5: Right Of Public Access
1-9-6: Fees
1-9-7: Retention Of Records
1-9-8: Access Requests; Procedure
1-9-9: Classification; Designation
1-9-10: Public Records
1-9-11: Private Records
1-9-12: Controlled Records
1-9-13: Protected Records
1-9-14: Segregation Of Records
1-9-15: Data Maintained On Individuals; Rights
1-9-16: Amendments And Changes To Records
1-9-17: Denial Of Request
1-9-18: Appeal Procedure
1-9-19: Confidential Treatment; No Applicable Exemption
1-9-20: Liability Of Officers And Employees
1-9-21: Criminal Penalties
1-9-1: TITLE:
This chapter is known as the LAVERKIN GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER. (Ord. 95-03, 6-7-1995)
1-9-2: PURPOSE; INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: In enacting this chapter, the city recognizes two (2)
fundamental constitutional rights:
      1.   The right of privacy in relation to personal data gathered by the
city; and
      2.   The public's right of access to information concerning the conduct
of the public's business.
   B.   Intent: It is the intent of the city to:
      1.   Establish fair information practices to prevent abuse of personal
information by the city while protecting the public's right of easy and
reasonable access to unrestricted public records;
      2.   Provide guidelines of openness to government information and privacy
of personal information consistent with nationwide standards;
      3.   Establish and maintain an active, continuing program for the
economical and efficient management of the city's records, as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 95-03, 6-7-1995)
1-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
AUDIT: A. A systematic examination of financial, management, program and
related records for the purpose of determining the fair presentation of
financial statements, adequacy of internal controls or compliance with laws and
regulations; or
   B.   A systematic examination of program procedures and operations for the
purpose of determining their effectiveness, economy, efficiency and compliance
with statutes and regulations.
CHRONOLOGICAL LOGS: The regular and customary summary records of law
enforcement agencies and other public safety agencies that show the time and
general nature of police, fire and paramedic calls made to the agency and any
arrests or jail bookings made by the agency.
CITY: Shall refer to the city of LaVerkin, Washington County, Utah.
CLASSIFICATION, CLASSIFY (And Their Derivative Forms): Determining whether a
record series, record or information within a record is public, private,
controlled or protected, or exempt from disclosure under Utah Code Annotated
section 63-2-201(3)(b).
COMPUTER PROGRAM: A series of instructions or statements that permit the
functioning of a computer system in a manner designed to provide storage,
retrieval and manipulation of data from the computer system, and any associated
documentation and source material that explain how to operate the computer
program. "Computer program" does not mean:
   A.   The original data, including numbers, text, voice, graphics and images;
   B.   Analysis, compilation and other manipulated forms of the original data
produced by use of the program; or
   C.   The mathematical or statistical formulas (excluding the underlying
mathematical algorithms contained in the program) that could be used if the
manipulated forms of the original data were to be produced manually.
CONTRACTOR: Any person who contracts with the city to provide goods or services
directly to the city or any private, nonprofit organization that receives funds
from the city. "Contractor" does not mean a private provider.
CONTROLLED RECORD: A record containing data on individuals that is controlled
as provided by section
1-9-12 of this chapter.
DESIGNATION, DESIGNATE (And Their Derivative Forms): Indicating, based on the
city's familiarity with a record series or based on the city's review of a
reasonable sample of a record series, the primary classification that a
majority of records in a record series would be given if classified and the
classification that other records typically present in the record series would
be given if classified.
ELECTED OFFICIAL: Each person elected to a state office, county office,
municipal office, school board or school district office, or special district
office, but does not include judges.
EXPLOSIVE: A chemical compound, device, or mixture commonly used or intended
for the purpose of producing an explosion and that contains oxidizing or
combustive units or other ingredients in proportions, quantities, or packing so
that an ignition by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or detonator of any
part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden generation of highly heated
gases and the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive
effects on contiguous objects or causing death or serious bodily injury.
GROSS COMPENSATION: Every form of remuneration payable for a given period to an
individual for services provided, including salaries, commissions, vacation
pay, severance pay, bonuses, and any board, rent, housing, lodging, payments in
kind, and any similar benefit received from the individual's employer.
INDIVIDUAL: A human being.
INITIAL CONTACT REPORT: A. An initial written or recorded report, however
titled, prepared by peace officers engaged in public patrol or response duties
describing official actions initially taken in response to either a public
complaint about or the discovery of an apparent violation of law, which report
may describe:
1. The date, time, location and nature of the complaint, the incident or
offense;
2. Names of victims;
3. The nature or general scope of the agency's initial actions taken in
response to the incident;
4. The general nature of any injuries or estimate of damages sustained in the
incident;
5. The name, address and other identifying information about any person
arrested or charged in connection with the incident;
6. The identity of the public safety personnel (except undercover personnel) or
prosecuting attorney involved in responding to the initial incident.
   B.   Initial contact reports do not include follow up or investigative
reports prepared after the initial contact report. However, if the information
specified in subsection A of this definition appears in follow up or
investigative reports, it may only be treated confidentially if it is private,
controlled, protected or exempt from disclosure under Utah Code Annotated
section 63-3-201(3)(b).
PERSON: Any individual, nonprofit or profit corporation, partnership, sole
proprietorship or other type of business organization or any combination of
these acting in concert with one another.
PRIVATE PROVIDER: Any person who contracts with the city to provide services
directly to the public.
PRIVATE RECORD: A record containing data on individuals that is classified
private as provided by section
1-9-11 of this chapter.
PROTECTED RECORD: A record that is classified protected as provided by section
1-9-13 of this chapter.
PUBLIC RECORD: A record that has not been classified private, controlled or
protected as provided in sections
1-9-11,
1-9-12 and
1-9-13 of this chapter.
RECORD: A. All books, letters, documents, papers, maps, plans, photographs,
films, cards, tapes, recordings or other documentary materials and electronic
data, regardless of physical form or characteristics, prepared, owned, used,
received or retained by the city.
   B.   "Record" does not mean:
1. Temporary drafts or similar materials prepared for the originator's personal
use or prepared by the originator for the personal use of an individual for
whom he is working;
2. Materials that are legally owned by an individual in his private capacity;
3. Materials to which access is limited by the laws of copyright or patent,
unless the copyright or patent is owned by the city;
4. Proprietary software;
5. Junk mail or commercial publications received by the city or an official or
employee of the city;
6. Books and other materials that are cataloged or inventoried and contained in
the collections of libraries open to the public, regardless of physical form or
characteristics of the material;
7. Daily calendars and other personal notes prepared by the originator for the
originator's personal use or for the personal use of an individual for whom he
is working;
8. "Computer programs", as defined herein, that are developed or purchased by
or for the city for its own use;
9. Notes or internal memoranda prepared as part of the deliberative process by
a member of the judiciary, an administrative law judge, a member of the board
of pardons or a member of any other body charged by law with performing a
quasi- judicial function;
10. A personal note or personal communication prepared or received by an
employee or official of the city in their private capacity;
11. A telephone number or similar code used to access a mobile communication
device that is used by an employee or official of the city, provided that the
employee or official has designated at least one business telephone number that
is a public record as provided in subsection 1-9-10A2 of this chapter.
RECORD SERIES: A group of records that may be treated as a unit for purposes of
designation, description, management or disposition.
RECORDS COMMITTEE: The Utah State records committee created in Utah Code
Annotated section 63-2-501.
RECORDS OFFICER: The city manager and other individuals as appointed by the
mayor to work in the care, maintenance, scheduling, designation,
classification, disposal and preservation of records.
STATE ARCHIVES: The Utah division of archives and records service created in
Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-901.
SUMMARY DATA: Statistical records and compilations that contain data derived
from private, controlled or protected information, but that do not disclose
private, controlled or protected information. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The mayor shall:
   A.   Program Establishment: Establish and maintain an active, continuing
program for the economical and efficient management of the city's records in
accordance with this chapter and Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-101 et seq.,
as amended.
   B.   Appoint Records Officer: Upon the advice and consent of the city
council, appoint the city manager as the records officer and the deputy clerk
as the assistant records officer, who will be trained to work with the state
archives in the care, maintenance, scheduling, disposal, classification,
designation, access and preservation of city records.
   C.   Training: Ensure that officers and employees of the city that receive
or process records requests receive required training on the procedures and
requirements of this chapter and title 63, chapter 2 of the Utah code.
   D.   Documentation: Make and maintain adequate and proper documentation of
the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures and essential
transactions of the governmental entity designed to furnish information to
protect the legal and financial rights of persons directly affected by the
city's activities.
   E.   Schedule Of Records Submission: Submit to the state archivist proposed
schedules of records for final approval by the state records committee.
   F.   Surveys: Cooperate with the state archivist in conducting surveys made
by the state archivist.
   G.   Rule Compliance: Comply with rules issued by the department of
administrative services as provided by Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-904, as
amended.
   H.   Report To State Archives:
      1.   Records Designation: Report to the state archives the designation of
records series that it maintains;
      2.   Records Classification: Report to the state archives the
classification of each record series that is classified; and
      3.   Retention Schedules: Establish and report to the state archives
retention schedules for objects that the governmental entity determines are not
records referred to under Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-103, but that have
historical or evidentiary value. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-5: RIGHT OF PUBLIC ACCESS:
   A.   Right To Inspect: Every person has the right to inspect a public record
free of charge and the right to take a copy of a public record during normal
working hours, subject to the payment of costs and fees pursuant to section
1-9-6 of this chapter. Requests to inspect or copy records shall be made
pursuant to section
1-9-8 of this chapter.
   B.   Records Designation:
      1.   Public: All records are public, unless otherwise expressly provided
by this chapter or state or federal law or regulation.
      2.   Nonpublic: The following records are not public:
         a.   Records that are appropriately classified private, controlled or
protected as provided by sections
1-9-11,
1-9-12 and
1-9-13 of this chapter; and
         b.   Records to which access is restricted pursuant to court rule,
another state statute, federal statute or federal regulation, including records
for which access is governed or restricted as a condition of participation in a
state or federal program or for receiving state or federal funds. The
disclosure of records to which access is governed or limited pursuant to court
rule, another state statute, federal statute or federal regulation, including
records for which access is governed or limited as a condition of participation
in a state or federal program or for receiving state or federal funds, is
governed by the specific provisions of that statute, rule or regulation;
however, this chapter applies to such records insofar as this chapter is not
inconsistent with the statute, rule or regulation.
   C.   Media: Any person who requests a record to obtain information for a
story or report for publication or broadcast to the general public is presumed
to be acting to benefit the public rather than a person.
   D.   Disclosure:
      1.   Government Entity, Contractor Or Private Provider: The city may
disclose a record classified private, controlled or public to another
governmental entity, city, another state, the United States, or a foreign
government or a contractor or private provider who has a contract to provide
services to the city only as provided by Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-206.
      2.   Court Ordered Disclosure: Under Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-404
(8), the court may require the disclosure of records that are private under
section
1-9-11 of this chapter, controlled under section
1-9-12 of this chapter, or protected under section
1-9-13 of this chapter, to persons other than those specified in sections
1-9-11,
1-9-12 and
1-9-13 of this chapter.
      3.   To Certain Specified Persons: Private, controlled and public records
may be disclosed to certain specified persons pursuant to sections
1-9-11,
1-9-12 and
1-9-13 of this chapter, subject to any exceptions described in this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-6: FEES:
   A.   Authority: The city may charge a reasonable fee to cover the city's
actual cost of duplicating a record or compiling a record in a form other than
that maintained by the city. The fees may be set by resolution and shall be
approved by the mayor. The initial fee, until changed by resolution, is as set
forth in schedule A, which is on file in the office of the records officer.
   B.   Compiling Records: If the city agrees to compile a record in a form
other than that normally maintained by the city, the city may charge a fee for
the actual costs of compiling such record, including the following:
      1.   The cost of staff time for compiling, formatting, manipulating,
packaging, summarizing, or tailoring the record either into an organization or
media to meet the person's request;
      2.   The cost of staff time for search, retrieval, and other direct
administrative costs for complying with a request; and
      3.   In the case of fees for a record that is the result of computer
output other than word processing, the actual incremental cost of providing the
electronic services and products together with a reasonable portion of the
costs associated with formatting or interfacing the information for particular
users.
   C.   Exceptions:
      1.   The city may fulfill a record request without charge when it
determines that:
         a.   Releasing the record primarily benefits the public rather than a
person;
         b.   The individual requesting the record is the subject of the
record, or a person identified in Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-202(1) or
(2); or
         c.   The requester's legal rights are directly implicated by the
information in the record, and the requester is impecunious.
      2.   The city may not charge a fee for:
         a.   Reviewing a record to determine whether it is subject to
disclosure;
         b.   Inspecting a record; or
         c.   The first quarter hour of staff time to compile the records
requested if they are not in a format that is normally maintained by the city.
   D.   Prepayment; Conditions: The city requires payment of past fees and
future estimated fees before beginning to process a request if fees are
expected to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), or if the requester has not paid
fees from previous requests. Any prepaid amount in excess of fees due shall be
returned to the requester.
   E.   Other Fees Established: This section does not alter, repeal or reduce
fees established by other ordinances, statutes or legislative acts. (Ord. 2006-
31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-7: RETENTION OF RECORDS:
   A.   Standards: Retention of the records of the city shall be as set forth
in the model retention schedules maintained by the state archivist for each
specific type of material that is classified as a record under this chapter and
state law. The city shall also establish and report to the state archives
retention schedules for any objects that the city determines are not defined as
a "record" under section
1-9-3 of this chapter, and Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-103, but that have
historical or evidentiary value, when such objects are discovered or
identified.
   B.   Ownership Of Records; Custody:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B2 of this section, all records
created or maintained by the city are the property of the state and shall not
be mutilated, destroyed or otherwise damaged or disposed of, in whole or in
part, except as provided for in state law.
      2.   Records which constitute a valuable intellectual property shall be
the property of the city.
      3.   The state archives may, upon request from the city, take custody of
any record series of the city. If the city no longer wishes to maintain custody
of a record which must be retained under the state's retention schedules, the
city shall transfer it to the state archives for safekeeping and management.
   C.   Intentional Damage Unlawful: It is unlawful for the city to
intentionally mutilate, destroy or otherwise damage or dispose of a record
series knowing that such mutilation, destruction or damage is in contravention
of the state's retention schedules. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-8: ACCESS REQUESTS; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Information Required: A person making a request for a record shall
furnish the city with a written request containing his name, mailing address,
daytime telephone number, if available, and a description of the record
requested that identifies the record with reasonable specificity. Before a
person receives a record, the lawful fees set forth in this chapter shall be
paid. If the record is private, controlled or protected, the city shall obtain
evidence of the requester's identity before releasing the record. A person may
request that the record provided be certified. Subpoenas and other methods of
discovery under the state or federal statutes or rules of civil procedure are
not written requests under this section.
   B.   Ordered Disclosures:
      1.   In judicial or administrative proceedings in which an individual is
requesting discovery of records classified private, controlled or protected
under this chapter, or otherwise restricted from access by other statutes, the
court or an administrative law judge shall follow the procedure in subsection K
of this section before ordering disclosure. Until the court or an
administrative law judge orders disclosure, these records are privileged from
discovery.
      2.   If the court or administrative order requires disclosure, the terms
of the order may limit the requester's further use and disclosure of the record
in accordance with subsection K of this section, in order to protect the
privacy interests recognized in this chapter.
      3.   This section does not otherwise limit a person's right to obtain
records through the procedures set forth in this chapter, unless the court or
an administrative law judge includes such a limitation in its order.
   C.   Time Limits: Unless the city determines that there are circumstances
constituting "extraordinary circumstances" 1 , as soon as reasonably possible,
but no later than ten (10) business days after receiving a written request, or
five (5) business days after receiving a written request if the requester
demonstrates that expedited response to the record request benefits the public
rather than the person, the city shall respond to the request by:
      1.   Approving the request and providing the record;
      2.   Denying the request;
      3.   Notifying the requester that it does not maintain the record and
providing, if known, the name and address of where the record can be found; or
      4.   Notifying the requester that because of one of the extraordinary
circumstances listed in subsection D1 of this section, it cannot immediately
approve or deny the request.
   D.   Extraordinary Circumstances:
      1.   Specified: The following circumstances constitute "extraordinary
circumstances" that allow the city to delay approval or denial of a records
request by an additional period of time as specified in subsection D3 of this
section:
         a.   Another governmental entity is using the record, in which case
the city shall promptly request the governmental entity currently in possession
to return the record;
         b.   Another governmental entity is using the record as part of an
audit and returning the record before the completion of the audit would impair
the conduct of the audit;
         c.   The request is for a voluminous quantity of records;
         d.   The city is currently processing a large number of records
requests;
         e.   The request requires the city to review a large number of records
to locate the records requested;
         f.   The decision to release a record involves legal issues that
require the city to seek legal counsel for the analysis of statutes, rules,
ordinances, regulations or case law;
         g.   Segregating information that the requester is entitled to inspect
from information that the requester is not entitled to inspect requires
extensive editing; or
         h.   Segregating information that the requester is entitled to inspect
from information that the requester is not entitled to inspect requires
computer programming.
      2.   Notice: The records officer shall provide the requester with written
notice of the extraordinary circumstance or circumstances which do not allow
the city to provide records in the time specified in subsection C of this
section and shall specify the earliest time and date when the record will be
available.
      3.   Extended Time Limits: If one of the extraordinary circumstances
listed in subsection D1 of this section precludes approval or denial within the
time specified in subsection C of this section, the following time limits apply
to the extraordinary circumstances:
         a.   For claims under subsection D1a of this section, the city shall
produce the record within ten (10) business days of the request for the return
from the governmental entity holding the record, unless returning the record
would impair the holder's work;
         b.   For claims under subsection D1b of this section, the city shall
notify the requester when the record is available for inspection and copying;
         c.   For claims under subsections D1c, D1d and D1e of this section,
the city shall:
            (1)   Disclose the records that it has located which the requester
is entitled to inspect;
            (2)   Provide the requester with an estimate of the amount of time
it will take to finish the work required to respond to the request; and
            (3)   Complete the work and disclose the records the requester is
entitled to inspect as soon as reasonably possible;
         d.   For delays under subsection D1f of this section, the city shall
either approve or deny the request within fifteen (15) business days after the
response time specified for the original request has expired;
         e.   For delays under subsection D1g of this section, the city shall
fulfill the request within twenty (20) business days after the response time
specified for in the original request has expired; or
         f.   For delays under subsection D1h of this section, the city shall
complete its programming and disclose the requested records as soon as
reasonably possible.
   E.   Appeals: If the city claims extraordinary circumstances and specifies
the date when the records will be available and, if the requester believes the
extraordinary circumstances do not exist or that the time specified is
unreasonable, the requester may appeal the city's claim of extraordinary
circumstances in accordance with section
1-9-18 of this chapter within thirty (30) days after notification of a claim of
extraordinary circumstances by the city, despite the lack of a "determination"
or its equivalent.
   F.   Limited City Resources: The time limits to respond to a request where
extraordinary circumstances are involved are so set as to provide the requested
records within a reasonable time, while at the same time recognizing the city's
limited resources to respond to such a request.
   G.   Failure To Provide Within Time Requested: If the city fails to provide
the requested records or issues a denial within the specified time period of
either subsection C or D3 of this section, that failure is considered the
equivalent of a determination denying access to the records, unless the city
and the requester have agreed in writing to an extension of the time period.
The city may not use the physical form, electronic or otherwise, in which a
record is stored to deny, or unreasonably hinder the rights of persons to
inspect and receive copies of the record under this chapter.
   H.   Duplicative Requests: Nothing in this chapter requires the city to
fulfill a person's records request if the request unreasonably duplicates prior
records requests from that person.
   I.   Voluminous Records: If a person requests copies of more than fifty (50)
pages of records, and if the records are contained in files that do not contain
records that are exempt from disclosure, the city may:
      1.   Provide the requester with the facilities for copying the requested
records and require the requester make the copies himself; or
      2.   Allow the requester to provide his own copying facilities and
personnel to make the copies at the city offices and waive the fees for copying
the records.
   J.   Intellectual Property Rights:
      1.   If the city owns an intellectual property right and offers the
intellectual property right for sale or license, the city may control by
ordinance or policy the duplication and distribution of the material based on
the terms the city considers to be in the public interest;
      2.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or impair the
rights or protections granted to the city under federal copyright or patent law
as a result of its ownership of the intellectual property right.
   K.   Court Ordered Disclosure: The city shall disclose a record pursuant to
the terms of the court order signed by a judge from a court of competent
jurisdiction; provided, that:
      1.   The record deals with a matter in controversy over which the court
has jurisdiction;
      2.   The court has considered the merits of the request for access to the
record;
      3.   The court has considered and, where appropriate, limited the
requester's use and further disclosure of the record in order to protect
privacy interests in the case of private or controlled records, business
confidentiality interest in the case of records protected under Utah Code
Annotated sections 63-2-304(1) and (2), and privacy interests or the public
interest in the case of other protected records;
      4.   To the extent the record is properly classified private, controlled
or protected, the interest favoring access, considering limitations thereon,
outweighs the interest favoring restrictions of access; and
      5.   Where access is restricted by a rule, statute or regulation referred
to in subsection 1-9-5B2b of this chapter, the court has authority independent
of this chapter to order disclosure.
   L.   Research Purposes:
      1.   The city may disclose or authorize disclosure of private or
controlled records for research purposes if the city:
         a.   Determines that the research purpose cannot reasonably be
accomplished without use of disclosure of the information to the researcher in
individually identifiable form;
         b.   Determines that the proposed research is bona fide, and that the
value of the research outweighs the infringement upon personal privacy;
         c.   Requires the researcher to assure the integrity, confidentiality
and security of the records and requires the removal or destruction of the
individual identifiers associated with the records as soon as the purpose of
the research project has been accomplished;
         d.   Prohibits the researcher from disclosing the record in
individually identifiable form, except as provided in subsection L2 of this
section, or from using the record for purposes other than the research approved
by the city; and
         e.   Secures from the researcher a written statement of his
understanding of and agreement to the conditions of this subsection and his
understanding that violation of the terms of this subsection may subject him to
criminal prosecution under Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-801.
      2.   A researcher may disclose a record in individually identifiable form
if the record is disclosed for the purpose of auditing or evaluating the
research program and no subsequent use or disclosure of the record in
individually identifiable form will be made by the auditor or evaluator, except
as provided by this subsection.
      3.   The city may require indemnification as a condition of permitting
research under this subsection.
   M.   Disclosure To Another Governmental Entity: The city may disclose a
record classified private, controlled or protected to another governmental
entity, city, another state, the United States, or a foreign government only as
provided by Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-206.
   N.   Confidentiality Agreements Predating April 1, 1992: If the city
receives a request for a record that is subject to a confidentiality agreement
executed before April 1, 1992, then Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-105
controls.
   O.   Format Of Records: Upon request, the city may provide a record in a
particular format if:
      1.   The city is able to do so without unreasonably interfering with the
city's duties and responsibilities.
      2.   The requester agrees to pay the city for its costs incurred in
providing the record in the requested format.
      3.   In response to a request, the city is not required to compile,
format, manipulate, package, summarize, or tailor information, or provide a
record in a particular format, medium, or program not currently maintained by
the city.
      4.   The city is not obligated to fill a request if the record requested
is accessible in the identical physical form and content in a public
publication or product produced by the city, and the city provides the person
requesting the record with the public publication or product and specifies
where the record can be found in the public publication or product.
   P.   Creation Of A Record: The city is not required to create a record or
record series in response to a request.
   Q.   Tape Duplication: Duplication of the audiotapes of all meetings can be
made for an entire tape or a selection from the tape. Staff time charges will
apply to time incurred in duplicating or selecting tape materials. Original
tapes will not be let out of the city offices. Individuals other than city
staff will not be allowed to operate the city duplication machine.
   R.   Requests To The Correct Governmental Entity: A person making a request
for a record must submit the request to the governmental entity that prepares,
owns, or retains the record. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection D of this section.
1-9-9: CLASSIFICATION; DESIGNATION:
   A.   Designation: The city shall:
      1.   Evaluate all record series that it uses or creates;
      2.   Designate those record series as provided by this chapter;
      3.   Report the designation of its record series to the state archives.
   B.   Classification: The city may classify a particular record, record
series or information within a record at any time, but is not required to
classify a particular record, record series or information until access of the
record is requested. The city may redesignate a record series or reclassify a
record or record series, or information within a record at any time. If more
than one provision of this chapter could govern the classification of a record,
the city shall classify the record by considering the nature of the interest
intended to be protected and specificity of the competing provisions. Nothing
in subsection 1-9-11B or sections
1-9-12 and
1-9-13 of this chapter require the city to classify a record as private,
controlled or confidential.
   C.   Business Confidentiality:
      1.   Any person who provides a governmental entity a record that he
believes should be protected under subsections 1-9-13A1 and A2 of this chapter
shall provide with the record a written claim of business confidentiality and a
concise statement of reasons supporting the claim of business confidentiality.
      2.   The claimant shall be notified by the governmental entity if the
record claimed to be protected under subsections 1-9-13A1 and A2 of this
chapter is classified public or if the governmental entity determines that the
record should be released after balancing interests under subsections 1-9-11C3,
1-9-13C and 1-9-18D5 of this chapter.
      3.   Except as provided by court order, the governmental entity may not
disclose records claimed to be protected under subsections 1-9-13A1 and A2 of
this chapter, but which it determines should be classified public until the
period in which to bring an appeal expires or the end of the appeal process,
including judicial appeal. This subsection does not apply where the claimant,
after notice, has waived the claim by not appealing or intervening before the
city council.
   D.   Misappropriation: Disclosure or acquisition of information under this
section does not constitute misappropriation under Utah Code Annotated section
13-24-2(2).
   E.   Security Measures: Records regarding security measures designed for the
protection of persons or property, public or private, are not subject to this
chapter. These records include security plans, security codes, combinations and
passwords, passes and keys, security procedures and building and public works
designs, to the extent that the records or information relate to the ongoing
security measures of the city.
   F.   Health Information: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections 1-9-
5B and 1-9-10B of this chapter, and Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-201(6)(a)
and (b), this chapter does not apply to a record containing protected health
information as defined in 45 CFR, part 164, standards for privacy of
individually identifiable health information, if the record is controlled or
maintained by a governmental entity and governed by 45 CFR, parts 160 and 164,
standards for privacy of individually identifiable health information. (Ord.
2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-10: PUBLIC RECORDS:
   A.   Specified: The following records are public:
      1.   Laws and ordinances;
      2.   The city's former and present employees and officers' names, gender,
gross compensation, job titles, job descriptions, business address, business e-
mail address, business telephone number, number of hours worked per pay period,
dates of employment and relevant education, previous employment and similar job
qualification. Undercover law enforcement personnel or investigative personnel
are excluded from this subsection if disclosure would reasonably be expected to
impair the effectiveness of investigations or endanger any individual's safety;
      3.   Final opinions, including concurring and dissenting opinions and
orders that are made by the city in an administrative, adjudicative or judicial
proceeding, except that if the proceedings were properly closed to the public,
the opinion and order may be withheld to the extent that they contain
information that is private, protected or controlled;
      4.   Final interpretation of statutes or rules by the city, unless the
records were prepared by or on behalf of the city solely in anticipation of
litigation that are not available under the rules of discovery, the records
disclose an attorney's work product, including the mental impressions or legal
theories of an attorney or other representative of the city concerning
litigation, and the records are of communications between the city and an
attorney representing, retained or employed by the city if the communications
would be privileged as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 78-24-8;
      5.   Information contained in or compiled from a transcript, minutes or
report of the open portion of a meeting of the city, including the records of
all votes of each member of the city council;
      6.   Judicial records, unless a court orders the records to be restricted
under the rules of civil or criminal procedure or unless the records are
private under this chapter;
      7.   Records filed with or maintained by county recorders, clerks,
treasurer, surveyors, zoning commissions of the division of state lands and
forestry, the division of oil, gas and mining, the division of water rights, or
other governmental entities that give public notice of:
         a.   Titles or encumbrances to real property;
         b.   Restrictions on the use of real property;
         c.   The capacity of persons to take or convey title to real property;
or
         d.   Tax status for real and personal property;
      8.   Records of the department of commerce that evidence incorporations,
mergers, name changes and uniform commercial code filings;
      9.   Data on individuals that would otherwise be private under this
chapter if the individual who is the subject of the record has given the city
written permission to make the records available to the public;
      10.   Documentation of the compensation that the city pays to a
contractor or private provider;
      11.   Summary data; and
      12.   Voter registration records, including an individual's voting
history, except for those parts of the record that are classified as private in
Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-302(1)(i).
   B.   Restricted Access; Conditions: The following records are normally
public, but access, upon approval of the city attorney, may be restricted in
whole or in part as private, controlled or protected, or the record is one
which access is restricted pursuant to court rule, another state statute,
federal statute or federal regulation, including records for which access is
governed or restricted as a condition of participation in a state or federal
program or for receiving state or federal funds:
      1.   Administrative staff manuals, instructions to staff and statements
of policy;
      2.   Records documenting a contractor's or private provider's compliance
with the terms of a contract with the city;
      3.   Records documenting the services provided by a contractor or private
provider to the extent the records would be public if prepared by the city;
      4.   Contracts entered into by the city;
      5.   Any account, voucher or contract that deals with the receipt or
expenditure of funds by the city;
      6.   Records relating to governmental assistance or incentives publicly
disclosed, contracted for or given by the city encouraging a person to expand
or relocate a business in Utah, except as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 63-2-304(35);
      7.   Chronological logs and initial contact reports;
      8.   Correspondence by and with the city in which the city determines or
states an opinion upon the rights of the state, political subdivision, the
public or any person;
      9.   Empirical data contained in drafts if:
         a.   The empirical data is not reasonably available to the requester
elsewhere in similar form; and
         b.   The city is given a reasonable opportunity to correct any errors
or make nonsubstantive changes before release;
      10.   Drafts that are circulated to anyone other than a government
managed corporation, or a contractor or private provider or the city, or the
state or a federal agency if the city, state or federal agency are jointly
responsible for implementation of a program or project that has been
legislatively approved;
      11.   Drafts that have never been finalized but were relied upon by the
city in carrying out action or policy;
      12.   Original data in a computer program if the city chooses not to
disclose the program;
      13.   Arrest warrants after issuance, except that for good cause, a court
may order restricted access to arrest warrants prior to service;
      14.   Search warrants after execution and filing of the return, except
that a court, for good cause, may order restricted access to search warrants
prior to trial;
      15.   Records that would disclose information relating to formal charges
or disciplinary actions against a past or present city employee if:
         a.   The disciplinary action has been completed and all time periods
for administrative appeal have expired; and
         b.   The formal charges were sustained;
      16.   Records maintained by the division of state lands and forestry or
the division of oil, gas and mining that evidence mineral production on
government lands;
      17.   Final audit reports;
      18.   Occupational and professional licenses;
      19.   Business licenses; and
      20.   A notice of violation, a notice of agency action under Utah Code
Annotated section 63-46b-3, or similar records used to initiate proceedings for
discipline or sanctions against persons regulated by the city, but not
including records that initiate employee discipline.
   C.   List Not Exhaustive: A list of public records in this section is not
exhaustive and should not be used to limit access to records. Public records
shall be made available to any person making a request pursuant to section
1-9-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-11: PRIVATE RECORDS:
   A.   Specified: The following records are private:
      1.   Records concerning an individual's eligibility for unemployment
insurance benefits, social services, welfare benefits or the determination of
benefit levels;
      2.   Records containing data on individuals describing medical history,
diagnosis, condition, treatment, evaluation or similar medical data;
      3.   Records of publicly funded libraries that, when examined alone or
with other records, identify a patron;
      4.   Records received or generated in a senate or house ethics committee
concerning any alleged violation of the rules on legislative ethics if the
ethics committee meeting was closed to the public;
      5.   Records concerning a current or former employee of, or applicant for
employment with, the city that would disclose the individual's home address,
home telephone number, social security number, insurance coverage, marital
status or payroll deductions;
      6.   That part of a record indicating a person's social security number
or federal employer identification number if provided under Utah Code Annotated
sections 31A-23a-104, 31A-25-202, 31A-26-202, 58-1-301, 61-1-4, or 61-2-6;
      7.   That part of a voter registration record identifying a voter's
driver's license or identification card number, social security number, or last
four (4) digits of the social security number;
      8.   A record that contains information about an individual, is
voluntarily provided by the individual, and goes into an electronic database
that is designated by and administered under the authority of the chief
information officer, and acts as a repository of information about the
individual that can be electronically retrieved and used to facilitate the
individual's online interaction with a state agency or local government; and
      9.   Information obtained through a criminal background check under Utah
Code Annotated title 11, chapter 40, criminal background checks by political
subdivisions operating water systems.
   B.   Properly Classified: The following records are private if properly
classified by the city:
      1.   Records concerning a current or former employee of, or applicant for
employment with, the city including performance evaluations and personal status
information such as race, religion or disabilities, but not including records
that are public under subsections 1-9-10A2 and 1-9-10B15 of this chapter or
private under subsection A5 of this section.
      2.   Records describing an individual's finances, except that the
following are public:
         a.   Records described in subsection 1-9-10A of this chapter;
         b.   Information provided to the city for the purpose of complying
with a financial assurance requirement; or
         c.   Records that must be disclosed in accordance with another
statute.
      3.   Records of independent state agencies if the disclosure of the
records would conflict with fiduciary obligations of the agency.
      4.   Other records containing data on individuals, the disclosure of
which constitutes a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
      5.   Records provided by the United States or by a governmental entity
outside the state that are given with the requirement that the records be
managed as private records, if the providing entity states in writing that the
record would not be subject to public disclosure if retained by it.
   C.   Disclosure Requirements:
      1.   Persons: Upon request, the city shall disclose a private record to:
         a.   The subject of the record, if the subject of the record is a
nonprofit or profit corporation or limited liability company, then the city
shall disclose the private record only upon receipt of a corporate or company
resolution requesting the record and authorizing the individual to receive the
record;
         b.   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who is the
subject of the record;
         c.   The legal guardian of a legally emancipated individual who is the
subject of the record;
         d.   Any other individual who:
            (1)   Has a power of attorney from the subject of the record; or
            (2)   Submits a notarized release from the subject of the record or
his legal representative dated no later than ninety (90) days before the date
the request is made; or
            (3)   If the record is a medical record described in Utah Code
Annotated section 63-2-302(1)(b), is a healthcare provider, as defined in Utah
Code Annotated section 26-33a-102(7), if releasing the record or information in
the record is consistent with normal professional practice and medical ethics;
or
         e.   Any person to whom the record must be provided pursuant to court
order as provided in subsection 1-9-8K of this chapter or a legislative
subpoena as provided in Utah Code Annotated title 36, chapter 14.
      2.   Context: When providing records under subsection C1 of this section
or when providing public records about an individual to the persons specified
in subsection C1 of this section, the city shall, upon request, disclose the
context in which the record is used to that individual.
      3.   Other Persons: The city may disclose records from subsection B of
this section to persons other than those identified in subsection C1 of this
section specified if the mayor or records officer determines that there is no
interest in restricting access to the record, or that the interest favoring
access outweighs the interest favoring restriction of access.
   D.   Segregation: If there is more than one subject of a private record, the
portion of the record that pertains to another subject shall be segregated from
the portion that the requester is entitled to inspect and the city shall issue
a notice of denial in respect to the segregated portion pursuant to sections
1-9-14 and
1-9-17 of this chapter.
   E.   Private Records Of At Risk Employees And Their Families:
      1.   A person who meets the definition of an "at risk government
employee" under Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-302.5 (current or former peace
officer or law enforcement official, all judges including justice court judges,
and certain prosecutors) may submit an application requesting that private
information of the individual and family members residing with the individual,
such as their home address, home telephone number, social security numbers,
insurance coverage, marital status, or payroll deductions, be classified as
private. Upon the city's granting such an application, such documents and
information shall be private and may only be disclosed as provided in this
section and Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-302.5.
      2.   If the city receives a subpoena for any of these records, the city
shall mail a copy of the subpoena to the at risk employee requesting that
within ten (10) days he/she either authorizes release of the records, or is
providing a motion to quash the subpoena. If no response is received from the
at risk employee within ten (10) days, or if the city receives a court order
for production of the records, the city may thereafter release the records
pursuant to the subpoena. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-12: CONTROLLED RECORDS:
   A.   Specified: A record is controlled only if:
      1.   The record contains medical, psychiatric or psychological data about
an individual;
      2.   The city reasonably believes that:
         a.   Releasing the information in the record to the subject of the
record would be detrimental to the subject's mental health or to the safety of
any individual; or
         b.   Releasing the information would constitute a violation of normal
professional practice and medical ethics; and
         c.   The city has properly classified the record.
   B.   Disclosure:
      1.   Upon a request, the city shall disclose a controlled record to:
         a.   A physician, psychologist, certified social worker, insurance
provider or agent, or a governmental public health agency upon submission of a
release from the subject of the record that is dated no more than ninety (90)
days prior to the date the request is made and a signed acknowledgment of the
terms of disclosure of controlled information as provided by subsection B2 of
this section; and
         b.   Any person to whom a record must be disclosed pursuant to court
order as provided in subsection 1-9-8K of this chapter or a legislative
subpoena as provided in Utah Code Annotated, title 36, chapter 14.
      2.   A person who receives a record from the city in accordance with
subsection B1a of this section may not disclose controlled information from the
record to any person, including the subject of the record.
   C.   Segregation: If there is more than one subject of a controlled record,
the portion of the record that pertains to another subject shall be segregated
from the portion that the requester is entitled to inspect and the city shall
issue a notice of denial pursuant to sections
1-9-14 and
1-9-17 of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-13: PROTECTED RECORDS:
   A.   Specified; Properly Classified: The following records are protected if
properly classified by the city:
      1.   Trade secrets as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 13-24-2, if
the person submitting the trade secret has provided the city with the
information specified in Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-308.
      2.   Commercial information or nonindividual financial information
obtained from a person if:
         a.   Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to
result in unfair competitive injury to the person submitting the information or
would impair the ability of the city to obtain necessary information in the
future;
         b.   The person submitting the information has a greater interest in
prohibiting access than the public in obtaining access; and
         c.   The person submitting the information has provided the city with
the information specified in Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-308.
      3.   Commercial or financial information acquired or prepared by the city
to the extent that a disclosure would lead to financial speculations in
currencies, securities or commodities that will interfere with a planned
transaction by the city or cause substantial financial injury to the city or
state economy.
      4.   Test questions and answers to be used in future license,
certification, employment or academic examination.
      5.   Records, the disclosure of which would impair governmental
procurement or give an unfair advantage to any person proposing to enter into a
contract or agreement with the city, except that this subsection does not
restrict the right of a person to see bids submitted to or by the city after
bidding has closed.
      6.   Records that would identify real property or the appraisal or
estimated value of real or personal property, including intellectual property,
under consideration for public acquisition before any rights to the property
are acquired unless:
         a.   Public interest in obtaining access to the information outweighs
the city's need to acquire the property on the best terms possible;
         b.   The information has already been disclosed to persons not
employed by or under a duty of confidentiality to the entity;
         c.   In the case of records that would identify property, potential
sellers of the property described have already learned of the city's plans to
acquire the property; or
         d.   In the case of records that would identify the appraised or
estimated value of property, the potential sellers have already learned of the
city's estimated value of the property.
      7.   Records prepared in contemplation of sale, exchange, lease, rental
or other compensated transaction of real or personal property, including
intellectual property which, if disclosed prior to completion of the
transaction, would reveal the appraisal or estimated value of the subject
property, unless:
         a.   The public interest in access outweighs the interests in
restricting access, including the city's interest in maximizing the financial
benefit of the transaction; or
         b.   When prepared by or on behalf of the city, appraisals or
estimates of the value of the subject property have already been disclosed to
persons not employed by or under a duty of confidentiality to the city.
      8.   Records created or maintained for civil, criminal or administrative
enforcement purposes or audit purposes, or for discipline, licensing,
certification or registration purposes if release of the records:
         a.   Reasonably could be expected to interfere with investigations
undertaken for enforcement, discipline, licensing, certification or
registration purposes;
         b.   Reasonably could be expected to interfere with audits,
disciplinary or enforcement proceedings;
         c.   Would create a danger of depriving a person of a right to a fair
trial or impartial hearing;
         d.   Reasonably could be expected to disclose the identity of a source
who is not generally known outside of government and, in the case of a record
compiled in the course of an investigation, disclose information furnished by a
source not generally known outside of government if disclosure would compromise
the source; or
         e.   Reasonably could be expected to disclose investigative or audit
techniques, procedures, policies or orders not generally known outside of
government if disclosure would interfere with enforcement or audit efforts.
      9.   Records, the disclosure of which would jeopardize the life or safety
of an individual.
      10.   Records, the disclosure of which would jeopardize the security of
governmental property, governmental programs or governmental record keeping
systems from damage, theft or other appropriation or use contrary to law or
public policy.
      11.   Records that, if disclosed, would jeopardize the security or safety
of a correctional facility, or records relating to incarceration, treatment,
probation or parole, that would interfere with the control and supervision of
an offender's incarceration, treatment, probation or parole.
      12.   Records that, if disclosed, would reveal recommendations made to
the board of pardons and parole by an employee of or contractor for the
department of corrections, the board of pardons and parole or the department of
human services that are based on the employee's or contractor's supervision,
diagnosis or treatment of any person within the board's jurisdiction.
      13.   Records and audit work papers that identify audit, collection and
operational procedures and methods used by the Utah state tax commission if
disclosure would interfere with audits or collections.
      14.   Records of a governmental audit agency relating to an ongoing or
planned audit until the final audit is released.
      15.   Records prepared by or on behalf of the city solely in anticipation
of litigation that are not available under the rules of discovery.
      16.   Records disclosing an attorney's work product, including the mental
impressions or legal theories of an attorney or other representative of the
city concerning litigation.
      17.   Records of communications between the city and an attorney
representing, retained or employed by the city if the communications would be
privileged as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 78-24-8.
      18.   Drafts, unless otherwise classified as public.
      19.   Records concerning the city's strategy about collective bargaining
or pending litigation.
      20.   Records of investigations of loss occurrences and analyses of loss
occurrences.
      21.   Records, other than personnel evaluations, which contain a personal
recommendation concerning an individual if disclosure would constitute a
clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, or disclosure is not in the
public interest.
      22.   Records that reveal the location of historic, prehistoric,
paleontological or biological resources that if known would jeopardize the
security of those resources or of valuable historic, scientific, educational or
cultural information.
      23.   Records of independent state agencies if the disclosure of the
records would conflict with the fiduciary obligations of the agency.
      24.   Records provided by the United States or by a government entity
outside the state that are given to the city with a requirement that they be
managed as protected records if the providing entity certifies that the record
would not be subject to public disclosure if retained by it.
      25.   Transcripts, minutes or reports of the closed portion of a meeting
of a public body, except as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-7,
open and public meetings act.
      26.   Records that would reveal the contents of settlement negotiations,
but not including final settlements or empirical data to the extent that they
are not otherwise exempt from disclosure.
      27.   Memoranda prepared by staff and used in the decision making process
by an administrative law judge, a member of the board of pardons or a member of
any other body charged by law with performing a quasi-judicial function.
      28.   Records that would reveal negotiations regarding assistance or
incentives offered by or requested from the city for the purpose of encouraging
a person to expand or locate a business in Utah, but only if disclosure would
result in actual economic harm to the person or place the city at a competitive
disadvantage, but this subsection may not be used to restrict access to a
record evidencing a final contract.
      29.   Materials to which access must be limited for purposes of securing
or maintaining the city's proprietary protection of intellectual property
rights including patents, copyrights, and trade secrets.
      30.   Records the disclosure of which could cause commercial injury to,
or confer a competitive advantage upon a potential or actual competitor of, a
commercial project entity as defined in Utah Code Annotated subsection 11-13-
103(4).
      31.   Accident reports, except as provided in Utah Code Annotated
sections 41-6a-404, 41-12a-202, and 73-18-13.
      32.   Records that provide detail as to the location of an explosive,
including a map or other document that indicates the location of:
         a.   A production facility; or
         b.   A magazine.
      33.   Records provided by any pawnbroker or pawnshop to law enforcement.
      34.   Information regarding food security, risk, and vulnerability
assessments performed by the department of agriculture and food.
      35.   Except to the extent that the record is exempt from this chapter
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-106, records related to an
emergency plan or program prepared or maintained by the division of emergency
services and homeland security the disclosure of which would jeopardize:
         a.   The safety of the general public; or
         b.   The security of:
            (1)   Governmental property;
            (2)   Governmental programs; or
            (3)   The property of a private person who provides the division of
emergency services and homeland security information.
      36.   Records of the department of agriculture and food relating to the
national animal identification system or any other program that provides for
the identification, tracing, or control of livestock diseases, including any
program established under Utah Code Annotated title 4, chapter 24, Utah
livestock brand and antitheft act or Utah Code Annotated title 4, chapter 31,
livestock inspection and quarantine.
      37.   Unless otherwise classified as public under section
1-9-10 of this chapter and/or Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-301, an
individual's home address, home telephone number, personal e-mail address, or
personal mobile phone number, if:
         a.   The individual is required to provide the information in order to
comply with a law, ordinance, rule, or order of a government entity; and
         b.   The subject of the record has a reasonable expectation that this
information will be kept confidential due to the nature of the law, ordinance,
rule, or order and the individual complying with the law, ordinance, rule, or
order.
   B.   Disclosure: Upon request, the city shall disclose a protected record
to:
      1.   The person who submitted the information in the record;
      2.   Any other individual who:
         a.   Has a power of attorney from all persons, governmental entities
or political subdivisions whose interests were sought to be protected by the
protected classification; or
         b.   Submits a notarized release from their legal representatives
dated no more than ninety (90) days prior to the date the request is made; or
      3.   Any person to whom the record must be provided pursuant to court
order as provided in subsection 1-9-8K of this chapter or a legislative
subpoena as provided in Utah Code Annotated title 36, chapter 14.
   C.   Other Persons:
      1.   The city may, at its discretion, disclose protected records to
persons other than those identified in subsection B of this section if the
mayor or records officer determines that there is no interest in restricting
access to the record, or that the interest favoring access outweighs the
interest favoring restriction of access.
      2.   The city may, in its discretion, disclose a protected record if the
mayor or records officer determines that all of the following are met: the
disclosure is mutually beneficial to the subject of the record, the
governmental entity and the public; and the disclosure serves a public purpose
related to public safety or consumer protection; and the person who receives
the record from the governmental entity agrees not to use or allow the use of
the record for advertising or solicitation purposes. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-14: SEGREGATION OF RECORDS:
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, if the city receives a
request for access to a record that contains both information that the
requester is entitled to inspect and information that the requester is not
entitled to inspect under this chapter, and, if the information the requester
is entitled to inspect is intelligible, the city:
   A.   Allow Access: Shall allow access to information in the record that the
requester is entitled to inspect under this chapter; and
   B.   Deny Access: May deny access to information in the record if the
information is exempt from disclosure to the requester, issuing a notice of
denial. (Ord. 95-03, 6-7-1995)
1-9-15: DATA MAINTAINED ON INDIVIDUALS; RIGHTS:
   A.   File With State Archivist:
      1.   The city shall file with the state archivist a statement explaining
the purposes for which record series designated private or controlled are
collected and used by the city.
      2.   That statement is a public record.
   B.   Notice To Person Providing Documents: The city shall provide notice of
the following to a person that is asked to furnish information that could be
classified as a private or controlled record, and shall further explain the
following to that person upon request:
      1.   The reasons the person is asked to furnish the information to the
city;
      2.   The intended uses of the information;
      3.   The consequences for refusing to provide the information; and
      4.   The reasons and circumstances under which the information may be
shared with or provided to other persons or governmental agencies, and the
classes of persons and governmental entities that may receive the information
from the city on a regular or contractual basis.
   C.   Uses: The city may not use private or controlled records for purposes
other than those given in the statement filed with the state archivist under
subsection A of this section or for purposes other than those for which another
governmental entity could use the record under Utah Code Annotated section 63-
2-206. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-16: AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES TO RECORDS:
   A.   Request; Information:
      1.   Subject to subsection G of this section, an individual may contest
the accuracy or completeness of any public, private or protected record
concerning him by requesting the city to amend the record. However, this
section does not affect the right of access to private or protected records.
      2.   The request shall contain the following information:
         a.   The requester's name, mailing address and daytime telephone
number; and
         b.   A brief statement explaining why the city should amend the
record.
   B.   Order; Time Limit: The city shall issue an order either approving or
denying the request to amend no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of
the request.
   C.   Approval: If the city approves the request, it shall correct all of its
records that contain the same incorrect information as soon as practical. The
city may not disclose the record until it has amended it.
   D.   Denial: If the city denies the request, it shall:
      1.   Inform the requester in writing; and
      2.   Provide a brief statement giving its reasons for denying the
request.
   E.   Statement Contesting Information:
      1.   If the city denies a request to amend a record, the requester may
submit a written statement contesting the information in the record.
      2.   The city shall:
         a.   File the requester's statement with the disputed record if the
record is in a form such that the statement can accompany the record or make
the statement accessible if the record is not in a form such that the statement
can accompany the record; and
         b.   Disclose the requester's statement along with the information in
the record whenever the city discloses the disputed information.
   F.   Appeal: The requester may appeal the denial of the request to amend a
record pursuant to section
1-9-18 of this chapter.
   G.   Exception: This section does not apply to records relating to title to
real or personal property, medical records, judicial case files or any other
records that the city determines must be maintained in their original form to
protect the public interest and to preserve the integrity of the record system.
(Ord. 95-03, 6-7-1995)
1-9-17: DENIAL OF REQUEST:
   A.   Notice: If the city denies the request in whole or part, it shall
provide a notice of denial to the requester either in person or by sending the
notice to requester's address.
   B.   Contents Of Notice: The notice of denial shall contain the following
information:
      1.   A description of the record or portions of the record to which
access was denied; provided, that the description does not disclose private,
controlled or protected information or records to which access is restricted
pursuant to court rule, another state statute, federal statute or federal
regulation, including records for which access is governed or restricted as a
condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state
or federal funds;
      2.   Citations to the provisions of this chapter, another state statute,
federal statute, court rule or order or federal regulation that exempt the
record or portions of the record from disclosure; provided, that the citations
do not disclose private, controlled or protected information;
      3.   Statement that the requester has the right to appeal the denial to
the city council; and
      4.   A brief summary of the appeals process and the time limits for
filing an appeal.
   C.   Preservation Of Record: Unless otherwise required by a court or agency
of competent jurisdiction, the city may not destroy or give up custody of any
record to which access was denied until the period for an appeal has expired or
the end of the appeals process, including judicial appeal. (Ord. 95-03, 6-7-
1995)
1-9-18: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Aggrieved Party: Any person aggrieved by the city's access
determination under this chapter, including a person not a party to the city's
proceeding, may appeal the determination within thirty (30) days to the mayor,
and then may appeal the mayor's decision within thirty (30) days to the city
council or the state records committee or the district court by filing notices
of appeal as provided in this section. A person aggrieved by the city's
classification or designation determination under this chapter, but who is not
requesting access to the records, may appeal the determination using the
procedures in this section. If the nonrequester is the only appellant, the
procedures provided in this section shall apply, except that the determination
on the appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days after receiving the notice
of appeal.
   B.   Extraordinary Circumstances: If the city claims extraordinary
circumstances and specifies the date when the records will be available and, if
the requester believes the extraordinary circumstances do not exist or that the
time specified is unreasonable, the requester may appeal the city's claim of
extraordinary circumstances or date for compliance within thirty (30) days
after notification of a claim of extraordinary circumstances by the city,
despite the lack of a "determination" or its equivalent.
   C.   Claims Of Business Confidentiality:
      1.   If the appeal involves a record that is the subject of a business
confidentiality claim under Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-308 or this
chapter, the mayor shall:
         a.   Send notice of the requester's appeal to the business
confidentiality claimant within three (3) business days after receiving notice,
except that if notice under this section must be given to more than thirty five
(35) persons, it shall be given as soon as reasonably possible;
         b.   Send notice of the business confidentiality claim and a schedule
for the city records determination to the requester within three (3) business
days after receiving notice of the requester's appeal.
      2.   The claimant shall have seven (7) business days after notice is sent
by the records officer to submit further support for the claim of business
confidentiality.
   D.   Mayor Appeal:
      1.   The aggrieved person's appeal to the mayor must meet the notice
requirements of subsection F of this section.
      2.   The mayor shall make a determination on any appeal within the
following period of time:
         a.   Within five (5) business days after the mayor's receipt of the
notice of appeal; or
         b.   Within twelve (12) business days after the city sends the
requester's notice of appeal to a person who submitted a claim of business
confidentiality.
      3.   If the mayor fails to make a determination within the time specified
in subsection D2 of this section, the failure shall be considered the
equivalent of an order denying the appeal.
      4.   The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the parties
participating in the proceedings may, by agreement, extend the time periods
specified in this section.
      5.   The mayor may, upon consideration and weighing of the various
interests and public policies pertinent to the classification and disclosure or
nondisclosure, order the disclosure of information properly classified as
private under subsection 1-9-11B of this chapter or protected under section
1-9-13 of this chapter if the interests favoring access outweigh the interest
favoring restriction of access.
      6.   The city shall send written notice of the determination of the mayor
to all participants. If the mayor affirms the denial in whole or in part, the
denial shall include a statement that the requester has the right to appeal the
denial to the city council or the state records committee or the district
court, and the time limits for filing an appeal, and the name and business
address of the executive secretary of the records committee.
      7.   The duties of the mayor under this section may be delegated.
   E.   City Council Appeal:
      1.   A notice of appeal to the city council must be filed with the city
clerk/recorder no later than thirty (30) days after the mayor has denied the
appeal or fails to make a determination within the time specified in subsection
D2 of this section. The contents of the notice of appeal are governed by
subsection F of this section.
      2.   No later than three (3) days after receiving the notice of appeal,
the city clerk/recorder shall schedule a hearing before the city council to
discuss the appeal which shall be held no sooner than fifteen (15) days and no
later than thirty (30) days from the date of the filing of the appeal.
      3.   At the hearing, the city council shall allow the parties to testify,
present evidence and comment on the issues. The city council may allow other
interested persons to comment on the issues.
      4.   The city council may, upon consideration and weighing of the various
interests and public policies pertinent to the classification and disclosure or
nondisclosure, order the disclosure of information properly classified as
private under section
1-9-11 of this chapter, controlled under section
1-9-12 of this chapter, or protected under section
1-9-13 of this chapter if the public interest favoring access outweighs the
interest favoring restriction of access.
      5.   No later than three (3) business days after the hearing, the city
council shall issue a signed order either granting the petition in whole or in
part or upholding the determination of the mayor in whole or in part.
      6.   The order of the city council shall include:
         a.   A statement of reasons for the decision, including citations to
this chapter or federal regulation that governs disclosure of the record;
provided, that the citations do not disclose private, controlled or protected
information;
         b.   A description of the record or portions of the record to which
access was ordered or denied; provided, that the description does not disclose
private, controlled or protected information;
         c.   A statement that any party to the appeal may appeal the city's
decision to either the state records committee or the district court; and
         d.   A brief summary of the city council's determination, and a notice
that in order to protect its rights on appeal, the party may wish to seek
advice from an attorney.
      7.   If the city council fails to issue a decision within thirty five
(35) days of the filing of the notice of appeal, that failure shall be
considered the equivalent of an order denying the appeal. The petitioner shall
notify the state records committee in writing if he considers the appeal
denied.
   F.   Notice:
      1.   The notice of appeal shall contain the following information:
         a.   The petitioner's name, mailing addresses and daytime telephone
number; and
         b.   The relief sought.
      2.   The petitioner may file a short statement of facts, reasons and
legal authority in support of the appeal. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-19: CONFIDENTIAL TREATMENT; NO APPLICABLE EXEMPTION:
   A.   Court Order: A court may, on appeal or in a declaratory or other
action, order the confidential treatment of records for which no exemption from
disclosure applies if:
      1.   There are compelling interests favoring restriction of access to the
record; and
      2.   The interests favoring restriction of access clearly outweigh the
interests favoring access.
   B.   City Request Access; Attorney Fees: If the city requests a court to
restrict access to a record under this section, the court shall require the
city to pay the reasonable attorney fees incurred by the lead party in opposing
the city's request, if:
      1.   The court finds that no statutory or constitutional exemption from
disclosure could reasonably apply to the record in question; and
      2.   The court denies confidential treatment under this section.
   C.   Exception: This section does not apply to records that are specifically
required to be public under section
1-9-10 of this chapter or Utah Code Annotated section 63-2-301, or by other
LaVerkin ordinances or Utah statutes, except as provided in subsection D of
this section.
   D.   Limited Access:
      1.   Access to drafts and empirical data in drafts may be limited under
this section, but the court may consider, in its evaluation of interests
favoring restriction of access, only those interests that relate to the
underlying information, and not to the deliberative nature of the record.
      2.   Access to original data in a computer program may be limited under
this section, but the court may consider, in its evaluation of interest
favoring restriction of access, only those interests that relate to the
underlying information, and not to the status of that data as part of a
computer program. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
1-9-20: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Authority To Obtain Evidenced: Neither the city nor any officer or
employee of the city is liable for damages resulting from the release of a
record where the person or government requesting the record presented evidence
of authority to obtain the record even if it is subsequently determined that
the requester had no authority.
   B.   Disciplinary Action: The city may take disciplinary action which may
include suspension or discharge against any employee of the city who
intentionally violates any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 95-03, 6-7-1995)
1-9-21: CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
   A.   Intentional Disclosure; Defense To Prosecution:
      1.   A public employee or other person who has lawful access to any
private, controlled or protected record under this chapter, and who
intentionally discloses, provides a copy of, or improperly uses a private,
controlled or protected record to any person knowing that such disclosure is
prohibited, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this title.
      2.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection A1 of this section
that the actor released private, controlled or protected information in the
reasonable belief that the disclosure of the information was necessary to
expose a violation of law involving government corruption, abuse of office or
misappropriation of public funds or property.
      3.   It is a defense to prosecution under subsection A1 of this section
that the record could have been released to the recipient if it had been
properly classified.
   B.   False Pretenses, Bribery Or Theft:
      1.   A person who by false pretenses, bribery or theft, gains access to
or obtains a copy of any private, controlled or protected record to which he is
not legally entitled is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title.
      2.   No person shall be guilty under subsection B1 of this section who
receives the record, information or copy after the fact and without prior
knowledge of or participation in the false pretenses, bribery or theft.
   C.   Intentional Refusal To Release: A public employee who intentionally
refuses to release a record, the disclosure of which the employee knows is
required by law or by final unappealed order from the city, the state records
committee or a court, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 2006-31, 10-4-2006)
CHAPTER 10
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING ISSUES
SECTION:
1-10-1: Policy Considerations
1-10-2: Definitions
1-10-3: Application Of Takings Principles
1-10-4: Judicial Remedies Of City
1-10-5: Guidelines Advisory
1-10-6: Review Of Decision
1-10-7: Action Upon Review
1-10-1: POLICY CONSIDERATIONS:
There is an underlying policy in the city, strongly favoring the careful
consideration of matters involving constitutional taking claims, in fairness to
the owner of private property bringing the claim and in view of the uncertainty
and expense involved in defending lawsuits alleging such issues. At the same
time, the legitimate role of government in lawfully regulating real property
must be preserved and the public's right to require the dedication or exaction
of property consistent with the federal constitution and Utah constitution.
Consistent with this policy, it is desired that a procedure be established for
the review of actions that may involve the issue of a constitutional taking.
These provisions assist the city council in considering decisions that may
involve constitutional takings. This chapter is further intended and shall be
construed to provide objective and fair review of claims by citizens that a
specific government action should require payment of just compensation while
preserving the ability of the city to lawfully regulate real property and
fulfill its other duties and functions. (Ord. 95-10, 9-6-1995)
1-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING: Actions by the city of LaVerkin involving the physical
taking, regulatory taking or exaction of private real property that might
require compensation to a private real property owner because of:
   A.   The fifth or fourteenth amendment to the constitution of the United
States;
   B.   Article 1, section 22 of the Utah constitution;
   C.   Any court ruling governing the physical taking or exaction of private
real property by a government entity.
EXACTION OF REAL PROPERTY: A condition of permit approval affecting real
property. Exactions include, by way of example and not of limitation,
dedications of property or easements.
PHYSICAL TAKING: Actions by the city of LaVerkin involving the physical
invasion of a private person's real property. Physical invasion includes, but
may not be limited to: a) direct appropriation; and b) physical ouster of
possession, except where such physical invasion or ouster is permitted to abate
nuisances and dangerous structures.
REGULATORY TAKING: Regulatory actions of the city of LaVerkin which deprive the
private landowner of all economically beneficial use, where the use sought for
the property is not already proscribed by federal law, state law, local law or
this state's common law of property and nuisance 1 .
REVIEWING BODY: The city council, unless the city council is the maker of the
decision giving rise to the constitutional taking claim, in which case the
reviewing body shall consist of the city manager, public works director and
city clerk/recorder ("administration committee"). With respect to the
administration committee, a quorum shall consist of two (2) members and any
action approved by said administration committee shall be approved by at least
two (2) members. With respect to the city council, quorum and voting
requirements shall be governed by Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-401 et seq.
and 10-3-501 et seq. (Ord. 95-10, 9-6-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
 
Notes
  1. Where the private landowner has not suffered a complete loss of all
  economic value of this land, "such an owner might not be able to claim the
  benefit of [a categorical regulatory taking], but, ... '[t]he economic impact
  of the regulation on the claimant and ... the extent to which the regulation
  has interfered with distinct investment-backed expectations' are keenly
  relevant to takings analysis." Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council, 120
  L. Ed. 2d 798, 815, fn. 8 (U.S. Supreme Court 1992 (quoting Penn Central
  Transportation Co. v. New York Town, 438 U.S. 104, 124 (1978). Where distinct
1 investment backed expectations are involved, the takings issue will be
  decided on a case by case basis. It may be that in one case a private
  landowner with a 95 percent loss will get no compensation and that in another
  case a landowner with a 95 percent loss will be compensated. Takings cases
  are full of such disparities and "all or nothing" situations. This footnote
  is intended for and provided to assist officers, employees, boards,
  commissions, and the city council in making determinations which may involve
  a constitutional taking and for the reviewing body when hearing an appeal on
  a constitutional taking claim. Id.
1-10-3: APPLICATION OF TAKINGS PRINCIPLES:
   A.   Physical Taking: Action by the city involving the ouster from or the
physical invasion of real property is not a physical taking, where such ouster
or physical invasion is permitted to abate nuisances and dangerous structures.
   B.   Regulatory Taking:
      1.   Action by the city involving regulation of real property which
results in the diminution in value of the property (but which does not deprive
the landowner of all economic use) is not a regulatory taking where the land
use regulation substantially advances a legitimate interest 1 .
      2.   Action by the city involving regulation of real property which
results in the deprivation of all economically beneficial use of the property
is not a regulatory taking where the use sought for the property is already
proscribed by federal law, state law, local law or this state's common law of
property and nuisance. The "total taking" inquiry will ordinarily entail
analysis of:
         a.   The degree of harm to public lands and resources or adjacent
private property, posed by the claimant's proposed activities;
         b.   The social value of the claimant's activities and their
suitability to the locality in question;
         c.   The relative ease with which the alleged harm can be avoided
through measures taken by the claimant and the government alike; and
         d.   Whether a particular use has been engaged in by similarly
situated landowners.
   C.   Constitutional Taking: Action by the city involving the exaction of
private real property is not a constitutional taking if the exaction:
      1.   Bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest; and
      2.   Is objectively demonstrated by the city to be roughly proportionate
and reasonably related, on an individualized property basis, both in nature and
extent, to the impact of the proposed development on the legitimate government
interest.
For example, it has been held that there is: a) a nexus (substantial
connection) where an ordinance requires a portion of a residential development
be dedicated as a public park; b) which dedication serves the legitimate
government interest of preserving the health and welfare of the citizens, and
beautifying the community; c) provided, that the park requirement, on an
individualized property basis, is roughly proportionate and reasonably related
to the government interest to be served. Simply put, a large park for a small
residential development would not meet the rough proportionality test. (Ord.
95-10, 9-6-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See footnote for the definition of "regulatory taking" in section
  1-10-2 of this chapter.
1-10-4: JUDICIAL REMEDIES OF CITY:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, nothing shall limit the
ability of the city to seek immediate judicial relief and intervention for any
constitutional taking initiated by the city including, but not limited to,
eminent domain proceedings under Utah Code Annotated section 78-34-1 et seq.
(Ord. 95-10, 9-6-1995)
1-10-5: GUIDELINES ADVISORY:
The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter are advisory, and shall not be construed to expand or limit the
scope of the city's liability for a constitutional taking. In addition to
following, the guidelines set forth in section
1-10-3 of this chapter when reviewing a claim for a constitutional taking, all
officers, employees, boards, commissions and the city council shall consider
the guidelines set forth in
1-10-3 of this chapter when taking any action that might result in a
constitutional taking of real property. (Ord. 95-10, 9-6-1995)
1-10-6: REVIEW OF DECISION:
Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a constitutional
taking of their private real property shall request a review of a final
decision of any officer, employee, board, commission or city council. The
following are specific procedures established for such a review:
   A.   Final Determination Required: The person requesting a review must have
obtained a final and authoritative determination, internally, within the city,
relative to the decision from which they are requesting review.
   B.   Request For Review: Within thirty (30) days from the date of the final
decision that gave rise to the concern that a constitutional taking has
occurred, the person requesting the review shall file in writing, in the office
of the city clerk/recorder, a request for review of that decision. A copy shall
also be filed with the city attorney. If included in the written request, the
appeal may be bifurcated into an appeal on the constitutional takings claim, to
be followed within twenty one (21) days by a hearing on the value of the
property right taken, if necessary. If the appeal is bifurcated, the required
items set forth in subsections D10 through D14 of this section, unless
specifically required by the reviewing body, will not be required of the
applicant at the hearing on the constitutional takings claim, but will be
required seven (7) days in advance of any hearing on the value of the property
right taken.
   C.   Review Time Set: The reviewing body shall, within five (5) working
days, set a time to review the decision that gave rise to the constitutional
takings claim.
   D.   Required Information; Materials: In addition to the written request for
review, the applicant must submit, seven (7) days prior to the date of the
review, the following:
      1.   Name of the applicant requesting review;
      2.   Name and business address of current owner of the property, form of
ownership, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not for profit
corporation, partnership, joint venture or other, and if owned by a
corporation, partnership or joint venture, name and address of all principal
shareholders or partners;
      3.   A detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there has
been a constitutional taking;
      4.   A detailed description of the property purportedly taken;
      5.   Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such as,
but not limited to, fee simple ownership, leasehold interest, etc.;
      6.   All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured
by the property, including name of the mortgagee or lender, current interest
rate, remaining loan balance and term of the loan and other significant
provisions, including, but not limited to, right of purchasers to assume the
loan;
      7.   All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the
petitioner within the previous three (3) years concerning feasibility of
development or utilization of the property;
      8.   For income producing property, itemized income and expense
statements from the property for the previous three (3) years;
      9.   The reviewing body may request additional information reasonably
necessary, in their opinion, to assist them in reviewing the constitutional
taking issue;
      10.   Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property taken,
including the date and cost at the date the property was acquired. This should
include any evidence of the value of that same property before and after the
alleged constitutional taking, the name of the party from whom purchased,
including the relationship, if any, between the person requesting a review and
the party from whom the property was acquired;
      11.   Terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of a
full or partial interest in the property in the three (3) years prior to the
date of application;
      12.   All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including
financing, offering for sale, or ad valorem taxation, within the three (3)
years prior to the date of application;
      13.   The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the property for the
previous three (3) years;
      14.   All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any, within the previous three (3) years; and
      15.   Information from a title policy or other source showing all
recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the property;
   E.   Certification Of Application: An application shall not be deemed to be
"complete" or "submitted" until the reviewing body certifies to the applicant
that all the materials and information required above, have been received by
the city. The reviewing body shall promptly notify the applicant of any
incomplete application.
   F.   Evidence Considered: The reviewing body shall hear all the evidence
related to and submitted by the applicant, city or any other interested party.
   G.   Approval, Rejection; Time Limit: The reviewing body shall hear and
approve or reject the appeal within fourteen (14) days after it is submitted.
If the reviewing body fails to hear and decide the review within fourteen (14)
days, the decision appealed from shall be presumed to be approved. (Ord. 95-10,
9-6-1995)
1-10-7: ACTION UPON REVIEW:
Except as provided in subsection 1-10-6G of this chapter, the reviewing body,
after hearing evidence on the constitutional takings claim, shall:
   A.   Reconsider: Make a recommendation to the officer, employee, board,
commission or city council that made the decision that gave rise to the
constitutional takings claim to reconsider such decision in light of the
provisions and guidelines set forth in this chapter, together with additional
instructions the reviewing body may give; or
   B.   Set Hearing To Determine Amount: In the case where the appeal was
bifurcated and a constitutional taking was found, set within twenty one (21)
days a hearing to determine, in the city's opinion, the amount of the property
right taken; or
   C.   Refer To District Court: Take no action on either the constitutional
takings claim or the value of the property right taken, or both, and inform the
appellant of his right to file a complaint in district court. (Ord. 95-10, 9-6-
1995)
CHAPTER 11
PROCUREMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-11-1: Adoption
1-11-2: Disposal Of Surplus Property
1-11-9: Acquisition Of New Items By Employees
1-11-1: ADOPTION:
The city council shall, by resolution, adopt and set forth a procurement
policy, which may be amended from time to time, in order to: a) facilitate the
fair and equitable treatment of all persons doing or desiring to do business
with the city, b) provide for the greatest possible economy in city procurement
activities, c) foster effective broad based competition within the free
enterprise system, d) facilitate the receipt by the city of the best possible
service or product at the lowest responsible price; and e) provide for clarity
and flexibility, while also f) providing general guidelines to guard against
arbitrariness, capriciousness, illegality, and unreasonableness, so as to not
unduly restrain, restrict, or prohibit transactions relating to municipal
procurements that are deemed to be in the best interests of the city and its
residents. (Ord. 2011-11, 9-7-2011)
1-11-2: DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY:
   A.   Authority: The city may, from time to time, dispose of real and/or
personal property that it has previously acquired for city use. Such property
may include, but not be limited to, property which no longer functions
properly, is dilapidated, requires frequent or costly maintenance or repairs,
is outmoded or outdated, and/or is no longer needed or desired for city use.
   B.   Procedure For Disposal: The city shall substantially comply with the
following procedure to dispose of surplus property, both real and personal,
except that this procedure shall not apply to the vacation of streets, alleys,
avenues, boulevards, sidewalks, parks, airports, parking lots or other
facilities for the parking of vehicles off streets, public grounds, or
pedestrian malls, and shall not apply to property acquired after July 1, 1983,
by eminent domain:
      1.   The city shall provide notice of the proposal to declare the
property surplus property and to sell and/or exchange the property, and notice
of the time and place of the public hearing, by publication of notice at least
once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which publication shall
be at least five (5) days prior to the date of the public meeting.
      2.   The city shall hold a public hearing on the proposal to declare the
property surplus property and to sell and/or exchange the property, which
public hearing may coincide with a regularly scheduled city council meeting.
      3.   After receiving public comment, the city shall, by resolution,
declare the property surplus, with or without conditions regarding its
disposal, and have the property sold and/or exchanged; or the city shall
abandon the matter.
      4.   If the city declares the property to be surplus property, the city
shall, at its option and discretion, proceed to sell and/or exchange the
property by offering the same for sale and/or exchange to the public or to one
or more specific persons or governmental, educational, religious, public or
private entities; or by the solicitation of written offers; or by public
auction.
         a.   Governmental entities, as used herein, shall include any
administrative, executive, legislative, judicial, and/or other civilian, law
enforcement, or military offices and/or agencies of the federal, state, county
and/or local government, or interlocal entities or associations thereof or
created thereby.
         b.   Private entities, as used herein, shall include, but not be
limited to, private trusts, organizations, partnerships, associations, joint
ventures, and corporations, whether nonprofit or for profit, including private
hospitals and other similar long and short term healthcare facilities and/or
assisted care facilities.
         c.   Public entities, as used herein, shall include, but not be
limited to, nonprofit organizations that benefit the public as a whole or large
segments thereof (e.g., Red Cross, Boy Scouts Of America, Girl Scouts Of
America, United Way, etc.), and public hospitals and/or other similar long and
short term healthcare facilities and/or assisted care facilities.
      5.   Except as provided in situations covered by subsection B6 of this
section, any proposed sale to and/or exchange shall be: a) open to public
bidding or offer, and b) on terms that are deemed by the city council to be in
the best interests of the city and consistent with any criteria established by
the city for such sale and/or exchange, including, but not limited to, terms
that are financially advantageous to the city and its residents.
      6.   In the case of a proposed sale and/or exchange that is limited
solely to a sale and/or exchange with one or more specific persons or
governmental, educational, religious, public or private entities, such proposed
sale and/or exchange need not be open to public bidding or offer. However, the
city council shall, by resolution, condition the declaration of surplus
property on the consummation of the proposed sale and/or exchange of property;
limit the proposed sale and/or exchange of property to one or more of such
identified persons or governmental, corporate, educational, religious or public
entities; require that such sale and/or exchange be on terms that are fair and
equitable to the city; and require that the sale and/or exchange be in
furtherance of a significant public interest, and determine and identify
therein what that significant public interest is or may be.
      7.   Should a proposed sale and/or exchange attempted pursuant to the
provisions of subsection B6 of this section not be consummated, for any reason
whatsoever, the city council may abandon the matter and maintain the property
as city property; or it may declare the property to be surplus (with or without
conditions attached to its disposal), and proceed to dispose of the property in
accordance with the provisions of subsections B4 and B5 of this section. (Ord.
2008-17, 9-17-2008; amd. Ord. 2011-11, 9-7-2011)
1-11-9: ACQUISITION OF NEW ITEMS BY EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Prohibited: Because of current tax laws, the city's tax exempt status
and because of auditing restrictions, city employees shall not purchase new
items through the city which will be used for personal use.
   B.   Workshops, Exception: This section does not limit employees' spouses or
immediate family from participating in any workshop provided for the city at
discounted rates, so long as the workshop provider has no objection and so long
as any workshop for the employee's personal use or spouse's or immediate
family's personal use, are paid for by the employee and not by city funds.
(1998 Code)
CHAPTER 12
CHIEF OF POLICE
SECTION:
1-12-1: Qualifications
1-12-2: Appointment
1-12-3: Classification Of Position And Compensation
1-12-4: Powers And Duties
1-12-5: Police Officer Qualifications
1-12-6: Police Officer Duties
1-12-7: Detective Duties
1-12-8: Detective Qualifications
1-12-9: Patrol Sergeant Duties
1-12-10: Patrol Sergeant Qualifications
1-12-1: QUALIFICATIONS:
The chief of police shall possess the following attributes and qualifications:
   A.   Be a United States citizen;
   B.   Be at least twenty one (21) years old at the time of appointment;
   C.   Be a high school graduate or furnish evidence of successful completion
of an examination indicating an equivalent achievement;
   D.   Have not been convicted of a crime for which the appointee could have
been punished by imprisonment in a federal penitentiary or by imprisonment in
the penitentiary of this or another state;
   E.   Have demonstrated good moral character as determined by a background
investigation;
   F.   Be free of any physical, emotional or mental condition that might
adversely affect the performance of his duties as chief of police;
   G.   Have successfully completed peace officer certification and training as
prescribed by Utah Code Annotated section 53-6-201 et seq. (1953, as amended),
and provide evidence of successful completion;
   H.   Complete forty (40) hours of annual certified training in peace officer
administration or similar law enforcement training; and
   I.   Attain or complete such other attributes or qualifications as the mayor
and city council may from time to time impose. (Ord. 2000-09, 6-7-2000; amd.
Ord. 2002-02, 2-6-2002; Ord. 2004-18, 5-5-2004)
1-12-2: APPOINTMENT:
The office of chief of police or any vacancy therein shall be filled by
appointment of the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council
following equal opportunity hiring guidelines. The chief of police shall act
under the direction, supervision and control of the mayor. The chief of police
shall serve at the pleasure of and may be removed by the mayor and city
council. (Ord. 2000-09, 6-7-2000; amd. Ord. 2004-18, 5-5-2004)
1-12-3: CLASSIFICATION OF POSITION AND COMPENSATION:
The position of chief of police shall be classified as an exempt position with
at will status, pursuant to all guidelines identified in the fair labor
standards act, as well as other applicable laws and guidelines. The chief of
police shall receive compensation at the rate and in a form to be determined by
the city council and as outlined by contract. (Ord. 2000-09, 6-7-2000; amd.
Ord. 2004-18, 5-5-2004)
1-12-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The chief of police shall have and exercise such powers and perform such duties
as specified in this section, or such other ordinances or resolutions as
specified by the city council. Specifically, the powers and duties of the chief
of police shall be: (Ord. 2000-09, 6-7-2000; amd. Ord. 2004-18, 5-5-2004)
   A.   Execute And Enforce Laws: To faithfully execute and enforce all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city; to place his
personal safety at risk by suppressing riots, disturbances, and breaches of the
peace; to apprehend all persons violating state laws or city ordinances; to
diligently discharge his duties and enforce all ordinances of the city to
preserve the peace, good order and protection of the rights and property of all
persons; and without process, to arrest and take into custody any person who
shall commit, threaten or attempt to commit in the presence of the chief of
police, or within his or her view, any breach of the peace, or any offenses
directly prohibited by the laws of this state or by ordinance; (Ord. 2006-30,
9-20-2006)
   B.   Head Of Department: As the head of the city's law enforcement
department, to supervise and have charge of those providing public safety
services to the city, including, but not limited to, police officers, animal
control officers, the fire department, ambulance services and crossing guards.
If one or more of these public safety services are provided by way of a
contract with another local government, the chief of police shall act as
liaison with such service provider in respect to the service. As head of the
law enforcement department, the chief of police shall also prepare and submit a
proposed annual budget for his department to the city manager for inclusion in
the overall city budget, and shall be responsible for the administration of the
department's budget upon adoption;
   C.   Emergency Service Director: As the LaVerkin City emergency service
director, to perform those duties as outlined in the LaVerkin City emergency
operations plan. The director shall review this annex annually and will forward
updated copies to the organization and individuals as listed on the
distribution list of the basic plan;
   D.   Court: To attend the municipal justice court when required, provide
security for the court, and obey its orders and directions;
   E.   Other Required Duties: To discharge any other duties specified by
statute or imposed by the mayor and city council. The duties enumerated in this
section shall not act as a limitation on the police chief's statewide authority
as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 2000-09, 6-7-2000; amd. Ord. 2004-18, 5-5-
2004)
1-12-5: POLICE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS:
Police officers shall possess the attributes and qualifications listed below.
Police officers shall be appointed by the city manager in consultation with the
chief of police, and shall serve under the direction of the chief of police.
   A.   Be a United States citizen;
   B.   Be at least twenty one (21) years old at the time of appointment;
   C.   Be a high school graduate or furnish evidence of successful completion
of an examination indicating an equivalent achievement;
   D.   Have not been convicted of a crime for which the appointee could have
been punished by imprisonment in a federal penitentiary or by imprisonment in
the penitentiary of this or another state;
   E.   Have demonstrated good moral character as determined by a background
investigation;
   F.   Be free of any physical, emotional or mental condition that might
adversely affect the performance of his duties as police officer;
   G.   Have successfully completed peace officer certification and training as
prescribed by Utah Code Annotated section 53-6-201 et seq. (1953, as amended),
and provide evidence of successful completion;
   H.   Complete forty (40) hours of annual certified training in peace officer
administration or similar law enforcement training; and
   I.   Attain or complete such other attributes or qualifications as the chief
of police, mayor and city council may from time to time impose. (Ord. 2000-09,
6-7-2000)
1-12-6: POLICE OFFICER DUTIES:
The position of police officer is an inherently dangerous position. Police
officers shall act under the direction of the chief of police, and shall at all
times have the authority to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect
and arrest offenders, suppress riots, protect persons and property, remove
nuisances existing in the public streets, roads and highways, enforce every law
relating to the suppression of offenses, and perform all duties required of
them by ordinance, resolution or the direction of the chief of police, mayor
and city council. The duties enumerated in this section shall not act as a
limitation of a police officer's statewide authority as otherwise provided by
law. (Ord. 2006-30, 9-20-2006)
1-12-7: DETECTIVE DUTIES:
The position of detective is an inherently dangerous position. Detectives shall
act under the direction of the chief of police, and shall at all times have the
authority to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest
offenders, suppress riots, protect persons and property, remove nuisances
existing in the public streets, roads and highways, enforce every law relating
to the suppression of offenses, and perform all duties required of them by
ordinance, resolution or the direction of the chief of police, mayor and city
council. The duties enumerated in this section shall not act as a limitation of
a detective's statewide authority as otherwise provided by law. In addition,
the detective will investigate any cases involving extensive follow up. This
includes, but is not limited to, all felonies and misdemeanors where the
division of child and family services may be involved. The detective may, with
consent of the patrol officers' sergeant, instruct the initial responding
officer to conduct the follow up and report back to them. The detective will
also be the crime scene investigator. (Ord. 2006-30, 9-20-2006)
1-12-8: DETECTIVE QUALIFICATIONS:
Detectives shall possess the attributes and qualifications listed below.
Detectives shall be appointed by the police chief and shall serve under the
direction of the chief of police.
   A.   Have successfully completed peace officer certification and training as
prescribed by Utah Code Annotated section 53-6-201 et seq. (1953, as amended),
and provide evidence of successful completion.
   B.   Have been a member of the department for at least two (2) years.
   C.   Is not currently on probation or under disciplinary action of any kind.
   D.   Pass a written and oral exam.
   E.   Complete forty (40) hours of annual certified training in
investigations, crime scene management, evidence collection and any other
training as directed by the police chief.
   F.   Attain or complete such other attributes or qualifications as the chief
of police, mayor and city council may from time to time impose. (Ord. 2006-30,
9-20-2006)
1-12-9: PATROL SERGEANT DUTIES:
The position of patrol sergeant is an inherently dangerous position. The patrol
sergeant shall act under the direction of the chief of police. Part of the
duties are to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest
offenders, suppress riots, protect persons and property, remove nuisances
existing in the public streets, roads and highways, enforce every law relating
to the suppression of offenses, and perform all duties required of them by
ordinance, resolution or the direction of the chief of police, mayor and city
council. The duties enumerated in this section shall not act as a limitation of
a patrol sergeant's statewide authority as otherwise provided by law.
Additional duties expected of a patrol sergeant are the supervision of patrol
officers, train and maintain records of training each officer receives,
schedule patrol shifts, days off, and court appearances of each officer. The
patrol sergeant will also conduct evaluations of patrol officers and use those
evaluations in assisting patrol officers to become better officers. The patrol
sergeant will also handle any initial complaints on the officers. (Ord. 2006-
30, 9-20-2006)
1-12-10: PATROL SERGEANT QUALIFICATIONS:
Patrol sergeants shall possess the attributes and qualifications listed below.
Patrol sergeants shall be appointed by the police chief and shall serve under
the direction of the chief of police.
   A.   Have successfully completed peace officer certification and training as
prescribed by Utah Code Annotated section 53-6-201 et seq. (1953, as amended),
and provide evidence of successful completion.
   B.   Have been a member of the department for at least two (2) years.
   C.   Is not currently on probation or under disciplinary action of any kind.
   D.   Pass a written and oral exam.
   E.   Complete forty (40) hours of annual certified training in first line
supervision, general patrol tactics, general investigative tactics, and any
other training as directed by the police chief.
   F.   Attain or complete such other attributes or qualifications as the chief
of police, mayor and city council may from time to time impose. (Ord. 2006-30,
9-20-2006)
CHAPTER 12A
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-12A-1: Qualifications For Chief Of The Fire Department
1-12A-2: Appointment
1-12A-3: Classification Of Position And Compensation
1-12A-4: Powers And Duties
1-12A-5: Volunteer Firefighter/Emergency Medical Personnel Qualifications
1-12A-6: Firefighter/Emergency Medical Personnel Duties
1-12A-1: QUALIFICATIONS FOR CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT:
The chief of the fire department shall possess the following attributes and
qualifications:
   A.   Be a United States citizen;
   B.   Be at least twenty one (21) years old at the time of appointment;
   C.   Be a high school graduate or furnish evidence of successful completion
of an examination indicating an equivalent achievement;
   D.   Have not been convicted of a crime for which the appointee could have
been punished by imprisonment in a federal penitentiary or by imprisonment in
the penitentiary of this or another state;
   E.   Have demonstrated good moral character;
   F.   Be free of any physical, emotional or mental condition that might
adversely affect the performance of his duties as chief of the fire department;
   G.   Have successfully completed Utah fire academy and training as
prescribed by Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-201 et seq. (1953, as amended),
and other applicable Utah laws and have provided evidence of successful
completion;
   H.   Complete annual certified training in firefighting, prevention,
investigation or similar training; and
   I.   Attain or complete such other attributes or qualifications as the mayor
and city council may from time to time impose. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-17-2003)
1-12A-2: APPOINTMENT:
The office of chief of the fire department or any vacancy therein shall be
filled by appointment of the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council. The chief of the fire department shall act under the direction,
supervision and control of the mayor. The chief of the fire department shall
serve at the pleasure of and may be removed by the mayor and city council.
(Ord. 2003-11, 9-17-2003)
1-12A-3: CLASSIFICATION OF POSITION AND COMPENSATION:
The position of chief of the fire department shall be classified as prescribed
in the city's agreement for fire protection services with the city of
Hurricane, Utah, or as subsequently changed or amended by the city council and
determined by contract. The chief of the fire department shall receive
compensation at the rate and in a form prescribed in the city's agreement for
fire protection services with the city of Hurricane, Utah, or as subsequently
changed or amended by the city council and determined by contract. (Ord. 2003-
11, 9-17-2003)
1-12A-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The chief of the fire department shall have and exercise such powers and
perform such duties as specified in this section, or such other ordinances or
resolutions as specified by the city council. Specifically, the powers and
duties of the chief of the fire department shall be:
   A.   Abatement, Prevention and Investigation: To abate, prevent and
investigate the causes of fires within the city.
   B.   Head Of Department: As the head of the city's fire department, to
supervise and have charge of those providing firefighting, emergency medical
and other related services to the city. If one or more of these public safety
services are provided by way of a contract with another local government, the
chief of the fire department shall act as liaison with such service provider in
respect to the service. As head of the fire department, the chief of the fire
department shall also prepare and submit a proposed annual budget for the fire
department to the city manager for inclusion in the overall city budget, and
shall be responsible for the administration of the department's budget upon
adoption.
   C.   Other Required Duties: To discharge any other duties specified by
statute or imposed by the mayor and city council. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-17-2003)
1-12A-5: VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER/EMERGENCY MEDICAL PERSONNEL QUALIFICATIONS:
Volunteer firefighters and emergency medical personnel shall possess the
attributes and qualifications listed below. Volunteer firefighters and
emergency medical personnel shall be appointed by the city manager in
consultation with the chief of the fire department, and shall serve under the
direction of the chief of the fire department.
   A.   Be a United States citizen;
   B.   Be at least twenty one (21) years old at the time of appointment;
   C.   Be a high school graduate or furnish evidence of successful completion
of an examination indicating an equivalent achievement;
   D.   Have not been convicted of a crime for which the appointee could have
been punished by imprisonment in a federal penitentiary or by imprisonment in
the penitentiary of this or another state;
   E.   Have demonstrated good moral character;
   F.   Be free of any physical, emotional or mental condition that might
adversely affect the performance of his duties as a firefighter or emergency
medical officer;
   G.   Have successfully completed the Utah fire academy and training as
prescribed by Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-201 et seq. (1953, as amended),
and other applicable Utah laws and have provided evidence of successful
completion;
   H.   Complete annual certified training or similar training; and
   I.   Attain or complete such other attributes or qualifications as the chief
of the fire department, mayor and city council may from time to time impose.
(Ord. 2003-11, 9-17-2003)
1-12A-6: FIREFIGHTER/EMERGENCY MEDICAL PERSONNEL DUTIES:
Firefighters and emergency medical personnel shall act under the direction of
the chief of the fire department, and shall at all times have the authority to
abate, prevent or investigate the causes of fires as individually trained and
qualified, and/or provide emergency medical services as individually trained
and qualified, and perform all duties required of them by ordinance,
resolution, or the direction of the chief of the fire department, mayor and
city council. (Ord. 2003-11, 9-17-2003)
CHAPTER 13
CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE
SECTION:
1-13-1: General
1-13-2: Definitions
1-13-3: Filing Of Disclosure Reports
1-13-4: Time Of Filing
1-13-5: Contents Of Statement
1-13-6: Penalty For Noncompliance
1-13-1: GENERAL:
All candidates for elective office shall comply with the campaign finance
disclosure requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2001-10, 6-17-2001)
1-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall be applicable to this chapter:
CANDIDATE: Any person who files a declaration of candidacy for a public office
of the city, or receives contributions or makes expenditures or consents to
another person receiving contributions or making expenditures to bring about
such person's nomination or election to public office.
CONTRIBUTION: Monetary and nonmonetary contributions such as in- kind
contributions and contributions of tangible things but shall not include
personal services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering
their time on behalf of a candidate.
EXPENDITURE: Any disbursement made by or on behalf of candidate from
contributions and receipts, or a purchase, payment, donation, distribution,
loan, advance, deposit, gift of money, or anything of value made for political
purposes. (Ord. 2001-10, 6-17-2001)
1-13-3: FILING OF DISCLOSURE REPORTS:
Each candidate for elective office who either receives more than fifty dollars
($50.00) in campaign contributions or spends more than fifty dollars ($50.00)
on campaign expenses shall file with the city recorder dated and signed
financial reports which comply with this chapter. Forms shall be made available
by the city. Other forms in substantially the same format are also acceptable.
(Ord. 2005-29, 7-20-2005)
1-13-4: TIME OF FILING:
The reports required by this chapter shall be filed at least seven (7) days
before the general election and at least once within thirty (30) days following
the final election. A candidate who is eliminated in the primary election shall
file the final report within thirty (30) days of the date of the primary
election. (Ord. 2001-10, 6-17-2001)
1-13-5: CONTENTS OF STATEMENT:
   A.   The statements filed seven (7) days before the city's general elections
shall include:
      1.   A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00)
received by the candidate, including the name of the donor and the amount of
the contribution;
      2.   An aggregate total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or
less received by the candidate; and
      3.   A list of each expenditure for political purposes made during the
campaign period, including the name of the recipient and amount of expenditure.
   B.   The statement filed thirty (30) days after the elections shall include:
      1.   A list of each contribution of more than fifty dollars ($50.00)
received after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven (7) days before
the election, and the name of the donor.
      2.   A total of all contributions of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less
received by the candidate after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven
(7) days before the election.
      3.   A list of all expenditures for political purposes made by the
candidate after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven (7) days before
the election, and the recipient of each payment.
      4.   All contributions and expenditures related to the candidate's
candidacy should be accounted for between the preelection and postelection
statement. (Ord. 2001-10, 6-17-2001)
1-13-6: PENALTY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
Any candidate who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter is guilty
of an infraction. The candidate's name may also be removed from the ballot.
(Ord. 2005-29, 7-20-2005)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: License Assessor And Collector
3-1-3: Business License Required
3-1-4: Application For License
3-1-5: License Fee Levied
3-1-5-1: Fee Exemption For Certain Small Businesses In Noncommercial Zones
(Gross Receipts Under $3,000.00)
3-1-5-2: License Fee Exemption For Home-Based Businesses
3-1-5-3: Licensing/Inspections Of Certain Businesses
3-1-6: Business License Term And Payment Dates
3-1-7: Certificate Of License
3-1-8: Transfer Of License Prohibited
3-1-9: Branch Establishments
3-1-10: Joint Business Licenses
3-1-11: Reciprocal Recognition; Delivery Of Goods
3-1-12: Exemptions To License
3-1-13: Revocation Or Denial Of License
3-1-14: Penalty
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title:
BUSINESS: Includes all activities engaged in within the City carried on for the
purpose of gain or economic profit, except that the acts of employees rendering
service to employers shall not be included in the term business, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
EACH SEPARATE PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate establishment or place of
operation, whether or not operating under the same name, within the City,
including a home or other place of lodging if the same is held out by
advertisements, listings or otherwise as the establishment or place of
operation of a person engaging in the business of selling tangible, personal
property at either retail or wholesale, or both, in the City.
EMPLOYEE: The operator or manager of a place of business and any persons
employed in the operation of said place of business in any capacity and also
any salesman, agent or independent contractor engaged in the operation of the
place of business in any capacity.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tangible
personal property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods or
property and the rendering of personal services for others for a consideration
by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business, occupation or
other calling, except the rendering of personal services by an employee to his
employer under any contract of personal employment.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate location maintained or operated by the
licensee within the City from which business activity is conducted or
transacted.
WHOLESALE: A sale of tangible personal property by wholesalers to retail
merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for resale, and does not
include a sale by wholesalers or retailers to users or consumers not for
resale, except as otherwise specified.
WHOLESALER: A person doing a regularly organized wholesale or jobbing business
and selling to retail merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers, for the
purpose of resale. (1982 Code § 9-111; amd. 1998 Code)
3-1-2: LICENSE ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR:
The City Clerk/Recorder is designated and appointed as Ex Officio Assessor of
license fees for the City. On receipt of any application for a license, the
City Clerk/Recorder shall assess the amount due thereon and shall collect all
license fees based upon the rate established by resolution of the City Council.
He shall enforce all provisions of this title, and shall cause to be filed
complaints against all persons violating any of the provisions of this title.
(1982 Code § 9-113; amd. 1998 Code)
3-1-3: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, it shall be a Class B
misdemeanor for any person to transact, engage in or carry on any business,
trade, profession or calling or to operate a vending, pinball or coin operated
machine without first receiving the class or type of license required by the
City. (Ord. 2017-12, 12-6-2017)
3-1-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Contents: All applications for license shall include:
      1.   The name of the person desiring a license.
      2.   The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade or
profession to be performed, practiced or carried on.
      3.   The class of license desired, if such licenses are divided into
classes.
      4.   The place where such business, calling, trade or profession is to be
carried on, giving the street number if the business, calling, trade or
profession is to be carried on in any building or enclosure having such number.
(1982 Code § 9-116)
      5.   The applicant's home address, mailing address, phone number, date of
birth and social security number. (1982 Code § 9-116; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Coin Operated Machine Or Device: In the event that the license
application relates to a coin operated machine or device, the application shall
identify the machine or device to which it applies and the location thereof.
(1982 Code § 9-116)
3-1-5: LICENSE FEE LEVIED:
Subject to the provisions of sections
3-1-5-1 and
3-1-5-2 of this chapter:
   A.   There is hereby imposed and levied a license fee on the business,
location, trade, calling or profession of every person engaged in a business
within the City (a "business license fee" - which shall consist of a base fee
for the business; certain administrative add-on fees; and, in certain limited
circumstances, per-employee fees, where the identity or number of employees is
of interest to and regulated by the City), which shall be established by
resolution and which may be changed from time to time.
   B.   A processing fee, as established by resolution, shall be imposed and
levied against any business that changes its physical location during the
calendar year for which a valid business license has been issued. (Ord. 2017-
12, 12-6-2017)
3-1-5-1: FEE EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN SMALL BUSINESSES IN NONCOMMERCIAL ZONES
(GROSS RECEIPTS UNDER $3,000.00):
   A.   Subject to the provisions of section
3-1-5-3 of this chapter, there shall be an exemption from the licensing fee
requirements of this chapter for any person who is engaged in, conducting, or
otherwise operating a "business", as that term is defined in section
3-1-1 of this chapter, where:
      1.   The goods and/or services of the business are offered, sold and/or
provided on real property situated within the City limits; and
      2.   Said real property is owned, leased or rented by the provider of the
goods and/or services that are the subject of said business; and
      3.   Said real property is not situated in a commercial zone; and
      4.   During the immediately previous calendar year: a) the business was
located in the same location within the City limits; b) the business was
properly licensed under the provisions of this chapter, or lawfully exempted
from licensure and/or paying the licensing fee; and c) the business is a
continuation of the previously licensed or exempted business; and
      5.   The total gross receipts for such business were three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00) or less during the immediately previous calendar year.
   B.   It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person claiming an
exemption from the licensing requirements of this chapter, on the basis of this
section, to maintain accurate and complete financial records of his or her
business; to provide competent proof that the business has not grossed in
excess of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) during the immediately previous
year, if questioned or requested by City officials, representatives, or
enforcement officers; and to obtain a business license hereunder if any
provision of this subsection is not or cannot be met. (Ord. 2017-12, 12-6-2017)
3-1-5-2: LICENSE FEE EXEMPTION FOR HOME-BASED BUSINESSES:
State law currently provides an exemption from the licensing fee requirements
of this chapter for home-based businesses.
   A.   Such businesses are home occupations permitted under section
10-7-17 of this Code, where the combined offsite impact of the business and the
primary residential use of the residential dwelling does not materially exceed
the offsite impact of the primary residential use alone.
   B.   To qualify for such an exemption, all of the following must be true
with respect to the home occupation:
      1.   The business must be a permitted use, as a home occupation, under
the City's zoning law (see section
10-7-17 of this Code).
      2.   There shall be no: a) daily home deliveries or pick-ups of goods
and/or materials or b) frequent deliveries or pick-ups by large vehicles with a
gross vehicle weight rating of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or greater.
      3.   There shall be no multiple client or patron (group) drop-offs,
assemblies or performances on-site (dance studios, recitals, etc.) which may
result in more than three (3) additional vehicles being parked on-site or
within the neighborhood (on the street or otherwise) at any given time.
      4.   There shall be no storage of flammable, toxic, explosive, noxious,
or other deleterious chemicals or materials, related to the business, anywhere
on the premises.
      5.   The business use:
         a.   Shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use
of the dwelling,
         b.   Shall be conducted - and all supplies and business materials
stored - within the dwelling (i.e., no outside storage or storage in accessory
buildings);
         c.   May not change the character of the dwelling,
         d.   May not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total footprint
of the dwelling, and
         e.   May not preclude the use of the garage for its intended use under
this Code (i.e., to park vehicles).
      6.   All employees of the business must lawfully reside within the
dwelling, in accordance with the City's applicable zoning laws and ordinances;
and
      7.   There shall be no lawful requirement nor request made for:
         a.   Fire and/or other Code inspections; and/or
         b.   The issuance of a business license (for State, Health Department,
financing, or other non-City purposes).
   C.   Provided that, group homes, day care facilities, preschools, dance
studios, and short-term rentals (where and to the extent permitted, including
those grandfathered under prior law) shall not qualify for the fee exemption
regardless of whether or not they are allowed in the zone as a home occupation.
(Ord. 2017-12, 12-6-2017; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 9-21-2022)
3-1-5-3: LICENSING/INSPECTIONS OF CERTAIN BUSINESSES:
   A.   Compliance Of Provisions: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
3-1-5B, and sections
3-1-5-1 and
3-1-5-2 of this chapter, if - due to the nature or location of the person's
business - State or local law or regulation (other than the provisions of this
chapter) require(s) that a Municipal business license be acquired by said
person, or if said person requests that a Municipal business license issue
(after being informed of the exemption(s) provided herein), then said person
shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter and shall pay
the licensing fees required herein.
   B.   Inspections Required: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 3-1-
5B, and sections
3-1-5-1 and
3-1-5-2 of this chapter, if - due to the nature or location of the person's
business - State or local law or regulation (including, e.g., the requirements
of title 10 of this Code relating to home occupations) require that fire and/or
safety inspections be conducted of the premises by City representatives prior
to allowing the person's business to be conducted thereon, or if said person
requests one or more fire and/or safety inspections, then the person shall be
assessed and shall pay to the City, in advance, an inspection fee, as
established by resolution, to help defray the costs of such inspection(s).
(Ord. 2017-12, 12-6-2017)
3-1-6: BUSINESS LICENSE TERM AND PAYMENT DATES:
   A.   Term:
      1.   New (First Year) And Renewal Licenses: Except as provided in
subsection A2 of this section, the annual license shall date from January 1 of
each year and shall expire on December 31 of each year.
      2.   Initial Applications After October 31: A business license granted by
the City to an applicant, pursuant to an application for a new business license
application submitted after October 31, shall extend and be in force (without
additional fee) until December 31 of the year following such application.
      3.   Inspections Made: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A1
and A2 of this section, no license shall be granted and validly in force until
any and all required inspections have been made, all City administrative
approvals have been given, and all licensing and delinquency related fees
(including any such unpaid fees from prior years) are paid by the applicant.
   B.   Due And Payable:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B2 of this section, annual
licensing fees shall be due and payable on or before December 31 of the year
immediately prior to year for which the business license is applicable and in
force; and shall become delinquent if not paid, in full, prior to February 1 of
the year in which the business license is applicable and in force.
      2.   Payment for initial business licenses are due and payable at the
time of application therefor; and no license shall be issued until such payment
is made. There is no grace period for the payment of such fees wherein business
may lawfully be transacted.
   C.   Delinquency Fee, And Civil Penalty, And Collection Costs:
      1.   Delinquency Related Fees: Delinquency related fees shall mean and
include any fees and costs provided for in this subsection C.
      2.   Late Fees: Any license not renewed and paid for (in full) prior to
the date that it becomes delinquent, shall incur a late fee, which shall be
established by resolution and which may be changed from time to time. No
license may be issued until such fees are paid in full.
      3.   Civil Penalty: Any business for which a license is required and is
not otherwise exempt, that transacts business in this City without such
license, is subject to the imposition of a civil penalty of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) (to be assessed in addition to any other fees, and regardless
of the application or assessment, by a court, of any criminal penalties which
may attach to such conduct).
      4.   Enforcement: The failure to pay fees provided for under this chapter
and/or otherwise engaging in business without the required business license
further subject(s) the applicant to:
         a.   The assessment and required repayment, by the applicant, of
enforcement costs incurred by the City or otherwise attributable to such
delinquency and/or illegal conduct, including costs and a reasonable attorney
fee.
         b.   A finding that the business no longer qualifies to be treated as
an ongoing business for which a renewal license may be secured, thereby
requiring, in addition to the payment of any and all outstanding licensing fees
and delinquency related fees, that a new business license be applied for, and
any and all required inspections made and City administrative approvals given,
prior to the time that business may be lawfully transacted. (Ord. 2011-12, 10-
19-2011; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 9-21-2022)
3-1-7: CERTIFICATE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Contents: All certificates of license shall be signed by the Mayor,
attested by the City Clerk/Recorder, and shall contain the following
information:
      1.   Name: The name of the person to whom such certificate has been
issued.
      2.   Amount: The amount paid. (1982 Code § 9-117)
      3.   Type: The type of business.
      4.   Term: The date of expiration. (1982 Code § 9-117; amd. 1998 Code)
      5.   Location: The place where such business, calling, trade or
profession is to be conducted. (1982 Code § 9-117)
   B.   Display:
      1.   Required: Every certificate of license issued under this chapter
shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place upon the wall of the
building, room or office of the place of business so that the same may be
easily seen. When such certificate of license has expired, it shall be removed
by the licensee from such place in which it has been posted, and no certificate
of license which is not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted
upon the wall or any part of any room within the place of business. If the
licensee's business is such that a license cannot be displayed due to the
transient or mobile nature of the business, then the licensee shall carry the
license on his person, ready to be shown upon request by an authorized officer
during all such time or times while the licensee is engaged in or pursuing the
business for which a license is granted.
      2.   Coin Operated Machine: In the event the license is for a coin
operated machine or device, the certificate shall be attached or displayed in
the immediate vicinity of the machine for which it has been issued. (1982 Code
§ 9-118)
3-1-8: TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No license granted or issued under any ordinance of the City shall be assigned
or transferred to any other person. It shall not be deemed to authorize any
person other than therein named to do business or to authorize any other
business, calling, trade or profession than is therein named, unless by
permission of the City Council. (1982 Code § 9-119)
3-1-9: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
Unless proscribed by applicable State law, a separate license must be obtained
for each separate place of business in the City and each license shall
authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the
location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses
and distributing places used in connection with or incident to a business
licensed under this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of
business or branch establishments. (Ord. 2017-12, 12-6-2017)
3-1-10: JOINT BUSINESS LICENSES:
Whenever any person is engaged in two (2) or more businesses at the same
location within the City, such person shall not be required to obtain separate
licenses for conducting each of such businesses, but shall be issued one
license which shall specify on its face all such businesses. The license fee to
be paid shall be computed at the highest license fee applicable to any of the
businesses being conducted at such location. The sale of beer or any other
product or service requiring an additional license shall be subject to such
additional licensing requirement. Where two (2) or more persons conduct
separate businesses at the same location, each such person shall obtain a
license for such business and pay the required license fee for such business.
(1982 Code § 9-122; amd. 1998 Code)
3-1-11: RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION; DELIVERY OF GOODS:
   A.   Vehicles: No license shall be required for operation of any vehicle or
equipment in the City when:
      1.   Such vehicle is merely passing through the City.
      2.   Such vehicle is used exclusively in intercity or interstate
commerce.
   B.   Delivery Of Property: No license shall be required by this chapter of
any person whose only business activity in the City is the mere delivery in the
City of property sold by him at a regular place of business maintained by him
outside the City where:
      1.   Such person's business is at the time of such delivery licensed by
the Utah municipality or county in which such place of business is situated;
and
      2.   The authority licensing such business grants to licensees of the
city making deliveries within its jurisdiction the same privileges, upon
substantially the same terms, as are granted by this section; and
      3.   Neither the property delivered nor any of the facilities by which it
was manufactured, produced or processed are subject to inspection by authority
of the City for compliance with health or sanitary standards prescribed by the
City.
   C.   Certification Of Section: The City Clerk/Recorder shall, at the request
of any person, certify a copy of this section to any municipality or county of
the State to which a copy has not previously been certified. (1982 Code § 9-
123; amd. 1998 Code)
3-1-12: EXEMPTIONS TO LICENSE:
   A.   Tax Exempt Businesses: No license fee shall be imposed under section
3-1-5 of this chapter on any person engaged in business for solely religious,
charitable, eleemosynary or other types of strictly nonprofit purpose which is
tax exempt in such activities under the laws of the United States and the
State, nor shall any license fee be imposed on any person engaged in a business
specifically exempted from Municipal taxation and fees by the laws of the
United States or the State; nor shall any license fee be imposed upon any
person not maintaining a place of business within the City who has paid a like
or similar License Tax or fee to some other taxing unit within the State and
which taxing unit exempts from its License Tax or fee, by reciprocal agreement
or otherwise, businesses domiciled in the City and doing business in such
taxing unit.
   B.   Reciprocal Agreements With Other Agencies: The License Assessor and
Collector may, with approval of the City Council, enter into reciprocal
agreements with the proper officials of other taxing units, as may be deemed
equitable and proper in effecting the exemption provided for in subsection A of
this section.
   C.   Youth Businesses: State law currently exempts youth under the age of
eighteen (18) years from being required to have a business license or permit
(or to pay the fee associated therewith) if they engage in business "only
occasionally". See 10-1-203, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended). (Ord.
2017-12, 12-6-2017)
3-1-13: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Failure To Comply; Unlawful Activities: Any license issued pursuant to
the provisions of this Code or of any ordinance of the City may be revoked and
any application denied by the City because of:
      1.   The failure of the licensee or applicant to comply with the
conditions and requirements of this Code or any ordinance of the City.
      2.   Unlawful activities conducted or permitted on the premises where the
business is conducted.
      3.   Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained in the
application for the license.
      4.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business.
      5.   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
   B.   Notice To Licensee: Prior to the revocation of a license or denial of
an application to renew business license, the licensee or applicant shall be
given a notice which shall state in substance that the City intends to revoke
the business license or deny the application to renew, together with the reason
or reasons therefor, at a regular or special meeting of the City Council (which
shall be at least 10 days and not more than 30 days from the date notice is
sent), and that the licensee or applicant has a right to appear, to be
represented by counsel, to hear the evidence against him, to cross examine
witnesses and to present evidence as to why the license should not be revoked
or the application denied. (1982 Code § 9-120; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Not Applicable To Businesses Not Previously Licensed: The preceding
subsection shall not apply to applications for licenses for businesses which
have not previously been licensed by the City, and such applicants need only be
informed that their application has been denied. (1982 Code § 9-120)
3-1-14: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class
B misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-2-0: Adoption Of Alcoholic Beverage Control Act
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Liquor Sale Classes And Licenses
3-2-3: License Required
3-2-4: Application For License
3-2-5: Qualifications Of Licensee
3-2-6: Fees
3-2-7: Proximity; Investigation; Inspection
3-2-8: Bond Required
3-2-9: Issuance; Conditions
3-2-10: Transfer Of License
3-2-11: Alcohol Education; Training
3-2-12: Badges Required
3-2-13: Renewals
3-2-14: Unlawful Acts And Regulations
3-2-15: Revocation Or Suspension
3-2-16: Penalty
3-2-0: ADOPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT:
   A.   Subject to the provisions of subsections B and C hereof, the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, as contained in Title 32B, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as
amended in and through 2023), is hereby adopted and incorporated as a part of
the LaVerkin City Code and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of the City
of LaVerkin; provided that where a legislatively-adopted addition to, change
in, or amendment to said portion of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act does not
become effective until a date subsequent to the effective date of this Section
such addition, change or amendment shall not be effective hereunder until the
effective date of such provision of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
   B.   Those portions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, as adopted by
this Section, referring to or dealing with felonies or other offenses which are
not subject to or authorized for enforcement by the City of LaVerkin, or
punishments associated therewith, are not made a part of the adopted LaVerkin
City Code.
   C.   Where and to the extent that the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act, as adopted by this Section, are in conflict with the provisions of
the LaVerkin City Code, they shall supersede such LaVerkin City Code
provisions; provided that, where such conflict exists because the City has
enacted legislation that is more restrictive than provided by State law, and
the City is not prevented by State law from being more restrictive, then the
conflicting LaVerkin City provision(s) shall govern. Where and to the extent
that provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act are not in conflict with
the provisions of the LaVerkin City Code, they shall supplement said City Code.
   D.   Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under or pursuant
to the State codes and/or provisions adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to
use the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the
LaVerkin City Code that is applicable and/or has been violated. (Ord. 2019-06,
8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 9-2-2020; Ord. 2021-04, 7-21-2021; Ord. 2022-06,
6-15-2022; Ord. 2023-09, 6-7-2023; Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
CLASS A LIQUOR LICENSE: A business license entitling the licensee to sell beer
on the licensed premises for consumption off the premises in connection with an
off-premise beer retailer license issued by the state of Utah. A Class A Liquor
License shall be referred to hereafter as a “Class A” license.
CLASS B LIQUOR LICENSE: A business license for a full -service restaurant that
entitles the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises of
the restaurant, in connection with a full-service restaurant license issued by
the state of Utah, and subject to the requirement that food sales must
constitute no less than seventy percent (70%) of the gross monetary receipts of
the licensee’s business. A Class B Liquor License shall be referred to
hereafter as a “Class B” license.
CLASS C LIQUOR LICENSE: A business license for a Recreational Facility that
entitles the licensee to sell beer for consumption on the licensed premises, in
connection with an on-premise beer retailer license issued by the state of
Utah. A Class C Liquor License shall be referred to hereafter as a “Class C”
license.
CLASS D LIQUOR LICENSE: A business license for a Recreational Facility that
entitles the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
licensed premises in connection with a bar establishment license issued by the
state of Utah. A Class D Liquor License shall be referred to hereafter as a
“Class D” license.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The agency enforcing federal, state and city laws and
ordinances on behalf of the city of LaVerkin.
LICENSED PREMISES: Any property, building, enclosure, room or equipment used in
connection with the sale, storage, distribution or consumption of alcoholic
beverages or products.
LICENSEE: Any person or entity issued a Class A, B, C, or D license.
MINOR: Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
OFF SITE RETAILER: Any person operating a bona fide regularly established
retail store selling beer, together with other commodities, and engaged in the
sale of beer only in the original package, to be taken away from the premises
of the retailer and to be consumed off the premises.
ON SITE RETAILER: Any person operating a restaurant or other establishment
where beer is sold in the original container for consumption on the premises
and in individual portions for consumption on the premises.
PACKAGE AGENCY: A retail liquor location operated under a contractual agreement
with the state, by a person other than the state.
PERSON: Includes partnership, association, company or corporation, as well as a
natural person.
PREMISES: The area from which the licensee is authorized to sell, dispense or
serve alcoholic beverages under the provision of the license.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Any building or permanent structure owned or leased by the
state, a county or local government entity that is used for public education,
transacting public business or regularly conducting government activities.
"Public building" does not mean or refer to any building owned by the state or
a county or local government entity when the building is used by anyone in
whole or in part for proprietary functions.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY: Any premises or building with a minimum of two acres of
real property (including contiguous parcels with the same owner) which is owned
or leased by a licensee, and which is used in connection with a business whose
primary purpose is commercial recreational use where sales of alcoholic
beverages is an ancillary purpose or offering to the commercial recreational
use. The following shall be considered a Recreational Facility: a commercial
pool and/or hot tub operation which contains pools and/or hot tubs that have a
combined surface area that exceeds 10,000, a commercial natural hot springs
operation, or a golf course, not including a miniature golf course.
RESTAURANT: A place of business where a variety of food is prepared and
complete meals are served to the general public, located on a premises having
adequate culinary fixtures for food preparation and dining accommodations, and
whose primary purpose is the service of meals to the public.
SALE: Includes soliciting or receiving an order for, keeping or exposing for
sale, delivering for value, peddling, keeping with intent to sell, and
trafficking in.
SCHOOL: Any building used primarily for the general education of minors,
including nursery schools, infant daycare centers or trade or technical
schools.
SINGLE EVENT: A short period on site consumption event not to exceed five (5)
days, which is sponsored by a bona fide partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, church, political organization, or incorporated association,
subordinate lodge chapter or other local unit thereof that is conducting a
civic or community enterprise or convention. The organization shall have been
in existence as a bona fide organization for at least one year prior to the
date of application.  (Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2023-09, 6-7-2023;
Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-2: LIQUOR SALE CLASSES AND LICENSES:
   A.   Classes Allowed: Retail alcoholic beverage sales permitted in the city
shall be Class A, B, C, or D licenses.
   B.   Class A Quota: There shall be no established quota for Class A
licenses, except as determined by location requirements.
   C.   Class B Quota: There shall be no established quota for Class B licenses
that will sell liquor except as determined by location requirements.
   D.   Class C License Quota: There shall be no established quota for Class C
licenses, except as determined by location requirements.
   E.   Class D License Quota: There shall be no established quota for Class D
licenses, except as determined by location requirements.
   F.   Consent For a License: The city council shall hear all requests for new
Class A, B, C, and D licenses in a public hearing and must give its written
consent before any license is granted by the city.
   G.   Duration: All Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D licenses shall
expire on December 31 of each year. (Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-
01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, licensee, permittee, or their officers,
managers, employees or agents to keep for sale, or to directly or indirectly or
upon any pretense or device, offer to sell, sell or otherwise furnish or supply
to another any alcoholic beverage or product, within the city without first
having procured a license therefor from the city council as hereinafter
provided. A separate license shall be required for each place of sale, and the
license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed on the premises. All
licenses shall comply with the alcoholic beverage control act of Utah, the
regulations of the alcoholic beverage control commission, and all applicable
ordinances of the city. (Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007)
3-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Application: An application for a Class A, B, C, or D license shall be
made in writing on forms provided by the city clerk/recorder, and such
application must state the applicant’s name in full, social security number,
date of birth, citizenship, and residence address; the location of proposed
license premises, the class of license desired, and any convictions for crimes
which could disqualify the applicant as a licensee as outlined in this chapter.
The application shall include a space for the applicant to sign under penalty
of law, certifying that the applicant has complied with all requirements and
possesses the qualifications for issuance of a license, and that all
information in the application is true. If the applicant is a partnership,
corporation, limited liability company or other entity, the applicant shall set
forth the names and addresses of all managers, officers, trustees or directors.
The applicant shall also set forth the names and addresses of all partners,
members, joint ventures, or shareholders holding any interest greater than
twenty percent (20%) in the application. Application by a partnership, limited
liability company or joint venture must be subscribed and sworn to by all
partners or members. Applications by a corporation must be subscribed and sworn
to by the president and secretary or trustees.
   B.   Accompanying Materials: An application for a Class A, B, C or D license
shall also include the following:
      1.   The application shall include evidence of the distance to the
nearest school, church, public library, public playground, and park.
      2.   The application shall include a bond as set forth in this chapter
and the nonrefundable license fees as set forth in this title.
      3.   The application for a class B business license shall include a
certified report from the bureau of criminal identification, dated within
thirty (30) days of the application, showing any criminal history of the
applicant and any partner, officer, director, managing agent, member or
stockholder who holds at least twenty percent (20%) of the stock of the
applicant corporation, and all employees who will either supervise or
personally handle sales of alcoholic beverages to the public.
      4.   The applicant must also indicate whether each partner, officer,
director, managing agent, member or stockholder who holds at least twenty
percent (20%) of the stock of the applicant corporation, and all employees who
will either supervise or personally handle sales of alcoholic beverages to the
public meet the qualifications in section 3-2-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-05,
1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-5: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
   A.   Citizenship: Every licensee hereunder shall be a bona fide citizen of
the United States or a legal resident alien. If a partnership, each partner
shall be a bona fide citizen or a legal resident alien of the United States. If
a corporation, it shall be a domestic corporation or a foreign corporation
which is qualified to do business in the state, and the corporation shall hold
its license through an agent. All employees who will either supervise or
personally handle sales of alcohol to the public shall be bona fide citizens of
the U.S. or legal resident aliens.
   B.   Corporations; Agent: A corporation which conforms to the qualifications
prescribed by subsection A of this section shall own the entire equitable
interest in its license through an agent, provided the agent is otherwise
qualified to hold a license under the provisions hereof. The agent shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed for any violation of the law relating to
alcoholic beverages. Upon the death or resignation or discharge of an agent of
a corporation holding a license, the license shall be assigned to another
qualified agent selected by the corporation.
   C.   Prior Violations: No Class A, B, C, or D license shall be issued to any
person, or entity whose principals include a person, who, within one year prior
to application, has violated any provision of a license to sell alcoholic
beverages issued by the city or any other governmental agency, or has had such
a license revoked. No license shall be issued to any person or corporation in
which a partner, a managing agent, a manager, an officer, a director, a
stockholder who holds at least twenty percent (20%) of the total issued and
outstanding stock of the applicant corporation, or a manager or member who owns
at least twenty percent (20%) of the applicant limited liability company, or an
employee who will either supervise or personally handle sales of alcohol to the
public who, within five (5) years prior to application, has:
      1.   Been convicted of or plead guilty to a felony under any federal or
state law;
      2.   Violated any federal or state law or local ordinance concerning the
sale, manufacture, distribution, warehousing, adulteration, or transportation
of alcoholic beverages;
      3.   Been convicted of or plead guilty to any crime involving moral
turpitude;
      4.   On two (2) or more occasions within the five (5) years before the
day on which the license is granted, plead guilty to or been convicted of
driving under the influence of alcohol, any drug, or the combined influence of
alcohol and any drug;
      5.   Had a revocation or nonrenewal of any alcoholic beverage license of
said person.
   D.   Criminal History: The city clerk/recorder shall request and receive
criminal history record information from the applicant for all partners,
officers, directors, managing agents, members, joint ventures, shareholders
holding any interest greater than twenty percent (20%), and all employees who
will either supervise or personally handle sales of alcohol to the public,
within thirty (30) days after receiving such application, and the law
enforcement agency shall add thereto its recommendation as to the granting or
denying of said application.
   E.   List Of Officers On File: Each corporation shall provide a list of
officers, directors, managing agents, members, partners, stockholders of twenty
percent (20%) or more, and all employees who will either supervise or
personally handle sales of alcohol to the public, to the city upon application
and with annual license renewal, and at all other times when there is a change
in said list.
   F.   Age: All applicants and any partner, officer, director, managing agent,
member or stockholder who holds at least twenty percent (20%) of the stock of
the applicant corporation, and all employees who will either supervise or
personally handle sales of alcoholic beverages to the public, shall be over the
age of twenty one (21) years.  (Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 1-
3-2024)
3-2-6: FEES:
   A.   License Fees: Applications provided for in this chapter shall be
accompanied by business license fees set forth in this title.
   B.   Class A, B, C or D License Fee: In addition to any other business
license fee which any person or place of business may be required to pay, there
is hereby imposed upon any Class A, B, C or D licensee an annual license fee to
be established by resolution which may change from time to time.
   C.   Issuance After July 1: If a license is issued on or after July 1 in any
year, one-half (½) of all annual license fees shall be charged. (Ord. 2007-05,
1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-7: PROXIMITY; INVESTIGATION; INSPECTION:
The right to a license hereunder shall be conditioned upon compliance with the
following:
   A.   Proximity: No Class A, B, C, or D license shall be issued that fails to
meet the proximity requirements of Utah Code § 32B-1201, et seq., as amended or
replaced from time to time.
   B.   Investigation: All applications filed in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter shall be referred to the law enforcement agency for inspection
and report. The law enforcement agency shall within thirty (30) days after
receiving such application, sign the application as notice of approval or deny
said signature with a written statement of denial. The law enforcement agency
shall include in any report to city council, recommendation as to whether or
not the application should be granted.
   C.   Inspection: All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by any
officer, agent and/or law enforcement officer of the city, the alcoholic
beverage control commission, and/or the state board of health, and every
licensee shall, at the request of the board of health, furnish to it samples of
alcoholic beverages which he shall have for sale or consumption. Any license
granted pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the city council on a
finding that the licensee has had ten (10) days’ or more notice from the board
of health that the licensee is violating one or more health ordinances, rules
or regulations of the city, or of the Utah division of health and has failed to
comply with such health ordinance, rule or regulation. The city council may
direct the law enforcement agency to close down any business licensed under
this chapter where the board of health has determined that continued operation
of the business presents an eminent danger to the health of the community or
persons who may eat or drink at the business. (Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd.
Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-8: BOND REQUIRED:
No Class A, B, C or D license shall be granted by the city council until the
applicant has posted a cash or corporate surety bond in an amount set by
resolution and payable to the city. Each licensee must procure and maintain
said bond for so long as the license is in effect. The bond shall be in a form
approved by the city clerk/recorder, conditioned upon the licensee’s faithful
compliance with this chapter, the Utah alcoholic beverage control act and rules
and regulations promulgated by the Utah alcoholic beverage control commission,
and any other applicable state or federal statutes. No part of any cash or
corporate bond so posted may be withdrawn during the period the license is in
effect, or while revocation proceedings are pending against the licensee. A
bond filed by a licensee may be forfeited if the license is finally revoked.
(Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-9: ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS:
   A.   Scope Of Class A, B, C, or D License: A Class A, B, C, or D license
shall be to sell alcoholic beverages only at the place and in the manner
provided therein, and a separate license shall be issued for each specific
business, each license specifying the exact location thereof.
   B.   Applicant Reliability: The city council shall approve the retailing of
alcoholic beverages only after satisfactory showing of the capability,
qualifications and reliability of the applicant, and that the public
convenience requires and that the best interests of the community will be
substantially served by the issuance.
   C.   Current Status Of Other Charges: No license herein provided shall be
issued to any applicant who is in arrears in the payment to the city for any
other city license, or who is otherwise indebted to the city. Failure to pay
business license fees or other charges assessed by the city for any reason
promptly when due shall be the basis for revocation of a license issued
hereunder.
   D.   Department Of Health Permit: No license under this chapter shall be
issued until the applicant therefor shall have first procured from the
department of health a permit which shall show that the premises to be licensed
is in a sanitary condition and that the equipment used in the storage,
distribution or sale of beer or alcoholic beverages complies with all of the
health regulations of the state.
   E.   Unused License: A license which is not used by the licensee for a
period of six (6) months shall revert to the city and shall no longer have any
validity.
   F.   State Law Applicability: A license for the sale of any alcoholic
beverage shall be required as provided in Utah Code Annotated title 32B, the
provisions of which are hereby adopted insofar as applicable to this chapter.
All licensees must notify the city clerk immediately if their state issued
license is denied, suspended or revoked for any reason.
   G.   Lawful Purchase Of Alcohol: A licensee may not purchase, acquire,
possess for the purpose of resale, or sell any alcoholic beverage except that
which has been lawfully purchased from a wholesaler or small business brewer
properly licensed by the State. (Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2023-09, 6-
7-2023; Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-10: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No Class A, B, C, or D license shall be assigned, transferred or sold, except
that in the sole discretion of the city council a transfer may be permitted
upon a change of location where the owner remains the same. In either case, the
same qualifications as to location of premises or character of licensee shall
apply, and the same fees will be required as in the case of an original
issuance of license. No Class A, B, C, or D license shall be leased or
subleased. (Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-11: ALCOHOL EDUCATION; TRAINING:
   A.   All employees of licensees who will either supervise the sales of
alcoholic beverages or shall handle the sales of alcoholic beverages to a
customer shall have a valid certificate showing completion of an alcohol
training and education seminar outlined by Utah Code Annotated sections 32B-1-
701 et seq. and 62A-15-401 as updated. Any individual who directly supervises
the sale of alcoholic beverages or sells alcoholic beverages to a customer
shall complete the required alcohol training and education seminar within
thirty (30) days of the day on which the individual is employed if on the date
of employment, the employee does not have a valid certificate that the
individual has completed an alcohol training and education seminar for purposes
of this section.
   B.   A local authority may immediately suspend the license of an alcohol
beverage retailer that allows an employee to directly supervise the sale of
beer or to sell beer to a customer without having a valid certificate showing
that the individual has completed an alcohol training and education seminar.
(Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2023-09, 6-7-2023; Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-12: BADGES REQUIRED:
   A.   Badge Requirements: Each employee of a licensed retailer who directly
supervises the sale of beer or who sells beer to a customer shall wear a unique
identification badge on the front of the employee's clothing, visible above the
waist, bearing the employee's first or last name, initials or unique
identification in letters or numbers. The number or letters on the unique
identification badge shall be sufficiently large to be clearly visible and
identifiable while engaging in or directly supervising the retail sale of
alcohol beverages.
   B.   Records: The licensed retailer shall maintain a record of all current
employees' unique identification badges as assigned. The record required to be
maintained shall be available for immediate inspection by:
      1.   Any peace officer or representative of the local licensing
authority; and
      2.   Shall include the employee's full name, address and driver's license
number or similar identification number.
   C.   Fines And Penalties: A local authority may impose a fine of up to two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) against any retailer that does not comply or
require its employees to comply with the requirements of this section. In
addition to any criminal penalties that may be imposed, an individual is
subject to other administrative penalties as allowed by Utah Code title 32B, as
amended.
   D.   Expunging Records: LaVerkin City shall expunge from the records any
administrative penalty imposed against a licensee for purposes of determining
future administrative penalties, if the licensee or any employee of that
licensee, has not been found in violation of any law involving the sale of an
alcoholic beverage to a minor for a period of thirty six (36) consecutive
months from the day on which the licensee or its employee is last adjudicated
as violating a law involving the sale of an alcoholic beverage to a minor.
(Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2023-09, 6-7-2023)
3-2-13: RENEWALS:
All Class A, B, C, and D licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. All
applications for renewal licenses filed by the holders of existing licenses
shall be filed with the city clerk/recorder at least thirty (30) days prior to
the expiration date of the then issued license. All renewal applications must
attach a copy of a valid state license. Any person who fails to file such
application within the time limit shall close his licensed premises on the
expiration date of the then issued license and shall keep the premises closed
for the sale, dispensing or consumption of beer or alcoholic beverages until
the date his new license is issued. If the application is filed with the
licensing official within sixty (60) days of expiration and there are no other
violations against the license, the licensing official shall prepare the new
license. If application for a Class A, B, C, or D license is not filed for
renewal by March 1 or violations other than late applications have occurred,
the license shall be considered suspended and the licensee must reapply to sell
beer or alcohol. A renewal application may be denied if the city finds any of
the following:
   A.   The licensee has attempted to transfer or assign the license to others
in violation of this title;
   B.   The licensee or any partner, officer, director, managing agent, member,
shareholder who holds at least twenty percent (20%) of the stock, or employee
who supervises or personally handles sales of alcohol to the public does not
meet the qualifications in section
3-2-5 of this chapter or the conditions in section
3-2-9 of this chapter, or is otherwise not in compliance with any requirements
of this title or state law;
   C.   The premises has been remodeled or changed in a manner that eliminates
required exits or creates closed booths or stalls where alcohol is sold and
consumed;
   D.   The licensee or his employees or agents have been convicted of or plead
guilty to more than five (5) violations of this title or state liquor control
statutes relative to the conduct of the licensed premises in a single calendar
year preceding the renewal, not including violations by patrons; and
   E.   In the case of Class A licenses, the licensee does not hold a current
LaVerkin City business license. (Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 1-
3-2024)
3-2-14: UNLAWFUL ACTS AND REGULATIONS:
It is unlawful:
   A.   License Required: For a person to buy for resale, sell or deal in
alcoholic beverages without first having procured a Class A, B, C, or D license
duly issued by the city council or otherwise complying with the provisions of
this chapter and the alcoholic beverage control act. Said license must be
publicly displayed at all times.
   B.   Purchasing:
      1.   For any retail licensee to purchase alcoholic beverages from any
person other than a properly licensed business, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      2.   For any licensee to purchase or acquire to have or possess for the
purpose of sale or distribution or consumption any beer or alcoholic beverage,
except that which shall have been lawfully purchased from a brewer or
wholesaler licensed under the provisions of the Utah alcoholic beverage control
act.
   C.   Minors:
      1.   For a licensee or any employee or agent of a licensee to sell,
furnish, dispose of, give or cause to be sold, furnished, disposed of or given
to a person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or for a person under the
age of twenty one (21) years to buy, receive, have in possession or consume,
beer or any alcoholic beverage.
      Whenever a licensee or its employee has a question regarding the age of a
customer seeking to purchase beer or other alcoholic beverages, before making
the sale it may request presentation of proof of age of the customer, and shall
require the purchaser to sign a form provided by the licensee regarding their
age, including the date of signature, and the number assigned to the person’s
proof of age by the issuing authority. Such form shall be filed alphabetically
and maintained for three (3) years subject to review by a peace officer or
representative of the state bureau of investigations or department of public
safety.
      2.   For any person to furnish, provide or offer beer or other alcoholic
beverages to a person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to knowingly
aid, induce, permit or otherwise assist in any way the consumption of beer or
other alcoholic beverage by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
   D.   Age Of Employees: For a class A licensee to employ a minor to sell or
dispose of beer or any alcoholic beverage except under the supervision of a
person twenty one (21) years of age or older who is on the premises. It shall
be illegal for a Class A, B, C or D licensee to employ a person under the age
of twenty one (21) to sell or dispose of beer or any alcoholic beverage.
   E.   Consumption By Licensee: For a licensee, when engaged in waiting on or
serving customers, to consume beer or other alcoholic beverages, or to remain
on or about the premises while in an intoxicated or disorderly condition.
   F.   Employee Purchase: For an employee of a licensee, during that
employee’s working hours or in connection with such employment, to give to or
purchase for any other person, accept a gift of, purchase for himself or
consume beer or any other alcoholic beverage.
   G.   Intoxicated And Disorderly Persons: For a licensee or other person to
serve, sell or furnish beer or alcoholic beverage to an intoxicated or
disorderly person, or for a licensee or employee of a licensee to allow or
permit an intoxicated or disorderly person to come into or remain on or about
the premises. It is the responsibility of the licensee to maintain proper order
and decorum within his establishment by taking appropriate action to prohibit
disorderly or prohibited conduct in the premises by a patron or employee.
   H.   Hours Regulated: For a Class A licensee or an employee of such licensee
to sell, deliver or give beer to a person between the hours of one o’clock (1:
00) A.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. For a class B licensee or any employee
of such to sell, deliver or give away, or allow a person to consume beer or
other alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises after twelve o’clock (12:00)
midnight and before twelve o’clock (12:00) noon on any day. Class B licensees
shall not sell, deliver, give away or allow to consume any alcoholic beverages
on any day of any regular general, primary or special election or municipal,
special district or school election until after the polls close. A Class C or
Class D licensee or any employee of such shall not sell, deliver or give away,
or allow a person to consume beer or other alcoholic beverages on the licensed
premises after ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and before eleven o’clock (11:00) A.M.
on any day. Failure to pick up and dispose of all drinks and beverages
containing alcohol which have not been fully consumed at closing hours as set
forth shall be considered permission to consume after closing hours and shall
be a violation of this subsection.
   I.   Class A License: For a class A retailer to sell beer except in original
container or to permit beer or other alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the
premises.
   J.   Class B, Class C, and Class D Consumption On Site: t shall be unlawful
for the licensee to allow or permit any person to bring, possess, or consume on
the premises any beer or other alcoholic beverage not purchased from the
licensee on said premises.
   K.   Advertising: For a person to advertise the sale of beer or alcoholic
beverages, except as may be expressly permitted by the Utah alcoholic beverage
control commission. Display of the license issued under this chapter shall be
visible to the public and shall not be considered advertisement for alcohol
consumption.
   L.   Lawful Purchasing: For any licensee to purchase or acquire to have or
possess for the purpose of sale or distribution or consumption any beer or
alcoholic beverage, except that which shall have been lawfully purchased from a
brewer or wholesaler licensed under the provisions of the Utah alcoholic
beverages control act.
   M.   Strict Liability: It shall constitute an offense of strict liability
for any licensee to permit or allow any of the violations in this section to
occur in or upon the licensed premises, and such licensee may be liable, in
addition to an agent or employee.
   N.   Consumption In Specific Places: For a person to consume alcoholic
beverages, including beer, in any place which is open to unrestricted use and
access by the public, including, but not limited to, any building or permanent
structure owned or leased by the state, county or city, city streets, roads and
alleyways, state or county highways or roads, buildings and grounds used for
school purposes, churches, parks or playgrounds.
   O.   Minor Consumption: For any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to purchase, possess or consume any beer or alcoholic beverage or
product, or for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to have any
detectable amount of alcohol in the blood or system as a result of having
consumed any beer or alcoholic beverage or product, as determined from a
totality of the circumstances, including any breath or blood test or the
administration of field sobriety tests.
   P.   Removal From Site Of Purchase: No person shall remove any beer or
alcoholic beverage from the premises at which it was purchased except in the
original container. It is a violation for a person to carry from the premises
an open container that is used for drinking purposes and contains an alcoholic
beverage.
   Q.   Sign Displayed: If malt beverage coolers or malt liquor is sold by the
beer retailer for off premises consumption; the beer retailer shall display a
sign at the location on the premises where the malt beverages or malt liquor is
sold stating: “Many malt beverages contain alcohol. Please read the label.”
   R.   Package Agency: No package agency shall be permitted or licensed.
   S.   Single Events: No single events shall be permitted or licensed.
   T.   Taverns: No taverns shall be permitted or licensed.
   U.   Illumination: Licensed premises shall be kept illuminated at all times
while occupied or open for business, and no booth or kind of stall where
alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed may be maintained unless all tables,
chairs and occupants are kept open to full view from the main floor of the
premises.
   V.   Prohibited Conduct: Acts or conduct on the licensee’s premises which
constitute a nuisance activity or are otherwise contrary to the public welfare
and morals, as addressed or defined by Utah Code Annotated sections 32B-1-104
(1), 32B-1-504, 32B-3-301 through 32B-3-305, 32B-6-406.1, and chapter 10 of
title 76, as amended, are prohibited. (Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2023-
09, 6-7-2023; Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-15: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
   A.   Grounds; Authority: The city council may suspend, revoke, refuse to
renew and the city clerk/recorder may suspend after a hearing, any Class A, B,
C, or D license issued pursuant to this chapter for any of the following
reasons:
      1.   Violence On Premises: There occurs on the licensed premises repeated
acts of violence.
      2.   Failure To Maintain Qualifications: The licensee fails to
satisfactorily maintain the capability, qualifications and reliability
requirements of an applicant for a license prescribed in section
3-2-5  of this chapter, or the conditions in section
3-2-9  of this chapter.
      3.   False Or Fraudulent Information: The licensee knowingly submits
false or fraudulent material information on any application or document filed
with the city.
      4.   Licensee Under Influence: The licensee or employees or agents of the
licensee on the premises are habitually drunk or under the influence of drugs.
      5.   Delinquent Fees Or Charges: The licensed business is delinquent for
more than sixty (60) days in the payment of any fee or charge due to the city.
      6.   Sale Or Transfer Of License: The licensee attempts to assign,
transfer or sell a license in violation of this chapter.
      7.   Failure To Maintain Records: The licensee fails to keep for a period
of two (2) years or as specified and make available to the city upon reasonable
request all invoices, records, bills or other papers and documents relating to
the purchase, sale and delivery of beer.
      8.   Felony Conviction: The licensee is convicted of a felony or any
violation of law or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages or drugs, driving
under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or alcohol/drug related reckless
driving, keeping a gambling or disorderly house, or any law or ordinance
involving moral turpitude.
      9.   Failure To Comply: The licensee violates or fails to comply with
this chapter, the Utah alcoholic beverage control act, or ceases to possess all
of the qualifications required by this chapter and the alcoholic beverage
control act.
      10.   Remodeled Or Changed Premises: The premises has been remodeled or
changed in a manner that eliminates required exits or creates closed booths or
stalls where alcohol is sold and consumed.
      11.   Failure To Maintain Proper Order: The licensee fails to maintain
proper order and decorum within his establishment by taking appropriate action
to prohibit disorderly or prohibited conduct in the premises by any patron or
employee.
   B.   Hearing: A hearing may be requested by a person:
      1.   That is denied or refused a Class A, B, C, or D license by any
officer, agent or employee of the city.
      2.   Whose Class A, B, C, or D license is revoked, restricted, qualified
or limited from that for which it was first issued.
   C.   Request; Time Limit: The request for hearing must be made in writing to
the mayor or city clerk/recorder and made within thirty (30) days following the
date notice denying, refusing, revoking, qualifying or restricting the license
is mailed or otherwise delivered by the city to the applicant or licensee at
his address as it appears on the application or license.
   D.   Examination Of Witnesses; Decision: Following receipt of a request for
hearing, the city council shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the
time and place the hearing is to be held. At the hearing, the aggrieved party
shall have the right to hear and examine any witness the city may produce in
support of his contention. The city council shall, within ten (10) days
following the conclusion of the hearing, in writing, inform the person who
requested the hearing of the decision of the city council. Such decision shall
then be final for purposes of appeal.
   E.   Hearing Procedures; Record Of Hearing: Hearings before the city council
shall be promptly scheduled upon request and shall be open to the public and
informal, with technical rules of evidence not applying to the proceeding. The
city shall prepare an official record of the hearing, including all testimony
recorded mechanically or stenographically and all exhibits introduced. The city
is not required to transcribe such record, except that, upon written request
with proper notice prior to the hearing desired to be transcribed and receipt
of a reasonable fee for transcribing such record, the city may transcribe the
record or allow for its transcription by the person requesting it.
   F.   Limitations; Criminal Complaints: This section shall not be construed
so as to afford any aggrieved party more than one hearing before the city
council, nor shall the hearing provided for in this section apply to criminal
complaint or proceeding. (Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 1-3-2024)
3-2-16: PENALTY:
In addition to the suspension or revocation of a license authorized by this
chapter, the licensee or any other person who shall violate the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2007-05, 1-17-2007)
CHAPTER 3
SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3-1: Title
3-3-2: Purpose
3-3-3: Effective Date
3-3-4: Tax Imposed
3-3-5: Penalty
3-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
LAVERKIN. (Ord. 90-01, 2-7-1990)
3-3-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Authorization Of Tax:
      1.   The forty eighth session of the Utah legislature authorized
municipalities of the state of Utah to enact sales and use tax ordinances
imposing a one percent (1%) tax. (Ord. 90-01, 2-7-1990; amd. Ord. 2007-30, 10-
17-2007)
      2.   Effective January 1, 2008, in addition to any other tax authorized
by the laws of the state of Utah and/or of this municipality, there is hereby
established, approved, and levied a sales and use tax upon the retail sales, as
defined and included in subsection 59-12-103(1), Utah Code Annotated (1953, as
amended), and as restricted in subsection 59-12-1001(1)(b), Utah Code Annotated
(1953, as amended), of three-tenths of one percent (0.30%), the same to be used
in connection with the financing of public transportation for the city of
LaVerkin, Utah. (Ord. 2007-30, 10-17-2007)
   B.   Tax Established: It is the purpose of this chapter to conform the sales
and use tax of the city to conform to the requirements of the sales and use tax
act, Utah Code Annotated chapter 12, title 59. (Ord. 90-01, 2-7-1990)
3-3-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
Subsection 3-3-2A1 of this chapter shall become effective as of one minute
after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., January 1, 1990. (Ord. 90-01, 2-7-1990; amd.
Ord. 2007-30, 10-17-2007)
3-3-4: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Imposed:
      1.   From and after one minute after the effective date hereof, there is
levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of
tangible personal property, services and meals made within the city at the rate
of one percent (1%).
      2.   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in the city of tangible personal property from any retailer on or
after the operative date hereof at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales
price of the property.
      3.   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales shall be presumed
to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or
his agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to
an out of state designation. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall
be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed and adopted by the
state tax commission. Public utilities, as defined by Utah Code Annotated title
54, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within any county
or municipality where public utilities are rendered, but the place of sale or
the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to the city shall be
as determined by the state tax commission pursuant to an appropriate formula
and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
   B.   Adoption Of State Codes; Provisions:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the sales tax and use tax act, all of the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated chapter 12, title 59, as amended, and in
force and effect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales
taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, are hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated chapter 12,
title 59, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in subsection B of
this section shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city
for the word "state" when the word is used as part of the title of the state
tax commission, or of the constitution of the state of Utah, nor shall the name
of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result
of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the state
tax commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this chapter.
      3.   If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Utah Code
Annotated section 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be required by
reason of this section. (Ord. 90-01, 2-7-1991)
      4.   There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by
which the tax is measured: (Ord. 90-01, 2-7-1991; amd. 1998 Code)
         a.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer.
         b.   The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use
tax has become due by reason of the sales transaction to any other municipality
and any county in the state under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by
that county or municipality in accordance with the sales and use tax act. (Ord.
90-01, 2-7-1990)
3-3-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 90-01, 2-7-1990; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-4-1: Intent
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: Tax Imposed
3-4-4: Exemptions To Tax
3-4-5: Existing Franchise Agreements
3-4-6: Contract With State Tax Commission
3-4-7: State Statutes Incorporated
3-4-8: Additional License Or Reporting Not Required
3-4-9: Effective Date Of Levy
3-4-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city to adopt the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to and in conformance with Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-301 et
seq., the municipal energy sales and use tax act. (Ord. 97-11, 6-18-1997)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to
the municipal energy sales and use tax.
CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE: A. A fee:
1. Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
2. That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
   B.   1. A fee similar to subsection A of this definition; or
2. Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
DELIVERED VALUE: A. The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for
sale or use in the city and includes:
1. The value of the energy itself; and
2. Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service charges or
other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to
each class of customer in the city.
   B.   Delivered value does not include the amount of a tax paid under Utah
Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1 or part 2.
ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons
supplying a de minimis amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded
by rule promulgated by the state tax commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract or agreement
granting a franchise.
FRANCHISE TAX: A. A franchise tax.
   B.   A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
   C.   Any combinations of subsection A or B of this definition.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this state,
any county, city, municipality, district, or other local governmental entity of
the state, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in
any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
   A.   Installment and credit sales;
   B.   Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
   C.   Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable
energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable
if an outright sale were made.
STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in this city for any
purpose, except sale in the regular course of business.
TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity.
USE: A. The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the
ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy.
   B.   Use does not include the sale, display, demonstration or trial of the
taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale. (Ord. 97-
11, 6-18-1997)
3-4-3: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this chapter, a tax on
every sale or use of taxable energy made within the city equaling six percent
(6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax
shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax.
   A.   Calculation: The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the
taxable energy to the consumer.
   B.   Additional Tax: The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on
taxable energy imposed by the city as authorized by Utah Code Annotated title
59, chapter 12, part 2, the local sales and use tax act. (Ord. 2007-06, 2-7-
2007)
3-4-4: EXEMPTIONS TO TAX:
   A.   No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
except as expressly provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b);
notwithstanding an exemption granted under Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, part 1, tax collection.
   B.   The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b):
      1.   Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel and special fuels subject
to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
      2.   Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under
federal law, the United States constitution or the Utah constitution;
      3.   Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale;
      4.   Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of
the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a
fuel subject to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
      5.   Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or
working in the state at the time of purchase;
      6.   The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a
fuel or energy; and
      7.   The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the
city.
   C.   The sale, storage, use or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt
from the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter, provided:
      1.   The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a
municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the
state authorized by Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 1, part 3; and
      2.   The city is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other
municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this chapter, if the
tax due under this chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality.
(Ord. 97-11, 6-18-1997)
3-4-5: EXISTING FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS:
   A.   No Alteration: This chapter shall not alter any existing franchise
agreements between the city and energy suppliers.
   B.   Credit Against Tax Due: There is a credit against the tax due from any
consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
      1.   The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the city
pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
      2.   The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy
supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
      3.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 97-11, 6-18-
1997)
3-4-6: CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
   A.   Required; Authority Of Mayor: On or before the effective date hereof,
the city shall contract with the state tax commission to perform all functions
incident to the administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and
use tax, in accordance with this chapter. This contract may be a supplement to
any existing contract with the commission to administer and collect the local
sales and use tax. The mayor, with the approval of the city manager and the
city attorney, is hereby authorized to enter supplementary agreements with the
state tax commission that may be necessary to the continued administration and
operation of the municipal energy sales and use tax ordinance enacted by this
chapter.
   B.   Monthly Payments By Supplier; Conditions: An energy supplier shall pay
the municipal energy sales and use tax revenues collected from consumers
directly to the city monthly, if:
      1.   The city is the energy supplier; or
      2.   a. The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and
use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more; and
         b.   The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use
tax.
   C.   Deduction Of Franchise Fees: An energy supplier paying the municipal
energy sales and use tax directly to the city may deduct any contractual
franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and
remit the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by
Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-307(4). (Ord. 97-11, 6-18-1997)
3-4-7: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED:
   A.   Specified; Exemptions: Except as herein provided, and except insofar as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 10,
chapter 1, part 3, municipal energy sales and use tax act, as well as this
chapter, all of the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12,
part 1, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date hereof,
insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and
59-12-119 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales and use taxes
levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully
set forth herein.
   B.   Substitution Of Terms: Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code
Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, the state is named or
referred to as the "taxing agency", the name of the city shall be substituted,
insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as Utah Code
Annotated title 10, chapter 1, part 3, as amended. Nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city for the word
"state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax
commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the city be
substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of such a
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the state tax commission in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter.
   C.   Amendments: Any amendments made to Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, part 1, as amended, which would be applicable to the city for the
purposes of carrying out this chapter are hereby incorporated herein by
reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a
Utah statute. (Ord. 97-11, 6-18-1997)
3-4-8: ADDITIONAL LICENSE OR REPORTING NOT REQUIRED:
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use
tax levied by this chapter is required, provided the energy supplier collecting
the tax has a license issued under Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-106. (Ord.
97-11, 6-18-1997)
3-4-9: EFFECTIVE DATE OF LEVY:
This chapter is effective March 31, 2007. The municipal energy sales and use
tax shall be levied beginning one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M.,
April 1, 2007. (Ord. 2007-06, 2-7-2007)
CHAPTER 5
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-5-1: Purpose And Intent
3-5-2: Definitions
3-5-3: Administration And Enforcement
3-5-4: Regulation By Permit
3-5-5: Location Restrictions
3-5-6: Permit Required
3-5-7: Application For Permit
3-5-8: Permit Fee
3-5-9: Bond Required
3-5-10: Investigation
3-5-11: Issuance Or Denial Of Permit
3-5-12: Sexually Oriented Business Employee License
3-5-13: Inspections
3-5-14: Expiration; Renewal
3-5-15: Suspension
3-5-16: Revocation
3-5-17: Judicial Review
3-5-18: Transfer Of Permit
3-5-19: Hours Of Operation
3-5-20: Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films Or Videos
3-5-21: Advertising And Outside Lighting Regulations
3-5-22: Prohibitions Regarding Minors
3-5-23: Nudity Prohibited
3-5-24: Operating Without Valid Permit
3-5-25: Defenses To Prosection
3-5-26: Immunity From Prosection
3-5-27: Criminal Penalties And Additional Relief
3-5-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and object of this chapter that the city establish reasonable
and uniform regulations governing the time, place and manner of operation of
sexually oriented businesses and their employees in the city. This chapter
shall be construed to protect the governmental interests recognized by this
chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional protections provided by the
United States and Utah constitutions. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
3-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as
follows:
CITY ADMINISTRATION: Is defined as city manager, city clerk/recorder and public
works director.
EMPLOYEE: A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business.
ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter;
   C.   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: A. The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
   B.   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover human
buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of
the female breast.
OPERATOR: Means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager,
operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES: Any premises that requires a license and/or
permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE: A person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the
state, the county, the city and special district, school district or any other
agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which
building is used for governmental purposes.
PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA: Public land which has been designated for park
or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park, playground,
nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis
courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space wilderness areas or similar public
land within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the
city park and recreation authorities.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which
is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE: A one-family, two-family, multiple- family or
mobile home, or recreational vehicle (RV) park or subdivision or use, as
defined and provided for in this code, or for lawful grandfathered uses, as
defined and provided by applicable city ordinance at the time that such park,
subdivision or use was lawfully provided for.
SCHOOL: Any public or private educational facility, including, but not limited
to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschool, kindergartens,
elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools,
middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools,
continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges and
universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include the
facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a
school.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals,
pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body
covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort
agency or seminude model studio. Sexually oriented businesses are those
businesses defined as follows:
Adult Arcade: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or
more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines,
or other image producing machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons
each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides
or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas",
as defined herein.
Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store Or Adult Video Store: A commercial
establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to the sale or rental for any form of consideration, of any one or
more of the following:
   A.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual representations
which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein;
   B.   An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as
defined herein, and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its principal business
purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the
specified materials which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas", as defined herein.
Adult Motel: A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which:
   A.   Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which
provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, and which advertises the
availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign
visible from the public right of way, or by means of any off premises
advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or
leaflets, radio or television; or
   B.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10)
hours; or
   C.   Allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a time
period of less than ten (10) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproduction which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, are regularly shown for any
form of consideration.
Escort: A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as
a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
Escort Agency: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
Massage Parlor: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity,
massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic
treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body which occurs
as a part of or in connection with "specified sexual activities", as defined
herein, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service
related thereto, exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas", as defined
herein. The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include the
practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a licensed hospital, nor
by a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by any nurse
or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon,
chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or
professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program.
Seminude Or Nude Model Studio: Any place where a person, who regularly appears
in a state of seminudity or nudity is provided for money or any form of
consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
Sexual Encounter Establishment: A business or commercial establishment, that as
one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a
place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for
the purpose of "specified sexual activities", as defined herein, when one or
more of the persons is nude or seminude. The definition of sexually oriented
businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state
engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: As used in this chapter, means and includes any of
the following:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areolae; or
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: As used in this chapter, means and includes any of
the following:
   A.   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;
   C.   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
   D.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
   E.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections A through D of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Increase in the floor
area occupied by the business by more than fifteen percent (15%) of the floor
area that existed when the permit was approved.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means and
includes any of the following:
   A.   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means;
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which
transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest
or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership
or control. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2009-06,
4-15-2009)
3-5-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   City Administration, City Council, Planning Commission: City
administration, city council and planning commission are responsible for
granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling sexually
oriented business permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented
businesses. City administration is also responsible for ascertaining whether a
proposed sexually oriented business for which a permit is being applied for
complies with all locational requirements of section
3-5-5 of this chapter, all applicable zoning laws 1  and/or regulations now in
effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date hereof and the
city master plan.
   B.   Washington County Sheriff's Department: The Washington County sheriff's
department is responsible for providing information on whether an applicant has
been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time period set forth.
   C.   Building Inspector: The building inspector shall be responsible for
inspecting a proposed, permitted or nonpermitted sexually oriented business in
order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and
ordinances. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
3-5-4: REGULATION BY PERMIT:
"Sexually oriented businesses", as defined herein, are regulated in the city by
permit. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
3-5-5: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
The city's zoning title hereby requires that sexually oriented businesses shall
be permitted only as provided in section
3-5-4 of this chapter. Permits for sexually oriented business shall be required
and governed by the procedures and policies specified in section
3-5-11 of this chapter. In addition, any sexually oriented business shall be
subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented
business, except as provided in section
3-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
   B.   It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented
business within a radius of one thousand feet (1,000') of: (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-
1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
      1.   Any religious institution;
      2.   Any school;
      3.   Any residential district;
      4.   Any public park;
      5.   Any lot devoted to residential use; or
      6.   Any boys club, girls club or similar existing youth organization.
   C.   It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented
business within a radius of one thousand feet (1,000') of another such
business.
   D.   It is unlawful to operate or cause or permit the operation,
establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business within
the same building, structure or portion thereof, or causes the substantial
enlargement of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or
portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
   E.   As regarding subsections B, C and D of this section, distance shall be
measured from property line of the adjoining property to any public entrance or
exit of the sexually oriented business in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
3-5-6: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No sexually oriented business shall operate without a valid sexually oriented
business permit issued by the city for the particular type of business. For
purposes of application, a sexually oriented business shall be considered a
conditional use. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
3-5-7: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Required: An application for a permit must be made on a form provided
by the city. Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall
file with the city an original and two (2) copies of a sworn permit application
on the standard application form supplied by the city.
   B.   Information; Documents Required: The completed application shall
contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following
documents:
      1.   If the applicant is:
         a.   An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is at least eighteen (18)
years of age;
         b.   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and
the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any;
         c.   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the
date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing
under the laws of Utah, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and
principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporation agent and
the address of the registered office for service of process.
      2.   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he must state: a) the sexually
oriented business's fictitious name; and b) submit the required Utah
registration documents.
      3.   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed
pursuant to subsection B1 of this section has, within the two (2) or five (5)
year period, as specified in subsection 3-5-11C10 of this chapter, immediately
preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a specified criminal
act and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and
the place of conviction.
      4.   Whether the applicant has any civil and/or criminal suits pending in
any state. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
      5.   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed
pursuant to subsection B1 of this section has had a previous permit or license
under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from
another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and
location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant
to subsection B1 of this section has been a partner in a partnership or an
officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is permitted
under this chapter whose permit has previously been denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for
which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of
denial, suspension or revocation. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd.
1998 Code)
      6.   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to
subsection B1 of this section holds any other permits and/or licenses under
this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another
city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted
businesses.
      7.   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, if
any.
      8.   The applicant's mailing addresses and residential address.
      9.   A recent photograph of the applicant.
      10.   The applicant's driver's permit number, social security number and
his/her state or federally issued tax identification number.
      11.   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6").
      12.   A current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within
thirty (30) days prior to application by a Utah registered land surveyor
depicting the property lines and the structures containing any established
existing uses regulated by this chapter within a radius of one thousand feet
(1,000') of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established
religious institution/synagogue, school or public park or recreation area
within a radius of one thousand feet (1,000') of the property to be certified;
and the property lines of any residentially zoned area or residential property
within a radius of one thousand feet (1,000') of the property to be certified.
For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established
if it is in existence (or has been approved by city council) at the time an
application is submitted.
      13.   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
an individual, he/she must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity
which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten percent
(10%) or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a
permit as applicant.
      14.   If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business which
shall exhibit on the premises films, videocassettes or other video
reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, then said person shall comply with the application requirements stated
at section
3-5-20 of this chapter.
   C.   Supplement Information: Applicants for a permit under this section
shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information
required by this section in the event that said information changes in any way
from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said
continuing duty within thirty (30) days from the date of such change, by
supplementing the application on file with city administration shall be grounds
for suspension of a permit.
   D.   Improperly Completed Application: In the event that city administration
determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed
the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, city administration
shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten
(10) days to properly complete the application. (The time period for granting
or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is
allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.)
   E.   Qualification Required: The applicant must be qualified according to
the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to
be in compliance with health, fire and building codes and laws.
   F.   Nonrefundable Application Fee: The applicant shall be required to pay a
nonrefundable application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) at the time of
filing an application under this section.
   G.   Location Requirements: Prior to obtaining any permit or license to
operate a "sexually oriented business", as defined in this chapter and as part
of any application for a permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain
from the city or its designee a certification that the proposed location of
such business complies with the locational requirements of section
3-5-5 of this chapter.
   H.   Permit In Addition To Others: The fact that a person possesses other
types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the
requirements of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.
   I.   Consent To Chapter Provisions: By applying for a permit under this
chapter, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of
this chapter and to the exercise by city administration, the Washington County
sheriff's department and all other city agencies charged with enforcing the
laws, ordinances and codes applicable in the city or their respective
responsibilities under this chapter.
   J.   Employee License: The applicant shall be required to provide the city
with the names of any and all employees who are required to be licensed
pursuant to section
3-5-12 of this chapter. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a
permit is granted or renewed. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
3-5-8: PERMIT FEE:
There is hereby imposed and levied an annual license fee for each sexually
oriented business permit. This fee is in addition to the regular license fee
established through title 3-1 that any business would pay, and other license
fees which may be required by this title. Such fees are to be set by resolution
and may change from time to time. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd.
Ord. 2004-17, 4-21-2004)
3-5-9: BOND REQUIRED:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business permit shall post with the city
clerk/recorder a cash or corporate surety bond payable to the city in an amount
established by resolution. Any fines assessed against the business, officers or
managers for violations of city ordinances shall be taken from this bond if not
paid in cash within ten (10) days after notice of the fine, unless an appeal is
filed as provided by this chapter. In the event the funds are drawn against the
cash or surety bond to pay such fines, the bond shall be replenished to its
prior amount within fifteen (15) days of the date of notice of any draw against
it. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. Ord. 2004-17, 4-21-2004)
3-5-10: INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Required: Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city
and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the city or its
designee, shall stamp and date the application as received and shall thereafter
send photocopies of the application to the Washington County sheriff's
department and any other city agencies responsible for enforcement of health,
fire and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly
conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed
sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law
and as set forth in this chapter. Said investigation shall be completed within
twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the city or its designee. At
the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate
on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the
application, date it, sign it and, in the event it disapproves, state the
reasons therefor. The Washington County sheriff's department shall only be
required to certify the NCIC records check. The Washington County sheriff's
department shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications.
   B.   Return To City: A department or agency shall disapprove an application
if it finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation
of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in
effect in the city. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each
department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application
to the city or its designee. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. Ord.
2004-17, 4-21-2004)
3-5-11: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   Time Limitation: City administration shall grant or deny an application
for a permit within thirty (30) days from the date of its proper filing. Upon
the expiration of the thirtieth day, unless the city notifies the applicant
that it needs additional and reasonable time to process the application, the
applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the business for which the
permit is sought, unless and until the city, or its designee, notifies the
applicant of denial and states the reason for that denial.
   B.   Grant Of Application For Permit:
      1.   City administration shall grant the application unless one or more
of the criteria set forth in subsection C of this section is present.
      2.   The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the
sexually oriented business. The permit shall also indicate that the sexually
oriented business, whether permitted or not, may be subject to indecency
pursuant to the United States supreme court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theatre,
Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991). The permit shall be posted inside, in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business, so that it can
be read easily at any time.
   C.   Denial Of Application For Permit: City administration shall deny the
application for any of the following reasons:
      1.   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue on his/her payment
to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him/her or
imposed upon him/her in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      3.   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit
by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve
(12) months, or residing with a person whose permit to operate a sexually
oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months.
      4.   An applicant has failed to provide information required by this
chapter or permit application for the issuance of the permit or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form.
      5.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not
been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes by
the department or agency responsible under law for investigating said
compliance.
      6.   The application or permit fees required by this chapter have not
been paid.
      7.   An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is not
in compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, the zoning locational requirements for a sexually oriented business
under sections
3-5-4 and
3-5-5 of this chapter.
      8.   The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance
or court order.
      9.   The applicant has a permit under this chapter which has been
suspended or revoked.
      10.   An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" for
which:
         a.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for a "specified criminal act", which
acts are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected
with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to,
distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution,
pandering or tax violations;
         b.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for a "specified criminal act",
which acts are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes
connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited
to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution,
pandering or tax violations;
         c.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses for a
"specified criminal act," which acts are sexual crimes against children, sexual
abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business,
including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or materials harmful
to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax violations; offenses occurring within
any twenty four (24) month period;
         d.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
of disqualification of the applicant;
         e.   An applicant who has been convicted of the above described
"specified criminal acts" may qualify for a sexually oriented business permit
only when the time period required above has elapsed. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995,
eff. 9-7-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
         f.   The applicant has been convicted of two (2) or more "specified
criminal acts," as described above.
      11.   An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ, an employee who
does not have a valid license as required in section
3-5-12 of this chapter.
   D.   Notification Of Denial: If city administration denies the application,
city administration shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the
reason for the denial.
   E.   No Change Within Twelve Months: If a person applies for a permit for a
particular location within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of
denial of a previous application for a permit at the location, and there has
not been an intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be
expected to lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for
denial, the application shall be denied. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995;
amd. Ord. 2004-17, 4-21-2004)
3-5-12: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE:
   A.   Required; Fee: Each individual to be employed in a sexually oriented
business shall be required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee
license. Such fee shall be established by resolution and may change from time
to time. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2004-17, 4-
21-2004)
   B.   Information Required: Before any applicant may be issued a sexually
oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be
provided by city administration the following information:
      1.   The applicant's name or any other names (including "stage" names) or
aliases used by the individual;
      2.   Age, date and place of birth;
      3.   Height, weight, hair and eye color;
      4.   Present residence address and telephone number;
      5.   Present business address and telephone number;
      6.   State driver's license or identification number;
      7.   Social security number; and
      8.   Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least eighteen
(18) years of age.
      9.   Attach to the application form as provided above, a color photograph
of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face and the applicant's
fingerprints on a form provided by the Washington County sheriff's department.
Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
      10.   A statement detailing the license or permit history of the
applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing
of the application, including whether such applicant is or was employed by, or
previously operated or is seeking to operate a sexually oriented business, in
this or any other county, city, state or country, or has ever had such a
license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended.
In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the
name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reasons
for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial,
revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application.
      11.   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal
act," as defined in subsection 3-5-11C10 of this chapter. This information
shall include the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo
contendere and identifying the convicting jurisdiction.
      12.   City administration shall refer the sexually oriented business
employee license application to the Washington County sheriff's department for
an investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the
application. The application process shall be completed within thirty (30) days
from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, city
administration shall issue a license, unless the report from the sheriff's
department finds that one or more of the following is true:
         a.   That the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statements of a material fact in the application for a license, or
in any report or record required to be filed with the sheriff's department or
other department of the city;
         b.   That the applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
         c.   That the applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal
act," as defined in subsection 3-5-11C10 of this chapter;
         d.   That the sexually oriented business employee license is to be
used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute,
rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this chapter;
         e.   That the applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee
license revoked by the city within two (2) years of the date of the current
application.
   C.   Renewal Of License:
      1.   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to
annual renewal by city administration upon the written application of the
applicant and a finding by city administration and the Washington County
sheriff's department that the applicant has not been convicted of any
"specified criminal act", as defined in subsection 3-5-11C10 of this chapter,
or committed any act during the existence of this previous license period,
which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application.
      2.   The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment of all
license fees pertaining to the sexually oriented business which are established
through this title and title 3-1 of this code. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-
1995; amd. Ord. 2004-17, 4-21-2004)
3-5-13: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Permission Mandatory: An applicant or permittee shall permit
representatives of the city, the county health department and the fire
department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
   B.   Unlawful To Prohibit: It shall be unlawful, regardless of whether or
not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, to prohibit
such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is occupied or open
for business. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. Ord. 2004-17, 4-21-
2004)
3-5-14: EXPIRATION; RENEWAL:
   A.   Application; Time Limits: Each permit shall expire one year from the
date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in
section
3-5-7 of this chapter (for renewals, filing of original survey shall be
sufficient if the original survey has not changed). Application for renewal
shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when
made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of
the permit will not be affected.
   B.   Denial: When city administration denies renewal of the permit, the
applicant shall not be issued a permit under this chapter for one year from the
date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city or its designee, finds that
the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has been corrected, the
applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed
since the date denial became final. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd.
Ord. 2004-17, 4-21-2004)
3-5-15: SUSPENSION:
   A.   Conditions: City administration shall suspend a permit for a period not
to exceed thirty (30) days if he/she determines that a permittee, or an
employee of a permittee, has:
      1.   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
or
      2.   Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages while working in the
sexually oriented business premises; or
      3.   Refused to allow an inspection of sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter; or
      4.   Knowingly permitted gambling or other illegal activities by any
person on the sexually oriented business premises; or
      5.   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building,
fire, health or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal,
state or local, said determination being based on investigation by the
division, department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In
the event of such statute, code, ordinance or regulation violation, the city or
its designee, shall promptly notify the permittee of a seven (7) day period in
which to correct the violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation
before the expiration of the seven (7) day period, the city or its designee
shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of the
suspension;
      6.   Engaged in permit transfer contrary to section
3-5-18 of this chapter. In the event that the city or its designee, suspends a
permit on the ground that a permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to
section
3-5-18 of this chapter, city administration shall forthwith notify the
permittee of this suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the
applicable section of this chapter has been satisfied;
      7.   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of
operation as set forth in section
3-5-19 of this chapter;
      8.   Knowingly employ a person who does not have a valid license as
required in section
3-5-12 of this chapter.
   B.   Remain In Effect: The suspension shall remain in effect until the
violation of the statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been
corrected. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. Ord. 2004-17, 4-21-2004)
3-5-16: REVOCATION:
   A.   Prior Suspensions: City administration shall revoke a permit if a cause
of suspension as set forth in section
3-5-15 of this chapter occurs and the permit has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months.
   B.   Determinations For Revocation: City administration shall revoke a
permit upon determining that:
      1.   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant's
opportunity for obtaining a permit; or
      2.   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances in or on the premises; or
      3.   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises; or
      4.   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was suspended; or
      5.   A permittee has been convicted of a "specified criminal act", as
defined in this chapter, for which the time period required in subsection 3-5-
11C of this chapter has not elapsed; or
      6.   On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a
person committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted premises,
constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained,
and the person was an employee of the sexually oriented business at the time
the offenses were committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect on the revocation of the permit; or
      7.   A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or fees
related to a sexually oriented business; or
      8.   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or any other specified
sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
      9.   A permittee has been operating more than one sexually oriented
business under a single roof.
   C.   Remain In Effect: When city administration revokes a permit, the
revocation shall continue for one year and the permittee shall not be issued a
sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, city administration finds that the
basis for revocation under this section has been corrected, the applicant shall
be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date
revocation became effective. If the permit was revoked under this section, an
applicant may not be granted another permit until the time required under this
section has elapsed. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. Ord. 2004-17,
4-21-2004)
3-5-17: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or
suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek
prompt review of such administrative action through the city council or special
city review board, if one is established by the city. If the denial, suspension
or revocation is affirmed upon review, the applicant may appeal the decision to
district court. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. Ord. 2004-17, 4-21-
2004)
3-5-18: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
   A.   Operation; Designated Place: A permittee shall not operate a sexually
oriented business under the authority or permit at any place other than the
address designated in the application for permit.
   B.   Requirements For Transfer: A permittee shall not transfer his/her
permit to another person unless and until such other person satisfies the
following requirements:
      1.   Obtains an amendment to the permit from city administration, which
provides that he/she is now the permittee, which amendment may be obtained only
if he/she has completed and properly filed an application with city
administration, setting forth the information called for under section
3-5-7 of this chapter in the application; and
      2.   Pays a transfer fee of twenty percent (20%) of the annual permit fee
as set by this resolution.
   C.   Suspension Or Revocation Proceedings: No permit may be transferred when
city administration has notified the permittee that suspension or revocation
proceedings have been or will be brought against the permittee.
   D.   Location Transfer Prohibited: A permittee shall not transfer his permit
to another location.
   E.   Revocation For Attempt: Any attempt to transfer a permit either
directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void and
the permit shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd.
Ord. 2004-17, 4-21-2004)
3-5-19: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   Operator: It shall be unlawful and a person commits a class B
misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said
business under this chapter, and allows such business to remain open for
business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a
performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a
service, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. of any particular day.
   B.   Employee: It shall be unlawful and a person commits a class B
misdemeanor if working as an employee of a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under
this chapter, said employee engages in a performance, solicits a performance,
makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a service or solicits a service between
the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. of
any particular day. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
3-5-20: EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel and regardless of whether or not a
permit has been issued to said business under this chapter, which exhibits on
the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet
of floor space, a film, videocassette or other video reproduction which depicts
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined
herein, shall comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Diagram Of Premises: Upon application for a sexually oriented business
permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof, specifying the location of one or more manager's
stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any
portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's
station may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area with no
dimension greater than eight feet (8'). The diagram shall also designate the
place at which this permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's
blueprint shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object
and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to
show the various internal dimensions of all areas on the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). City administration
may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant
adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the
configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
   B.   Sworn As To Truth And Accuracy: The application shall be sworn to be
true and correct by the applicant.
   C.   Alteration Prohibited: No alteration in the configuration or location
of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city or
its designee.
   D.   On Duty At All Times: It is the duty of the owner and operator of the
premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
   E.   Unobstructed View; Maintained:
      1.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight
from the manager's station.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in subsection E1 of this section remains unobstructed
by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or persons
at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted.
   F.   Occupancy Of Viewing Room: No viewing room may be occupied by more than
one person at any one time.
   G.   Restrooms: Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment
or any of the business merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only one
person being allowed in the restroom per stall, and only one person in any
stall at a time, and requiring that patrons shall not be allowed access to
manager's station areas.
   H.   Lighting Fixtures; Illumination:
      1.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access and an illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles, as measured
at the floor level.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the owner and operator and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
3-5-21: ADVERTISING AND OUTSIDE LIGHTING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Advertising:
      1.   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a class B misdemeanor if
he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under
this chapter, and advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by any
applicable state statute or local ordinance.
      2.   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a class B misdemeanor if
he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under
this chapter, and displays or otherwise exhibits the materials and/or
performances at such sexually oriented business in any advertising which is
visible outside the premises. This prohibition shall not extend to advertising
of the existence or location of such sexually oriented business. (Ord. 95-12,
9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
      3.   All signs advertising the existence or location of a sexually
oriented business must be attached to the building permitted for the sexually
oriented business and not exceed the height of the building. A maximum of one
sign per side of building and a maximum of four (4) signs per building shall be
permitted. Signs shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
   B.   Interior Premises Not Visible: The permittee shall not allow any
portion of the interior premises to be visible from outside the premises.
   C.   Illumination: All off street parking areas and premises entries of the
sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of
operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/
or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually
oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to
reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be
shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
   D.   Compliance Required: Nothing contained in this section shall relieve
the operator of a sexually oriented business from complying with the
requirements of this chapter, commonly known as the sexually oriented business
ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time, or any subsequently enacted
city ordinances or regulations. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
3-5-22: PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS:
It is unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless or whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under
this chapter, and knowingly or with reasonable cause to know, permit, suffer or
allow:
   A.   Admittance: Admittance of a person under eighteen (18) years of age to
the business premises.
   B.   Remain At Premises: A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain
at the business premises.
   C.   Purchase: A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods
or services at the business premises.
   D.   Work As Employee: A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to
work at the business premises as an employee. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-
1995)
3-5-23: NUDITY PROHIBITED:
   A.   Case Authority: The United States supreme court decision in Barnes v.
Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), which upheld the rights of cities to
prohibit live public exposure of a person's private parts, specifically applies
to sexually oriented businesses (regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued to said businesses under this chapter), including said businesses where
no alcoholic beverages are sold, served or consumed at the premises.
   B.   Suspension Of Permit: Public nudity is prohibited within the city,
including any sexually oriented business. Any sexually oriented business which
is found in violation of this section shall have its permit suspended pursuant
to the provisions of section
3-5-15 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
3-5-24: OPERATING WITHOUT VALID PERMIT:
   A.   Criminal Applicability: In addition to the criminal provisions found at
other sections of this chapter, the following additional criminal provisions
shall also apply to sexually oriented businesses.
   B.   Specified: It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated a
sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued for said business under this chapter, and said person knows or should
know that: (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
      1.   The business does not have a sexually oriented business permit under
this chapter; (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
      2.   The business has a permit which is under suspension;
      3.   The business has a permit which has been revoked; or
      4.   The business has a permit which has expired. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995,
eff. 9-7-1995)
3-5-25: DEFENSES TO PROSECTION:
   A.   Modeling Classes: It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of
this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:
      1.   By a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
      2.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      3.   In a structure:
         a.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicated a nude person is available for viewing; and
         b.   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
         c.   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
   B.   Employee's Use Of Specific Facilities: It is a defense to prosecution
for a violation of this chapter that an employee of a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not it is permitted under this chapter,
exposed any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a
restroom, or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is
accessible only to employees. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
3-5-26: IMMUNITY FROM PROSECTION:
The city and its designee, the Washington County sheriff's department and all
other departments and agencies, and all other city officers, agents and
employees, charged with enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be
immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass
upon a sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of authority
conferred by this chapter. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
3-5-27: CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND ADDITIONAL RELIEF:
   A.   Injunction; Prosecution: A person who operates or causes to be operated
a sexually oriented business without having a valid permit due to locational
restrictions is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for
criminal violation. If an injunction must be sought, attorney fees and costs
will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the sexually oriented
business. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-1995)
   B.   Misdemeanor Charge: In addition to whatever penalties are applicable
under the Utah criminal code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply
with or violates any of the criminal provisions of this chapter, such person
upon conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and
shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation or
noncompliance shall be considered as a separate offense. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995,
eff. 9-7-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Additional Remedies: Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict
the city from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent
jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or
noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be
limited to, an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for
damages.
   D.   Code Enforcement: Further, nothing in this section shall be construed
to prohibit the city from prosecuting any violation of this chapter by means of
a code enforcement board, established pursuant to the authority as provided by
the laws of the state.
   E.   Cumulative Remedies: All remedies and penalties provided for in this
section shall be cumulative and independently available to the city and the
city shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this
section to the full extent allowed by law. (Ord. 95-12, 9-6-1995, eff. 9-7-
1995)
CHAPTER 6
TEMPORARY BUSINESS LICENSES FOR SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT
MERCHANTS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: License Required
3-6-3: Application For Temporary License; Fee
3-6-4: Investigation And Issuance Of Temporary License
3-6-5: Fees
3-6-6: Temporary License Provisions
3-6-7: Revocation Or Denial Of License
3-6-8: Appeal
3-6-9: Additional Requirements
3-6-10: Exceptions
3-6-11: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR: Any individual, whether or not a resident of the city,
traveling either by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or other type of conveyance from
place to place, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders
for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature
whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in
the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a
sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he is collecting advance
payments on such sales; provided, that such definition shall include any person
who, for himself, or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases,
uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, hotel or motel
room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the
sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
PEDDLER: Shall include any person, whether or not a resident of the city,
traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of conveyance, from
place to place, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting
goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm
products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making
sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from
place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, motor
vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance; and further provided,
that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to
purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a peddler, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster".
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT OR ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person, firm or
corporation, whether as owner, agent, cosignee or employee, whether or not a
resident of the city, who engages in a temporary business of selling and
delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who in furtherance
of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor
vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, public room in any hotel, motel, lodging house,
apartment, shop or any street, alley or other place within the city, for the
exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or
at public auction. The person, firm or corporation so engaged shall not be
relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of
associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer,
or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or
in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS LICENSE: A business license issued to any transient
merchant, itinerant merchant or vendor or peddler for a period of thirty (30)
days or less. (Ord. 2004-04, 2-4-2004; amd. Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-
2008)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for:
   A.   Transient Merchant, Itinerant Merchant Or Vendor: A transient merchant,
itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor to engage in such business without first
obtaining a temporary license therefor, in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
   B.   Peddler: Any person to engage in the business of peddler without first
obtaining a temporary license therefor, as provided in this chapter.
   C.   Solicitor Or Canvasser: Any solicitor or canvasser to engage in such
business without first obtaining a temporary license therefor, in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-04, 2-4-2004)
3-6-3: APPLICATION FOR TEMPORARY LICENSE; FEE:
   A.   Required; Contents: Applicants for temporary licenses under this
chapter shall file a sworn application in writing signed by the applicant if an
individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a
corporation, or by an agent, including a state or regional agent, with the city
clerk/recorder, which shall give the following information:
      1.   The name of the applicant, and if the applicant is an employee or
agent of a corporation, the name of the corporation.
      2.   The address of the applicant, and if the applicant is an agent or
employee of a corporation, the address of the corporation.
      3.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold and from whom or where the applicant obtains the goods to be sold.
      4.   If the applicant is employed by or an agent of another person, the
name and permanent address of such other person.
      5.   The length of time for which the applicant desires to engage in
business within the city.
      6.   The places within the city where the applicant proposes to carry on
his or her business.
      7.   A list of the other municipalities in which the applicant has
engaged in business within the six (6) month period preceding the date of the
application.
      8.   A photograph of the applicant, taken within six (6) months
immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which photograph shall
be two inches by two inches (2" x 2"), showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
      9.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any of his
employers, have been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any
municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefor.
      10.   If the applicant desires to sell fresh vegetables, fruits, meats or
other foodstuffs, a statement by a reputable physician of the state, dated not
more than ten (10) days prior to submission of the application, certifying the
applicant to be free of infectious, contagious or communicable diseases.
      11.   If the applicant is employed by another person, documents showing
that the person for which the applicant proposes to do business is authorized
to do business within the state.
   B.   Fee: At the time of filing the application, a fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00), which shall be deposited with the city clerk/recorder, is
required. (Ord. 2004-04, 2-4-2004)
3-6-4: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF TEMPORARY LICENSE:
   A.   Referral To Law Enforcement Agency: On receiving the application, the
city clerk/recorder shall refer it to the city law enforcement agency, who
shall within five (5) days thereof, cause such investigation of the applicant's
business and moral character to be made as it deems reasonable and necessary
for the protection of the public good.
   B.   Unsatisfactory Result Of Investigation: If, as a result of the
investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to
be unsatisfactory, the city law enforcement agency shall endorse such upon the
application, together with a statement of its reasons therefor, and return the
application to the city clerk/recorder who shall notify the applicant that his
application has been disapproved and that no temporary license will be issued.
   C.   Satisfactory Result Of Investigation: If, as a result of such
investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant is
found to be satisfactory, the city law enforcement agency shall endorse such
upon the application and return it to the city clerk/recorder who shall, upon
payment of the prescribed fee, issue a temporary license. Such temporary
license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the
name, address and photograph of the licensee and the kind of goods to be sold
pursuant to the application, together with an expiration date. (Ord. 2004-04,
2-4-2004)
3-6-5: FEES:
   A.   Established: The fee which shall be charged by the city clerk/recorder
for any temporary license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00).
   B.   Interstate Commerce: None of the fees provided for by this chapter
shall be applied as to engage an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any
case, where a fee is believed by the licensee or applicant for temporary
license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, he or she may apply
to the mayor for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be
discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair to interstate commerce. Such application
may be made before, at or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed
fee. (Ord. 2004-04, 2-4-2004)
3-6-6: TEMPORARY LICENSE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Issuance: The city clerk/recorder shall issue to each licensee his
temporary license, which shall contain the words "licensed solicitor",
"licensed transient merchant" or "licensed peddler", as the case may be, for
which the application was made and the temporary license issued.
   B.   Exhibit Temporary License: Any person licensed pursuant to this chapter
shall exhibit such temporary license at the request of any citizen of the city.
   C.   Produce Temporary License Upon Request: It shall be the duty of any
city law enforcement agency to require any person seen soliciting, canvassing
or peddling, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to
produce his or her temporary license and to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   D.   Expiration Of Temporary License: All temporary licenses issued pursuant
to this chapter shall expire on the date specified on the license. (Ord. 2004-
04, 2-4-2004)
3-6-7: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
Revocation or denial of a temporary license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be as provided in section
3-1-13 of this title. (Ord. 2004-04, 2-4-2004)
3-6-8: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the city law enforcement agency or the
city clerk/recorder in the denial of a temporary license issued pursuant to
this chapter, or by the action of the city council, may appeal. Such appeal
shall be taken by filing with the city council within fourteen (14) days after
notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known
address or address on the business application, a written statement setting
forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city council shall set a time and
place for the hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given
to the applicant in the same manner as provided in section
3-1-13 of this title. (Ord. 2004-04, 2-4-2004)
3-6-9: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
This chapter shall not be construed so as to waive the provisions and
requirements of any other ordinance of the city and the requirements and fees
required herein shall be in addition to any other requirements and fees of any
other ordinance of the City. (Ord. 2004-04, 2-4-2004)
3-6-10: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Church Or Charity: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
any individual who is, at the time he is engaged in any activity which would
otherwise require licensing by this chapter, engaged in an activity which is
authorized by any church or charity which has a permanent structure located
within the State, provided such church or charity has had such permanent
structure for at least six (6) months prior to the date when the individual
engaged in the activity would otherwise require licensing by this chapter.
   B.   Food Trucks: Where there is a conflict between the provisions of this
chapter and applicable State law with regards to food trucks, as defined by
State law, the State law provisions shall supersede the provisions of this
chapter. Where there is no conflict, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply. [See 11-56-101 through 11-56-106, Utah Code Annotated (1953 as
amended).] (Ord. 2017-12, 12-6-2017)
3-6-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2004-04, 2-4-2004)
ARTICLE A. RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATIONS
SECTION:
3-6A-1: Applicability
3-6A-2: Purpose
3-6A-3: No Other City License Or Approval Required
3-6A-4: Definitions
3-6A-5: Exemptions
3-6A-6: Solicitation Prohibited
3-6A-7: Registration Of Solicitors
3-6A-8: Application Form
3-6A-9: Written Disclosures
3-6A-10: When Registration Begins
3-6A-11: Issuance Of Certificates
3-6A-12: Form Of Certificate And Identification Badge
3-6A-13: Maintenance Of Registry
3-6A-14: Nontransferability Of Certificates
3-6A-15: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of A Certificate Of Registration
3-6A-16: Appeal
3-6A-17: Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
3-6A-18: No Solicitation Notice
3-6A-19: Duties Of Solicitors
3-6A-20: Time Of Day Restrictions
3-6A-21: Buyer's Right To Cancel
3-6A-22: Penalties
3-6A-1: APPLICABILITY:
To the extent that the activities of any person, business, entity, organization
or institution fall within and are regulated by this chapter, the terms and
provisions hereof shall apply and not those of chapter 1 of this title. (Ord.
2015-02, 2-18-2015)
3-6A-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Interests:
      1.   Residents of the city have an inalienable interest in their personal
safety, well being, and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability
to provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief,
political or charitable activities, and goods and services lawfully in
commerce.
      2.   The city has a substantial interest in protecting the well being,
tranquility, personal safety, and privacy of its citizens, which includes the
ability to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property.
      3.   The city also has a substantial interest in protecting citizens from
fraud or otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as criminal
activity.
   B.   Balance: There must be a balance between these substantial interests of
the city and its citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this article on
the rights of those who are regulated.
   C.   Promotion Of Interests: Based on the collective experiences of city
officials derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and
property from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens
regarding door to door solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement
officers and those affected by door to door canvassing and solicitation, as
well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional
protections afforded and denied persons seeking to engage in door to door
solicitation, the city adopts this article to promote the city's substantial
interests in:
      1.   Respecting citizens' decisions regarding privacy in their
residences;
      2.   Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
      3.   Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious
belief, political position, or charitable activities; and
      4.   Permitting truthful and nonmisleading door to door solicitation
regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
   D.   Findings: The city finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set
forth in this article are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the city
interests referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights of
those regulated. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-3: NO OTHER CITY LICENSE OR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Registered solicitors and persons exempt from registration need not
apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the city
to engage in door to door solicitation.
   B.   Any business licensed by the city under another city ordinance that
uses employees, independent contractors, or agents for door to door
solicitation in an effort to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to the
business, shall be required to have such solicitors obtain a certificate,
unless otherwise exempt from registration.
   C.   Those responsible persons or entities associated with registered
solicitors need not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or
registration from the city, provided they do not establish a temporary or fixed
place of business in the city.
   D.   Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other
requirement of federal, state, or other local government law regarding any
license, permit, or certificate that a registered solicitor is otherwise
required to have or maintain. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ADVOCATING: Speech or conduct intended to inform, promote, or support religious
belief, political position, or charitable activities.
APPEALS OFFICER: The city council or designee of the city responsible for
receiving the information from the city and appellant regarding the denial or
suspension of a certificate and issuing a decision as required by this article.
APPELLANT: The person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a
certificate, either personally as an applicant or registered solicitor, or on
behalf of the applicant or registered solicitor.
APPLICANT: An individual who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and not a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity who
applies for a certificate permitting door to door solicitation.
APPLICATION FORM: A standardized form provided by the city to an applicant to
be completed and submitted as part of registration.
BCI: An original or copy, dated no older than one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to the date of the application, of either: a) a Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification verified criminal history report
personal to the applicant; or b) verification by the Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification that no criminal history rising to the
level of a disqualifying status exists for the applicant.
BUSINESS: A commercial enterprise licensed by the city as a person or entity
under this title, having a fixed or temporary physical location within the
city.
CERTIFICATE: A temporary, annual, or renewal certificate permitting door to
door solicitation in the city applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of
this article.
CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES: Advocating by persons or entities that either are, or
support, a charitable organization.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: A. Includes any person, joint venture, partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, association, group, or other entity
that is:
1. A benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane,
patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public
health, environmental or conservation, or civic organization; or
2. For the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter
fraternal association; or
3. Established for any charitable purpose; and
4. Tax exempt under applicable provisions of the internal revenue code of 1986,
as amended, and qualified to solicit and receive tax deductible contributions
from the public for charitable purposes.
   B.   Charitable organization includes a chapter, branch, area, or office, or
similar affiliate or any person soliciting contributions within the state for a
charitable organization that has its principal place of business outside the
city or state of Utah 1 .
COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL: A person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen
(18) years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage
in rational thought, conversation, and conduct.
COMPLETED APPLICATION: A fully completed application form, a BCI, two (2)
copies of the original identification relied on by the applicant to establish
proof of identity, and the tendering of fees.
CRIMINALLY CONVICTED: The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of no
contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not
been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal
conviction is that offense of which the applicant or registered solicitor was
convicted, without regard to the reduced status of the charge after completion
of conditions of probation or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in
abeyance or diversion agreement.
DISQUALIFYING STATUS: Anything specifically defined in this article as
requiring the denial or suspension of a certificate, and any of the following:
   A.   Applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of: 1)
felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a
minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4) sexual
assault of any kind.
   B.   Criminal charges currently pending against applicant or registered
solicitor for: 1) felony homicide; 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or
exploiting a minor; 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances; or 4)
sexual assault of any kind.
   C.   Applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of a
felony within the last ten (10) years.
   D.   Applicant or registered solicitor has been incarcerated in a federal or
state prison within the past five (5) years.
   E.   Applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of a
misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: 1) moral
turpitude, or 2) violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property.
   F.   A final civil judgment has been entered against applicant or registered
solicitor within the last five (5) years indicating that: 1) applicant or
registered solicitor had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation; or 2) that a debt of applicant or registered solicitor was
nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4),
(a)(6), or (a)(19).
   G.   Applicant or registered solicitor is currently on parole or probation
to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under
house arrest or subject to a tracking device.
   H.   Applicant or registered solicitor has an outstanding arrest warrant
from any jurisdiction.
   I.   Applicant or registered solicitor is currently subject to a protective
order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: The practice of engaging in or attempting to engage
in conversation with any person at a residence, whether or not that person is a
competent individual, while making or seeking to make or facilitate a home
solicitation sale, or attempting to further the sale of goods and/or services.
ENTITY: Includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or
other lawful entity, organization, society or association.
FEES: The cost charged to applicant or registered solicitor for the issuance of
a certificate and/or identification badge, which shall not exceed the
reasonable costs of processing the application and issuing the certificate and/
or identification badge.
FINAL CIVIL JUDGMENT: A civil judgment that would be recognized under state law
as a judgment to which collateral estoppel would apply.
GOODS: One or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise, perishables
of any kind, subscriptions, or manufactured products offered, provided, or
sold.
HOME SOLICITATION SALE: To make or attempt to make a sale of goods or services
by a solicitor at a residence by means of door to door solicitation, regardless
of:
   A.   The means of payment or consideration used for the purchase; or
   B.   The time of delivery of the goods or services; or
   C.   The previous or present classification of the solicitor as a solicitor,
peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or similar designation.
LICENSING OFFICER: The city employee(s) or agent(s) responsible for receiving
from an applicant or registered solicitor the completed application and either
granting, suspending, or denying applicant's certificate.
NO SOLICITATION SIGN: A reasonably visible and legible sign that states "No
Soliciting", "No Solicitors", "No Salespersons", "No Trespassing", or words of
similar import.
POLITICAL POSITION: Any actually held belief, or information for, against, or
in conjunction with any political, social, environmental, or humanitarian
belief or practice.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has been issued a current certificate by
the city.
REGISTRATION: The process used by the city licensing officer to accept a
completed application and determine whether or not a certificate will be
denied, granted, or suspended.
RELIGIOUS BELIEF: Any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption, presumption
or position, or religious doctrine, dogma, or practice regardless of whether or
not the belief or information is endorsed by any other person or public or
private entity.
RESIDENCE: Any living unit contained within any building or structure that is
occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the
city, together with the lot or other real property on which the living unit is
located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street or public rights of
way.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON OR ENTITY: That person or entity responsible to provide the
following to an applicant, registered solicitor, and the competent individual
in a residence to whom a sale of goods or services is made or attempted to be
made by means of a home solicitation sale:
   A.   Maintaining a state sales tax number, a special events sales tax
number, computing the sales taxes owing from any sale of goods or services,
paying the sales taxes, and filing any required returns or reports; and
   B.   Facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to
cancel the sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law; and
   C.   Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those
persons who timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights
or law.
SALE OF GOODS OR SERVICES: The conduct and agreement of a solicitor and the
competent individual in a residence regarding a particular good(s) or service
(s) that entitles the consumer to rescind the same within three (3) days under
any applicable federal, state, or local law.
SERVICES: Those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided, or
sold to a competent individual of a residence.
SOLICITING OR SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: Any of the following activities:
   A.   Seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or
consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought.
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase
insurance, subscriptions to publications, or publications.
   C.   Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value
for the benefit of any person or entity.
   D.   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or
services.
   E.   Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence for the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding
religious belief, political position, charitable conduct, or a home
solicitation sale.
   F.   Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of
soliciting, such as hawking or peddling.
SOLICITOR OR SOLICITORS: A person(s) engaged in door to door solicitation.
SUBMITTED IN WRITING: The information for an appeal of a denial or suspension
of a certificate, submitted in any type of written statement to the city
offices by certified, registered, priority, overnight or delivery confirmation
mail, facsimile, or hand delivery.
SUBSTANTIATED REPORT: An oral, written, or electronic report:
   A.   That is submitted to and documented by the city by any of the
following:
1. A competent individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or other
city employees with publicly available identification of their name, address,
and any other reliable means of contact; or
2. City law enforcement or licensing officer; or
3. Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level of
government;
   B.   That provides any of the following information regarding a registered
solicitor:
1. Documented verification of a previously undisclosed disqualifying status of
registered solicitor; or
2. Probable cause that registered solicitor has committed a disqualifying
status which has not yet been determined to be a disqualifying status; or
3. Documented, eyewitness accounts that registered solicitor has engaged in
repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrates failure by registered solicitor
to adhere to the requirements of this article; or
4. Probable cause that continued licensing of registered solicitor creates
exigent circumstances that threaten the health, safety, or welfare of any
individuals or entities within the city.
WAIVER: The written form provided to applicant by the city wherein applicant
agrees that the city may obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on
the applicant for licensing purposes under this article, and which contains
applicant's notarized signature. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 13-22-2(1)(a), (b).
3-6A-5: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The following are exempt from registration under this article:
      1.   Persons specifically invited to a residence by a competent
individual prior to the time of the person's arrival at the residence;
      2.   Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the
state of Utah permits them to engage in door to door solicitation to offer
goods or services to an occupant of the residence;
      3.   Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a previously
made order, or persons providing services at a residence pursuant to a
previously made request by a competent individual;
      4.   Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any religious belief, or political position regardless of
whether goods, services, or any other consideration is offered or given, with
or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or purchase;
and
      5.   Persons representing a charitable organization. The charitable
exemption shall apply to students soliciting contributions to finance
extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs,
provided that the solicitation has been approved in writing by the school
administration, and that such student solicitors carry current picture student
identification from the educational institution for which they are soliciting.
   B.   Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the duties
and prohibitions outlined in sections
3-6A-18,
3-6A-19, and
3-6A-20 of this article while advocating or soliciting. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-
2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-6: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and
provisions of this article, the practice of being in and upon a private
residence within the city by solicitors, for the purpose of home solicitation
sales or to provide goods or services, is prohibited and is punishable as set
forth in this article. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-7: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS:
Unless otherwise exempt under this article, all persons desiring to engage in
door to door solicitation within the city, prior to doing so, shall submit a
completed application to the licensing officer and obtain a certificate. (Ord.
2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-8: APPLICATION FORM:
The licensing officer shall provide a standard application form for use for the
registration of solicitors. Upon request to the licensing officer, or as
otherwise provided, any person or entity may obtain in person, by mail, or
facsimile, a copy of this application form. Each application form shall require
disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the following information,
documentation, and fee:
   A.   Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant has
received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this article.
   B.   Contact Information:
      1.   Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former names
or aliases used during the last ten (10) years; and
      2.   Applicant's telephone number, home address and mailing address, if
different; and
      3.   If different from applicant, the name, address, and telephone number
of the responsible person or entity; and
      4.   The address by which all notices to applicant required under this
article are to be sent.
   C.   Proof Of Identity:
      1.   An in person verification by the licensing officer of the
applicant's true identity by use of any of the following which bear a
photograph of said applicant:
         a.   A valid driver's license issued by any state; or
         b.   A valid passport issued by the United States; or
         c.   A valid identification card issued by any state; or
         d.   A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States
military.
      2.   Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted
to establish proof of identity shall be returned to applicant.
   D.   Proof Of Registration With Department Of Commerce: Applicant shall
provide proof that either applicant, or the responsible person or entity, has
registered with the Utah state department of commerce.
   E.   Special Events Sales Tax Number: Applicant shall provide a special
events sales tax number for either applicant, or for the responsible person or
entity for which the applicant will be soliciting.
   F.   Marketing Information:
      1.   The goods or services offered by applicant, including any commonly
known, registered or trademarked names.
      2.   Whether applicant holds any other licenses, permits, registrations,
or other qualifications required by federal or state law to promote, provide,
or render advice regarding the offered goods or services.
   G.   BCI Background Check: Applicant shall provide:
      1.   An original or a copy of a "BCI" background check as defined in
section
3-6A-4 of this article; and
      2.   A signed copy of a waiver whereby applicant agrees to allow the city
to obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on applicant for purposes
of enforcement of this article 1 .
   H.   Responses To Questions Regarding Disqualifying Status: Applicant shall
be required to provide an affirmative or negative response to each of the
following questions on the application form:
      1.   Has applicant been criminally convicted of: a) felony homicide, b)
physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, c) the sale or
distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual assault of any kind?
      2.   Are any criminal charges currently pending against applicant for: a)
felony homicide, b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a
minor, c) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual
assault of any kind?
      3.   Has applicant been criminally convicted of a felony within the last
ten (10) years?
      4.   Has applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison within
the past five (5) years?
      5.   Has applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within the
past five (5) years involving a crime of: a) moral turpitude, or b) violent or
aggravated conduct involving persons or property?
      6.   Has a final civil judgment been entered against applicant within the
last five (5) years, indicating that: a) applicant had either engaged in fraud,
or intentional misrepresentation, or b) a debt of applicant was
nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4),
(a)(6), or (a)(19)?
      7.   Is applicant currently on parole or probation to any court, penal
institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest or
subject to a tracking device?
      8.   Does applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any
jurisdiction?
      9.   Is applicant currently subject to a protective order based on
physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction?
   I.   Fee: Applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the
city, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application
and issuing the certificate and/or identification badge.
   J.   Execution Of Application: Applicant shall execute the application form,
stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on the
present knowledge and belief of applicant, the information provided is
complete, truthful and accurate. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 53-10-108(1)(b).
3-6A-9: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying
applicant of the following:
   A.   Applicant's submission of the application authorizes the city to verify
information submitted with the completed application including:
      1.   Applicant's address; and
      2.   Applicant's and/or responsible person or entity's state tax
identification and special use tax numbers, if any; and
      3.   The validity of applicant's proof of identity.
   B.   The city may consult any publicly available sources for information on
applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any outstanding
warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments.
   C.   Establishing proof of identity is required before registration is
allowed.
   D.   Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant
with a completed application.
   E.   Applicant must submit a BCI background check with a completed
application.
   F.   To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, applicant's BCI
background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not
available for public inspection.
   G.   The city will maintain copies of applicant's application form, proof of
identity, and identification badge. These copies will become public records
available for inspection on demand at the city offices whether or not a
certificate is denied, granted, or renewed.
   H.   The criteria for disqualifying status, denial, or suspension of a
certificate under the provisions of this article.
   I.   That a request for a temporary certificate will be granted or denied
the same business day that a completed application is submitted. (Ord. 2007-32,
12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-10: WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS:
   A.   The licensing officer shall not begin the registration process unless
applicant has submitted a completed application.
   B.   The original identification submitted to establish proof of identity
shall be returned after the licensing officer verifies applicant's identity. A
copy of the identification may be retained by the licensing officer.
   C.   If an original BCI background check is submitted by applicant, the
licensing officer shall make a copy of the BCI and return the original to the
applicant. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-11: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES:
The licensing officer shall review the completed application submitted by the
applicant and issue a certificate in accordance with the following:
   A.   Temporary Certificate:
      1.   A temporary certificate shall issue allowing applicant to
immediately begin door to door solicitation upon the following conditions:
         a.   Applicant's submission of a completed application; and
         b.   Applicant's submission of the required fee; and
         c.   Applicant establishes proof of identity; and
         d.   Applicant's representations on the application form do not
affirmatively show a disqualifying status; and
         e.   The BCI does not affirmatively show a disqualifying status; and
         f.   Applicant has not previously been denied a certificate by the
city, or had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this article.
      2.   A temporary certificate will automatically expire after twenty five
(25) calendar days from issuance, or upon grant or denial of an annual
certificate, whichever period is shorter.
   B.   Annual Certificate: Within twenty five (25) calendar days of the
issuance of a temporary certificate the city shall:
      1.   Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the
truthfulness and completeness of the information submitted by applicant,
including, but not limited to, those disclosed with the application form.
      2.   Issue written notice to applicant and the responsible person or
entity, if any, that the applicant either:
         a.   Will be issued an annual certificate, eligible for renewal one
year from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate; or
         b.   Will not be issued an annual certificate for reasons cited in
section
3-6A-15 of this article.
   C.   Renewal Certificate:
      1.   An annual certificate shall be valid for one year from the date of
issuance of the temporary certificate and shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight on the anniversary date of issuance.
      2.   Any annual certificate that is not suspended, revoked, or expired
may be renewed upon the request of the registered solicitor and the submission
of a new completed application and payment of the fee, unless any of the
conditions for the denial, suspension or revocation of a certificate are
present as set forth in section
3-6A-15 of this article, or a disqualifying status is present. (Ord. 2007-32,
12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-12: FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
   A.   Certificate Form:
      1.   Should the licensing officer determine that applicant is entitled to
a certificate, the licensing officer shall issue a certificate to applicant.
      2.   The certificate shall list the name of the registered solicitor and
the responsible person or entity, if any, and the date on which the certificate
expires.
      3.   The certificate shall be dated and signed by the licensing officer.
      4.   The certificate shall be carried by the registered solicitor at all
times while soliciting in the city.
   B.   Identification Badge:
      1.   With both the temporary and annual certificates, the city shall
issue each registered solicitor an identification badge that shall be worn
prominently on his or her person while soliciting in the city.
      2.   The identification badge shall bear the name of the city and shall
contain: a) the name of the registered solicitor; b) the address and phone
number of the registered solicitor, or the name, address, and phone number of
the responsible person or entity; c) a recent photograph of the registered
solicitor; and d) the date on which the certificate expires. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-
5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-13: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
   A.   The licensing officer shall maintain and make available for public
inspection a copy or record of every completed application received and the
certificate or written denial issued by the city.
   B.   Applicant's BCI background check shall remain a confidential,
protected, and/or private record, not available for public inspection.
   C.   The licensing officer may furnish to the head of the city's law
enforcement agency a listing of all applicants, both those denied and those
issued a certificate. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-14: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Certificates shall be issued only in the name of applicant and shall
list the responsible party or entity, if any.
   B.   The certificate shall be nontransferable.
   C.   A registered solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to facilitate
home solicitation sales with different:
      1.   Goods or services; or
      2.   A responsible person or entity, from those designated in the
originally submitted completed application, shall submit a written change
request to the licensing officer.
   D.   A new certificate based on the amended information shall issue for the
balance of time remaining on the solicitor's previous certificate before the
amendment was filed.
   E.   Before the new certificate is given to the registered solicitor, the
registered solicitor shall obtain a revised identification badge from the city,
after payment of the fee for the identification badge. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-
2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-15: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
   A.   Denial: Upon review, the licensing officer shall refuse to issue a
certificate to an applicant for any of the following reasons:
      1.   Denial Of Temporary Certificate:
         a.   The application form is not complete.
         b.   Applicant fails to:
            (1)   Establish proof of identity; or
            (2)   Provide a BCI; or
            (3)   Pay the fees.
         c.   The completed application or BCI indicates that applicant has a
disqualifying status.
         d.   Applicant has previously been denied a certificate by the city,
or has had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this article.
      2.   Denial Of Annual Certificate:
         a.   The information submitted by applicant at the time of the
granting of the temporary certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect.
         b.   Since the submission of the completed application, applicant is
subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status.
         c.   Failure to complete payment of the fees.
         d.   Since the submission of the application, the city has received a
substantiated report regarding the past or present conduct of applicant.
         e.   Since the submission of the application, the city or other
governmental entity has either criminally convicted or obtained a civil
injunction against applicant for violating this article or similar federal,
state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying
status.
         f.   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against applicant indicating that: 1) applicant had either
engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation; or 2) a debt of applicant
was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)
(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
      3.   Denial Of Annual Certificate Renewal:
         a.   The information submitted by applicant when seeking renewal of a
certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect.
         b.   Since the submission of the renewal application, applicant is
subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status.
         c.   Failure to complete payment of the fees.
         d.   Since the submission of the application or granting of a
certificate, the city has received a substantiated report regarding the past or
present conduct of the solicitor.
         e.   The city or other governmental entity has either criminally
convicted or obtained a civil injunction against applicant for violating this
article or similar federal, state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the
level of a disqualifying status.
         f.   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against applicant indicating that: 1) applicant had either
engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation; or 2) a debt of the
applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)
(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation: The city shall either suspend or revoke a
certificate when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a certificate
occurs.
   C.   Notice Of Denial Or Suspension:
      1.   Upon determination of the licensing officer to deny an applicant's
completed application or to suspend a registered solicitor's certificate, the
city shall cause written notice to be sent to applicant or registered solicitor
by the method indicated in the completed application.
         a.   The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or
suspension, the documentation or information the city relied on to make the
decision, the availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon
one business day's notice to the city, and the date upon which the denial or
suspension of the certificate shall take effect.
         b.   It shall further state that the applicant or registered solicitor
shall have ten (10) business days from the receipt of the notice of denial or
suspension to appeal the same.
      2.   The denial or suspension of the certificate shall:
         a.   Be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from the date
the notice is sent, unless that suspension is because of exigent circumstances
outlined in the definition of "substantiated report" in section
3-6A-4 of this article, in which case, the suspension is effective immediately.
         b.   Remain effective unless and until the order is rescinded,
overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to be contrary to equity or law.
      3.   Failure to appeal the suspension of a certificate automatically
results in its revocation. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-16: APPEAL:
   A.   An applicant or registered solicitor whose certificate has been denied
or suspended shall have the right to appeal to the city council or its
designee.
   B.   Any appeal must be submitted by either applicant, the responsible
person or entity, or legal counsel for either, who:
      1.   Documents the relationship with applicant or responsible person or
entity; or
      2.   Is licensed or authorized by the state of Utah to do so, and makes
the assertion of an agency relationship.
   C.   The following procedures and requirements shall apply to the appeal:
      1.   Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the city recorder, with a
copy to the license officer, within ten (10) business days of the decision from
which the appeal is taken. Such appeal shall describe in detail the nature of
the appeal, the action complained of and the grounds for appeal.
      2.   Upon request of applicant or registered solicitor, within one
business day, the city will make available any information upon which it relied
in making the determination to either deny or suspend the certificate.
      3.   The appeals officer shall review, de novo, all written information
submitted by applicant or registered solicitor to the licensing officer; any
additional information relied upon by the licensing officer as the basis for
denial, suspension or revocation; and any additional information supplied by
the city, applicant or registered solicitor.
         a.   Any additional information submitted by any party to the appeal
to the appeals officer shall be simultaneously submitted to the opposing party.
         b.   If desired, any party shall have three (3) business days to
submit rebuttal documentation to the appeals officer regarding the additional
information submitted by the opposing party.
      4.   The appeals officer will render a decision no later than fifteen
(15) calendar days from the date the appeal was taken, unless an extension of
time is agreed upon by the parties. In the event that any party to the appeal
submits rebuttal information as allowed in this section, the fifteen (15)
calendar days shall be extended to include the additional three (3) days for
rebuttal.
         a.   The denial or suspension of the certificate shall be reversed by
the appeals officer if, upon review of the written appeal and information
submitted, the appeals officer finds that the licensing officer made a material
mistake of law or fact in denying or suspending applicant's or registered
solicitor's certificate.
         b.   If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that
the licensing officer properly denied or suspended the certificate of the
applicant or registered solicitor, the denial or suspension of the certificate
shall be affirmed and constitute a determination that the suspended certificate
is revoked.
         c.   The decision of the appeals officer shall be delivered to
applicant or registered solicitor by the means designated in the completed
application, or as otherwise agreed upon when the appeal was filed.
      5.   After the ruling of the appeals officer, applicant or solicitor is
deemed to have exhausted all administrative remedies with the city.
      6.   Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the applicant's,
solicitor's, or city's right to seek relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-17: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
   B.   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to
face solicitation:
      1.   The name of the solicitor;
      2.   The name and address of the entity with whom the solicitor is
associated; and
      3.   The purpose of the solicitor's contact with the person and/or
competent individual. This requirement may be satisfied through the use of the
badge and an informational flyer.
   C.   No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other
than his or her true and correct name.
   D.   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the
granting of a certificate of registration implies any endorsement by the city
of the solicitor's goods or services or of the individual solicitor. (Ord.
2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-18: NO SOLICITATION NOTICE:
   A.   Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse
solicitors by displaying a "No Solicitation" sign which shall be posted on or
near the main entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the
sidewalk leading to the residence.
   B.   The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute
notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to
receive and/or does not invite solicitors.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each residence
for the presence of any such notice.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall apply also to solicitors who are
exempt from registration pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord.
2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-19: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS:
   A.   Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for
any "No Soliciting" sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a
solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to, "No
Solicitation" signs.
      1.   If such sign or placard is posted, such solicitor shall desist from
any efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall immediately
depart from such property.
      2.   Possession of a certificate of registration does not in any way
relieve any solicitor of this duty.
   B.   It is a violation of this article for any person soliciting or
advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner
attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a "No
Solicitation" sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or
attempting to engage in advocating, a home solicitation sale, door to door
soliciting, or soliciting.
   C.   It is a violation of this article for any solicitor, through ruse,
deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take action
calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
   D.   Any solicitor, who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence
or dwelling to leave, shall immediately and peacefully depart.
   E.   The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical
contact with, or touch, another person without the person's consent.
   F.   The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without their
explicit consent.
   G.   The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person
and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their
lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
   H.   The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 2007-
32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-20: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a
residence before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
Mountain Time, unless the solicitor has express prior permission from the
resident to do so. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-21: BUYER'S RIGHT TO CANCEL:
In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to
provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or
solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer's signature to a written
statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the third
business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of "buyer's
right to cancel" shall be in the form required by Utah Code Annotated section
70C-5-103, 1953, or a current version thereof or any state or federal law
modifying or amending such provision. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
3-6A-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any term or provision of this article shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2007-32, 12-5-2007, eff. 3-1-2008)
CHAPTER 7
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES
SECTION:
3-7-1: Purpose
3-7-2: Definitions
3-7-3: Special Guidelines
3-7-4: Standards And Requirements
3-7-5: Conditional Use Permit
3-7-6: Business License Required
3-7-7: Fees And Financial Responsibility
3-7-8: Exceptions
3-7-9: Reasonable Accommodation
3-7-10: Severability
3-7-1: PURPOSE:
To provide districts in the city where facilities for elderly, disabled, youth,
nursing facilities for the elderly and the disabled, and other similar type
dwelling arrangements may be allowed to integrate without discrimination of
need; having an awareness of the inherent qualities of the residential, and
commercial zones within the city. (Ord. 2005-13, 4-20-2005)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES ("CLF"): A residence in which persons unrelated to
the owner or provider reside, including, but not limited to, residential
facilities for the disabled, residential facilities for the elderly, nursing
facilities for the elderly or disabled, and private facilities for youth.
DISABLED/DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one or more of a person's major life activities, including a person having a
record of such an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment.
"Disability" does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, any
federally controlled substance, as defined in section 102 of the controlled
substances act, 21 USC 802, or successor law. Disabled/disability includes
those as defined in sections 62A-5-101 and 57-21-2 Utah Code Annotated.
ELDERLY: A person who is sixty five (65) years of age or older, who desires or
needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but is capable of
living independently.
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: A change in a rule, policy, practice or service
necessary to afford a person with a disability equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling.
As used in this definition:
   A.   "Reasonable" means the requested accommodation will not undermine the
legitimate purposes of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit
that the accommodation would provide to a person with a disability.
   B.   "Necessary" means the applicant must show that, but for the
accommodation, one or more persons with a disability likely will be denied an
equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their choice.
   C.   "Equal opportunity" means achieving equal results as between a person
with a disability and a nondisabled person.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR THE DISABLED/RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A
DISABILITY: A residence in which one or more persons with a disability resides
and which is licensed or certified by the department of human services under
title 62A, chapter 5 of the Utah code, services to people with disabilities; or
is licensed or certified by the department of health under title 26, chapter
21, health care facility licensing and inspection act.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR THE ELDERLY: A dwelling unit that is either owned by
one of the residents or by an immediate family member of one of the residents,
or is a facility for which the title has been placed in trust for a resident;
and is occupied on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis by eight (8) or fewer
elderly persons in a family type arrangement.
A residential facility shall not include:
   A.   Any facility which is operated as a business (provided, that such
facility may not be considered to be operated as a business solely because a
fee is charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of operation and
maintenance of the facility).
   B.   Where persons being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse are placed;
where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or where placement is part
of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional
institution.
   C.   Which is a healthcare facility as defined by section 26-21-2 or the
Utah code.
RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT: A twenty four (24) hour group living environment for
four (4) or more individuals unrelated to the owner or provider that offers
room or board and specialized treatment, rehabilitation or habilitation
services for persons with emotional, psychological, developmental or behavioral
dysfunctions, impairments, or chemical dependencies. In residential treatment,
individuals are assisted in acquiring the social and behavioral skills
necessary for living independently in the community.
SCHOOL: A public kindergarten, elementary, middle, junior high or high school.
YOUTH PROGRAM: A nonresidential program designed to provide behavioral,
substance abuse or mental health services to minors that serves adjudicated or
nonadjudicated youth, charges a fee for its services, may or may not provide
overnight accommodation, may or may not provide all or part of its services in
the outdoors, may or may not limit access to parents or guardians, and
prohibits or restricts a minor's ability to leave the program at any time of
his own free will. (Ord. 2005-13, 4-20-2005)
3-7-3: SPECIAL GUIDELINES:
In order to determine which types of CLFs will work best in which zones,
certain properties of proposed enterprises must be considered.
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter, a "small" CLF is one in which eight
(8) or fewer "residents" are housed.
   B.   For the purpose of this chapter, a "large" CLF is one in which more
than eight (8) residents are housed.
   C.   For the purposes of this chapter, an "open" residence is one where
inhabitants come and go as they please, where movements of occupants and their
visitors are unrestricted by formal program rules or by external law. An "open"
facility is one in which residents have unrestricted interaction with the
community. Such facilities encourage integration of residents in a neighborhood
atmosphere and in commercial areas, connect and enhance surrounding commerce
spaces.
   D.   For the purposes of this chapter, a "closed" residence is one where
inhabitants are strictly monitored, where movements of occupants may be limited
by formal program rules and/or external law. A "closed" facility does not
necessarily provide unrestricted interaction with the community. Such
facilities do not encourage unsupervised integration into the neighborhood.
   E.   For the purposes of this chapter, a "permanent" residence or CLF means
any building or portion thereof where individuals are actually residing at a
given point in time and intend to remain. It is not a place of temporary
sojourn or transient visit.
   F.   For the purposes of this chapter, a "temporary" CLF or residence means
any building or portion thereof intended to house occupants on a temporary
basis. (Ord. 2005-13, 4-20-2005)
3-7-4: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   A CLF shall comply with all standards, provisions and rules of the
applicable sections of Utah administrative code. A CLF is subject to the
LaVerkin City zoning requirements, the standards contained herein, and the
exemptions below.
      2.   A CLF shall comply with all building, safety, and health regulations
applicable to similar structures. As part of this requirement the following
site development standards and parking standards shall be applicable: (Ord.
2005-13, 4-20-2005)
         a.   Each CLF in a residential zone shall be subject to minimum site
development standards applicable to a one-family dwelling or other similar
dwelling in the zone in which the CLF is located. (Ord. 2009-06, 4-15-2009)
         b.   The minimum number of parking spaces required for a CLF in
residential zones shall be the same as those for a similar dwelling located in
the same zoning district in which the CLF is located.
         c.   A CLF in a residential zone shall not have any structural or
landscaping alterations that would change the residential character of the
structure or the surrounding area.
      3.   Any conversion, remodel or alteration of buildings or new
construction of a CLF shall require that the development standards of LaVerkin
City zoning ordinance and the LaVerkin City general plan are met.
      4.   Any conversion of existing buildings or uses to a CLF, or any new
construction of a CLF shall provide at least thirty percent (30%) of the area
as open green space or playground, sufficient parking to service the number of
vehicles likely to be used by the maximum allowed number of residents, and
adequate off street parking spaces for the staff and visitors of the CLF as
determined by the city council. The city council may reduce the parking
requirement as part of the conditional use permit or license approval upon a
finding that less parking will meet the needs of the public and the proposed
program.
      5.   The number of residents in a CLF shall not increase above eight (8)
unless a conditional use permit is recommended by the planning and zoning
commission and is approved by the city council.
      6.   The planning and zoning commission and city council shall consider
the general plan, protection of neighborhood character, permitted uses in
underlying zones, and the aesthetics of any proposed building in making its
recommendations and/or approval to any CLF.
      7.   In review of any application for reasonable accommodation, the city
council shall consider whether the use proposed will fill a demonstrated
community need and shall analyze the anticipated impact of the proposal on
surrounding, existing or intended uses, including the result with any written
findings made. Consideration and analysis may include, but are not limited to:
field trips to the site, commissioned studies, expert opinions, etc. Before
granting any application for reasonable accommodation, the city council shall
find:
         a.   That the applicant is eligible for reasonable accommodation
because the facility will house a meaningful proportion of the legally
disabled;
         b.   That the accommodation will affirmatively enhance the quality of
life of the disabled by ameliorating the effects of their disabilities;
         c.   That the accommodation will impose no undue financial or
administrative hardship on the city;
         d.   That the accommodation proposed is necessary to provide an equal
opportunity for housing to the disabled;
         e.   That the accommodation will not adversely impact the harmony or
intended character of the zone;
         f.   That the proposed accommodation will not adversely impact
legislative goals of the rule being relaxed, including those designed to
protect the aquifer and comply with the guidelines of the city's contract with
the Washington County water conservancy district.
      8.   All recipients of facility services shall reside on site.
      9.   Any CLF which is a business shall maintain active, current business
entity status with the Utah department of commerce and current business
licensure from LaVerkin City.
      10.   Prior to the occupancy of any CLF requiring state licensure or
certification, the person or entity to be licensed or certified shall:
         a.   Provide a copy of such license or certification to the city,
         b.   Certify to the city that no person will reside or remain in the
facility whose tenancy would likely constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other individuals, or result in substantial physical damage to the
property of others.
   B.   Large CLFs:
      1.   All CLFs housing more than eight (8) persons shall require a
conditional use permit. For purposes of state licensure, a CLF may receive
preliminary approval of the permit from the city council. However, final
approval is contingent upon receipt and review of documentation of compliance
with all federal, state, and local regulations and requirements, by the city
council. Preliminary approval is offered as a convenience and is in no way
assurance of final granting of the permit if all requirements are not met.
      2.   The application for a conditional use permit shall include
sufficiently detailed site plans, building plans or remodeling plans, and all
other information necessary to determine compliance with building, fire and
health regulations and standards applicable to similar dwellings. Any
alterations must be reviewed and recommended for approval by the city planning
and zoning commission and shall be approved by the city council before a
conditional use permit is approved.
      3.   The LaVerkin City planning and zoning commission may recommend and
council may approve a conditional use permit to operate a CLF they deem to be
in harmony with the zone, the surrounding uses, and the general plan; and in
the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the city, within the
limits of this code, Utah Code Annotated, and Utah administrative code.
Commission and council shall consider in their decisions any anticipated
impacts of traffic, noise, disruption, added infrastructure, or saturation in
the location proposed.
      4.   A business plan and a community impact study shall be provided by
the applicant as part of the application for the conditional use permit at
applicant's expense, and shall be conducted by an appropriately qualified firm
or individual within any guideline passed by resolution of the city (if any).
The findings shall include results of a ground water protection study, and
shall specifically describe and evaluate the programs provided and the impact
of the CLF on:
         a.   Local schools,
         b.   The city's economy and economic resources,
         c.   The tax revenue of the city,
         d.   The city's infrastructure including water hookup, sewer, septic
and floodplain concerns,
         e.   Public safety and law enforcement,
         f.   Traffic,
         g.   Aesthetics,
         h.   Tourism,
         i.   Neighboring properties and businesses,
         j.   The impact on property values, if any, and
         k.   The impact of any other uses within or proposed within the same
building to be used as a CLF.
      5.   The number of residents in a CLF shall not increase above the number
allowed in the conditional use permit unless an amendment to the permit is
recommended by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city
council. Any request for amendment to any CLF conditional use permit shall be
accompanied by a new study as described in subsection B4 of this section. (Ord.
2005-13, 4-20-2005)
3-7-5: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Application: Anyone desiring to procure a LaVerkin City permit and/or
license to operate a CLF shall begin the process by completing any appropriate
business license and conditional use applications, consulting with the
licensing official or zoning administrator when necessary. When the
applications have been reviewed and deemed complete by the licensing official
and the zoning administrator, the applicant may be placed on the agenda of the
next meeting of the planning and zoning commission.
   B.   Planning And Zoning Recommendation: The planning and zoning commission
will hear the applicant's proposal, review the application and all required
documentation, and determine whether or not it is in harmony with the LaVerkin
City general plan and in compliance with the LaVerkin City zoning ordinance and
standards for granting a city license or permit. The planning and zoning
commission shall consider public input as well as any request for reasonable
accommodation, and make its findings and recommendation to the city council,
including any specific regulations to be placed on the permit, in writing.
Writing requirement may be deemed satisfied by approved written minutes
provided that findings are articulated in the minutes of a meeting.
   C.   City Council Approval: Once the planning and zoning commission has
forwarded recommendation to the city council, the applicant may be placed on
the agenda of a city council meeting. The council may then approve, modify and
approve, or deny the license or permit.
   D.   Public Hearing Required: The city council shall publish notice at least
fourteen (14) days in advance and hold a public hearing to gather input from
citizens on the granting of a conditional use permit to a CLF.
   E.   Disputes: In the event of a dispute, every effort shall be made to
explore all reasonable alternative resolution methods, such as requesting a
variance, applying for reasonable accommodation, or participating in mediation
or arbitration by mutual agreement between all affected parties. (Ord. 2005-13,
4-20-2005)
3-7-6: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
The owner or provider of a CLF which is a business shall be required to
maintain a valid business license with LaVerkin City as provided in this title.
   A.   A business license to operate any CLF, as authorized by this chapter,
is nontransferable and shall only be valid to the owner or provider identified
on a valid LaVerkin City business license authorizing the operation of such,
and identified as the owner or provider licensed or certified by the
appropriate department of the state of Utah.
   B.   City business licenses granted to CLFs shall terminate upon the
expiration, revocation, or surrender of any state or county license or permit
or other regulatory license; and the facility must close.
   C.   Permission to operate a CLF as regulated by this chapter shall be
subject to a city license which shall be revoked if at any time it is
demonstrated to the city council, that:
      1.   The structure is devoted to a use other than the city approved use,
or
      2.   The structure or program fails to comply with the requirements of
this chapter, or
      3.   The applicant has not obtained and maintained all licenses from the
state and/or county required to operate or has not provided the city with proof
of such licenses.
      4.   Material false information has been provided by the applicant during
the process of obtaining a license or permit.
      5.   Facility shall notify the city immediately if a state or county
license, permit or certification status changes. The city shall then review the
reasons for the change in status and may, after a hearing and at the discretion
of the city council, revoke the facility's city business license or place
additional conditions on the facility's permit. (Ord. 2005-13, 4-20-2005)
3-7-7: FEES AND FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   The applicant for a permit or license to operate a CLF shall pay the
applicable license and permit fees as set by the city council.
   B.   Any costs to the city for police, emergency, search, fire, or rescue
services arising as a result of acts of CLF consumers, staff or management
shall be the responsibility of the permittee(s). (Ord. 2005-13, 4-20-2005)
3-7-8: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   No CLF shall be made available to an individual whose tenancy would:
      1.   Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals, or
      2.   Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. (It
is not the intention of this subsection to establish any legal basis for tort
liability on the part of the facility operator.)
   B.   No CLF shall be made available to any individual who:
      1.   Is a current user of illegal drugs, or
      2.   Has been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of
controlled substances.
   C.   No CLF licensed for the housing of eight (8) or more unrelated person,
shall be established or maintained within three-fourths (3/4) mile measured in
a straight line between the closest property lines of the lots or parcels of
another CLF. (Ord. 2005-13, 4-20-2005)
3-7-9: REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION:
   A.   None of the foregoing conditions shall be interpreted to limit any
reasonable accommodation necessary to allow equal opportunity for the disabled
in the establishment or occupancy of a residential facility. If the zoning
administrator, the planning and zoning commission, or the city council should
have objective reason to believe an applicant is in need of reasonable
accommodation, applicant shall be reminded or informed of the city policy to
reasonably accommodate the disabled, and inquiry shall be made as to whether he
or she would like to be considered for such an accommodation. Should the
applicant respond in the affirmative, the official shall:
      1.   Assist in filling out the reasonable accommodation information
submission form to be presented by the applicant in a regularly scheduled
public meeting, or
      2.   Offer the information submission form to the applicant to fill out
and return to the city.
   B.   Any applicant for a project which will provide housing for a meaningful
proportion of disabled persons may apply for reasonable accommodation to the
city council. The applicant shall articulate on the application form the basis
for the requested accommodation.
   C.   Any and all legally protected medical information provided by applicant
will be exempt from disclosure by the city.
   D.   Each application for a reasonable accommodation shall be decided by the
city council within not more than thirty (30) days.
   E.   If a request for a reasonable accommodation is denied, specific reasons
for denial shall be made in writing or in the approved minutes of a meeting by
the city council. Such decisions to deny may be appealed to the board of
adjustment in the manner provided for appeals of administrative decisions.
   F.   LaVerkin City shall make available to all CLF applicants a reasonable
accommodation information submission form. (Ord. 2005-13, 4-20-2005)
3-7-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional, invalid, or
unenforceable, the remainder of this chapter shall be deemed severable and
shall not be affected, and this chapter shall remain valid.
The terms, standards, and requirements, specified by this chapter shall,
wherever there is a conflict, supersede those of all previous ordinances and
regulations of this code. (Ord. 2005-13, 4-20-2005)
CHAPTER 8
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: Tax Imposed
3-8-3: Collection Of Tax
3-8-4: Penalties
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
RECREATIONAL LODGING UNITS: Each site in a campground, which is issued a
business license by LaVerkin City, and provides water, sewer, and electrical
hookups; or a recreational vehicle park that provides water, sewer, and
electrical hookups.
RENTS: Include rental fee collected, or timeshare fees or dues.
STANDARD LODGING UNIT: Each bedroom in:
   A.   Motels.
   B.   Hotels.
   C.   Inns.
   D.   Bed and breakfast establishments.
   E.   Condominiums:
1. That are part of a rental pool; or
2. That are regularly rented out for a time period of less than thirty (30)
consecutive days.
   F.   Property used as a residence:
1. That is part of a rental pool; or
2. That is regularly rented out for a time period of less than thirty (30)
consecutive days.
TRANSIENT: A person who occupies a public accommodation or recreational lodging
unit for less than thirty (30) days.
TRANSIENT ROOM: Any public accommodation or recreational lodging unit, which is
provided for rent for less than thirty (30) days. (Ord. 2005-16, 5-4-2005)
3-8-2: TAX IMPOSED:
The LaVerkin City council hereby levies a one percent (1%) transient room tax
on charges imposed on the purchaser for amounts paid or charged for occupying
public accommodations and recreational lodging units. (Ord. 2005-16, 5-4-2005)
3-8-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
The transient room tax shall be levied at the same time and collected in the
same manner as provided in Utah Code Annotated, section 59-12-354, the local
sales and use tax act. The tax shall be reviewed by the city council on an
annual basis to evaluate the overall efficacy and the fiscal advisability of
continuing with said tax as imposed by this chapter. Revenues generated by the
tax imposed hereby, shall be appropriated for general fund purposes. (Ord.
2005-16, 5-4-2005)
3-8-4: PENALTIES:
Violation or avoidance of payment of the tax imposed hereby shall subject the
violator to penalties as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code, as well
as penalties and interest rates authorized by the Utah state tax commission
under sections 59-1-401 and 59-1-402 of the Utah code. (Ord. 2005-16, 5-4-2005)
CHAPTER 9
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: Levy Of Tax
3-9-3: Tax Rate
3-9-4: Rate Limitation And Exemption
3-9-5: Effective Date Of Tax Levy
3-9-6: Interlocal Agreement For Collection Of Tax
3-9-7: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein:
COMMISSION: The state tax commission.
CUSTOMER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this definition, "customer"
means the person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications
provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "customer" means:
1. The person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications
provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract; or
2. If the end user is not the person described in subsection B1 of this
definition, the end user of telecommunications service.
   C.   "Customer" does not include a reseller:
1. Of telecommunications service; or
2. For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an
agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's
licensed service area.
END USER: A. The person who uses a telecommunications service.
   B.   For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is
not an individual, "end user" means the individual who uses the
telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the
telecommunications service.
GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE MUNICIPALITY: Those gross receipts from a
transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the
municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under title 59, chapter
12, Utah Code Annotated ("sales and use tax act"), and determined in accordance
with section 59-12-207 Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended).
GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered
except for amounts collected or paid as:
   A.   A tax, fee, or charge:
1. Imposed by a governmental entity;
2. Separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge in the transaction with the
customer for the telecommunications service; and
3. Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
   B.   Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a
customer under title 59, chapter 12, Utah Code Annotated ("sales and use tax
act"); or
   C.   Interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications
provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when
payment is due.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
MUNICIPALITY: LaVerkin City.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: A. For telecommunications service other than mobile
telecommunications service, means the street address representative of where
the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which
shall be:
1. The residential street address of the customer; or
2. The primary business street address of the customer; or
   B.   For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
SERVICE ADDRESS: Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, "service
address" means:
   A.   If the location described in this subsection is known, the location of
the telecommunications equipment:
1. To which the call is charged; and
2. From which the call originates or terminates;
   B.   If the location described in subsection A of this definition is not
known but the location described in this subsection is known, the location of
the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first
identified by:
1. The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
2. If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications
provider from its service provider; or
   C.   If the locations described in subsection A or B of this definition are
not known, the location of a customer's place of primary use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this
definition, "telecommunications provider" means a person that:
1. Owns, controls, operates, or manages a telecommunications service; or
2. Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition for the
shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications service.
   B.   A person described in subsection A of this definition is a
telecommunications provider whether or not the public service commission of
Utah regulates:
1. That person; or
2. The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls, operates, or
manages.
   C.   "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined
in section 54-8b-2, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended).
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: A. Telephone service, as defined in section 59-12-
102, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended), other than mobile
telecommunications service, that originates and terminates within the
boundaries of the state of Utah; and
   B.   Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in section 59-12-102,
Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended):
1. That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state; and
2. Only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications sourcing act,
4 USC section 116 et seq. (Ord. 2007-22, 7-18-2007)
3-9-2: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to LaVerkin City (otherwise
known as the gross receipts attributed to the municipality). (Ord. 2007-22, 7-
18-2007)
3-9-3: TAX RATE:
   A.   The rate of the tax levy shall be three and one-half percent (3.5%) of
the telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service
that are attributed to the municipality, subject to the provisions of
subsection B of this section.
   B.   If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than
LaVerkin City, then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for
telecommunications services shall be the lower of: 1) the rate imposed by the
taxing jurisdiction in which the transaction is located or 2) the rate for the
nonmobile telecommunication services shall be the rate imposed by the
municipality in which the customers service address is located; or for mobile
telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the municipality of the
customer's primary place of use. (Ord. 2007-22, 7-18-2007)
3-9-4: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION:
The rate of this levy shall not exceed three and one-half percent (3.5%) of the
telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunication service
attributed to the municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority
vote of the voters in LaVerkin City that vote in: a) a municipal general
election; or b) a regular general election; or c) a local special election; and
d) incorporates the provisions of section 10-1-408, Utah Code Annotated (1953,
as amended and in effect at the time of election). (Ord. 2007-22, 7-18-2007)
3-9-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1, 2007, or the first
day of any calendar quarter after a seventy five (75) day period beginning on
the date the commission received or receives notice pursuant to 10-1-403, Utah
Code Annotated (1953, as amended), of the enactment of this chapter. (Ord.
2007-22, 7-18-2007)
3-9-6: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF TAX:
On or before the effective date hereof, LaVerkin City shall enter into an
amended uniform interlocal agreement with the commission as described in
section 10-1-405, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended), for the collection,
enforcement, and administration of this municipal telecommunications license
tax, as amended. (Ord. 2007-22, 7-18-2007)
3-9-7: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
   A.   Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality under authority
of section 10-1-203 or title 11, chapter 26 ("local taxation of utilities
limitation"), Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended), is hereby repealed.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal
ordinance or fee which provides that LaVerkin City may recover, from a
telecommunications provider, the management costs of the city caused by the
activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights of way of the
municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with section 72-7-102, Utah
Code Annotated (1953, as amended), and is not related to the municipality's
loss of use of a highway as a result of the activities of the
telecommunications provider in a right of way, or increased deterioration of a
highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a
right of way.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to repeal or limit the
city's right to charge fees or taxes on persons not subject to the municipal
telecommunications license tax under this chapter who locate telecommunications
facilities, as defined in section 72-7-108, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as
amended), within the jurisdiction of LaVerkin City. (Ord. 2007-22, 7-18-2007)
CHAPTER 10
TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
3-10-1: Applicability; Sale Of Tobacco Products And Paraphernalia Restricted
3-10-2: Definitions
3-10-3: Tobacco Sales Business Permit Required
3-10-4: Retail Tobacco Specialty Business Not Permitted
3-10-5: Revocation Of A Tobacco Sales Business Permit
3-10-6: Penalty
3-10-1: APPLICABILITY; SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND PARAPHERNALIA RESTRICTED:
No individual, entity or organization shall:
   A.   Conduct or operate a retail tobacco specialty business; or
   B.   Sell, furnish, or otherwise distribute tobacco products or "tobacco
paraphernalia", as defined in this chapter, unless it satisfies the
requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2013-01, 2-6-2013)
3-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
RETAIL TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS: A commercial establishment in which:
   A.   The sale of tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia accounts for
more than thirty five percent (35%) of the total annual gross receipts for the
establishment;
   B.   Food and beverage products, excluding gasoline sales, is less than
forty five percent (45%) of the total annual gross receipts for the
establishment; and
   C.   The establishment is not licensed as a pharmacy under the "pharmacy
practice act" 1 .
TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA: A. Does not include matches or lighters.
   B.   Does mean and include any equipment, product, or material of any kind
which is used, intended for use, or designed for use to package, repackage,
store, contain, conceal, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce a cigar,
cigarette, or tobacco in any form into the human body, including, but not
limited to:
1. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or
without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
2. Water pipes;
3. Carburetion tubes and devices;
4. Smoking and carburetion masks;
5. Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a
cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
6. Chamber pipes;
7. Carburetor pipes;
8. Electric pipes;
9. Air driven pipes;
10. Chillums;
11. Bongs; and
12. Ice pipes or chillers.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any cigar, cigarette, or electronic cigarette as defined in
the Utah code; a tobacco product as defined in the Utah code, including chewing
tobacco; any substitute for a tobacco product, including flavoring or additives
to tobacco.
TOBACCO SALES PERMIT: A permit or notation on the primary business license
issued by the city which allows the licensee to sell tobacco products and
tobacco paraphernalia from its validly licensed business. (Ord. 2013-01, 2-6-
2013)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA title 58, ch. 17b (1953, as amended).
3-10-3: TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Sale Of Tobacco Products And Tobacco Paraphernalia: No individual,
entity, organization, or business shall sell tobacco products and/or tobacco
paraphernalia unless it has obtained a tobacco sales business permit, which
shall only be issued as a notation on or supplemental permit to a business
license for one of the following:
      1.   A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of food and
beverage products;
      2.   A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of gasoline or
diesel fuel, e.g., a gas station or a convenience store;
      3.   A business for which an on premises alcoholic beverage sales license
has been granted;
      4.   A business license for a pharmacy under the Utah code; or
      5.   For calendar year 2013 only, a business that, prior to the effective
date of this chapter, obtained or renewed a business license from the city and
does not meet the definition of a "retail tobacco specialty business" under
section
3-10-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Application For Permit: An application for a tobacco sales business
permit shall be: 1) made in writing on the form provided by the licensing
officer; 2) completed in its entirety; and 3) accompanied by:
      1.   The business license or application therefor, as required in
subsection A of this section; and
      2.   Proof of the operation of a business specified in subsection A1 or
A2 of this section, if the application is to qualify as such a business. (Ord.
2013-01, 2-6-2013)
3-10-4: RETAIL TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS NOT PERMITTED:
The operation of a retail tobacco specialty business, within the city limits of
LaVerkin, is prohibited. (Ord. 2013-01, 2-6-2013)
3-10-5: REVOCATION OF A TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS PERMIT:
In addition to any other actions which the city may take (under applicable
state law and the provisions of this title) with respect to the business
license of a business operating within the city limits of LaVerkin, the city
may suspend, revoke, or terminate the tobacco sales permit of a business if:
   A.   The licensee, owner, or operator:
      1.   Engages in a pattern of unlawful activity as outlined in sections
76-10-1601 et seq., Utah code, or any amendment thereto; or
      2.   Commits any alcohol or drug related offenses, violates any
regulations restricting the sale and distribution of tobacco products or
tobacco paraphernalia, or commits any felony offenses under any provision of
federal, state, or local law.
   B.   While on the business premises, an employee violates:
      1.   Any laws or regulations related to alcohol or controlled substances;
      2.   Any laws or regulations restricting the sale and distribution of
tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia; or
      3.   Any provision of federal, state, or local law which would be a
felony level offense.
   C.   The business does not maintain the right to operate under the terms of
other applicable laws, including zoning ordinances, building codes, and the
business license. (Ord. 2013-01, 2-6-2013)
3-10-6: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter is a class B misdemeanor and punishable by a fine
not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), not including any mandatory
fees and surcharges imposed by law or a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord.
2013-01, 2-6-2013)
CHAPTER 11
CLEANLINESS, SAFETY, AND SANITARY CONDITIONS IN TRANSIENT LODGING FACILITIES
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: General
3-11-3: Water Supplies
3-11-4: Wastewater Disposal
3-11-5: Plumbing
3-11-6: Operations And Maintenance
3-11-7: Swimming Pools
3-11-8: Solid Waste
3-11-9: Management
3-11-10: Administrative Provisions
3-11-11: Occupancy
3-11-12: Bed And Breakfast And Vacation Rental Facilities (When, Where, And To
The Extent Permitted, Including Those Grandfathered Under Prior Law)
3-11-13: Penalty; Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-11-13-5: Developments And Resorts
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY: The city of LaVerkin and its officials, employees, and representatives;
and shall commonly have reference to the city inspector and/or the director of
operations.
DEPARTMENT: The Utah department of health.
DIRECTOR: The executive director of the Utah department of health.
PET: A domesticated companion animal that is not included in the definition of
a service animal or support animal under federal or state law that allows
access of the animal to hotel, motel, and resort facilities.
PET FRIENDLY: The designation of certain guestrooms or all guestrooms by an
owner or operator to allow pets to stay in a guestroom with the guest.
TRANSIENT LODGING FACILITY OR TRANSIENT LODGING FACILITIES (Also Known Herein
By The Phrase HOTEL, MOTEL OR RESORT): Facilities providing transient lodging
for a fee, where and to the extent permitted (including those grandfathered
under prior law), and includes, but is not limited to, hotels, motels, motor
hotels, inns, lodges, bed and breakfast establishments, condominiums
constituting standard lodging units under section
3-8-1 of this title, resorts, resort camps, tourist courts, hostels,
dormitories and similar facilities; and shall mean every building, or
structure, with all buildings and facilities in connection therewith, kept,
used, maintained as, advertised as, or held out to the public to be, a place
where living accommodations are furnished to transient guests or to groups
normally occupying such facilities on a seasonal or short term basis.
UNITS: Accommodations, within or part of a transient lodging facility, that
serve one or more persons (regardless of the type or name of the transient
lodging facility).
WASTEWATER: Discharges from all plumbing facilities such as restrooms, kitchen,
and laundry fixtures, either separately or in combination. (Ord. 2013-09, 7-17-
2013; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 9-21-2022)
3-11-2: GENERAL:
   A.   It shall be the duty of each person operating a transient lodging
facility to carry out and conform to the provisions of this chapter. Such
person should also have the duty of controlling the conduct of occupants (also
known herein as "guests" or "patrons") to this end, and shall make at least one
daily inspection of the area for these purposes.
   B.   Transient lodging facility sites shall be constructed to provide
adequate surface drainage and shall be isolated from any existing or potential
health hazard or nuisance.
   C.   All applicable local and state building, zoning, electrical, health,
and fire codes, and all local ordinances shall be complied with. (Ord. 2013-09,
7-17-2013)
3-11-3: WATER SUPPLIES:
   A.   Potable water supply systems for use by transient lodging facility
occupants shall meet the requirements, rules, and regulations of the state of
Utah rules relating to public drinking water supplies.
   B.   Unless otherwise exempted or provided by the director or applicable
state of Utah public drinking water rules:
      1.   The design of water system facilities shall be based on the
supplier's engineer's estimate of water demands, but shall in no case be less
than the following:
 
Source capacity: 150 gallons per day per hotel, motel or resort unit.
Storage volume:  75 gallons per hotel, motel or resort unit.
 
      2.   Distribution system capacity: Shall maintain a water system pressure
in excess of twenty (20) psi at all points in the distribution system during
peak hourly flow conditions. The peak hourly flow should be calculated for the
number of fixture units and in accordance with the applicable plumbing code(s).
   C.   In addition to any rules, regulations, processes, reviews, and
approvals required and/or provided by applicable state law, including rule 392-
502, UAC:
      1.   The above stated source and storage requirements do not include
water demands for outside use or fire protection. If the culinary system is
intended to provide water for such purposes, the above stated water
requirements must be appropriately increased. Specific information on watering
requirements (e.g., area of land to be irrigated) must be provided for city
review and approval.
      2.   Construction of a public drinking water supply system intended to
serve occupants of any transient lodging facility shall not commence until
plans prepared by a licensed professional registered engineer (in accordance
with title 58, chapter 22, "professional engineers, and land surveyors
licensing act", Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended)) have been submitted to
and approved in writing by the city. Following construction, the system may not
be placed in service until a final inspection is made by the city.
   D.   All systems shall be monitored in accordance with the state of Utah
public drinking water rules and in cooperation with the local health department
having jurisdiction.
   E.   Any culinary system or portion thereof that is drained seasonally must
be cleaned, flushed and disinfected prior to use. Furthermore, a water sample
of satisfactory bacteriologic quality, i.e., a sample showing not more than one
coliform bacteria per one hundred milliliters (100 ml) sample, must be obtained
before being placed into service.
   F.   Systems operated on a seasonal basis may be required to sample for
bacteriologic analysis at an accelerated frequency as determined by the
director or director of the local health department having jurisdiction. (Ord.
2013-09, 7-17-2013)
3-11-4: WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
   A.   All wastewater shall be discharged to a public sewer system where
accessible and within three hundred feet (300') of the transient lodging
facility's property line.
   B.   Where connection to a public sewer is not available, wastewater shall
be discharged into a wastewater disposal system meeting requirements of the
state and of Ash Creek special service district ("Ash Creek") for waste
disposal. Unless water usage rates are available, design shall be based on not
less than one hundred twenty five (125) gallons per day per hotel, motel or
resort unit.
   C.   All plans for the construction or alteration of a wastewater disposal
system shall initially be submitted to Ash Creek, the local health department,
and, where required by law, the state department of environmental quality
("DEQ"). Construction or alteration of the disposal system shall not commence
until the plans have been approved, in writing, by Ash Creek and the
appropriate health agency or agencies. (Ord. 2013-09, 7-17-2013)
3-11-5: PLUMBING:
   A.   All plumbing in any transient lodging facility shall comply with the
provisions of the currently adopted and applicable state and local plumbing
codes.
   B.   The adequacy of plumbing fixtures shall be determined by the stricter
of the following: adopted plumbing codes, local ordinance, or tables I and II
of rule 392-502-5, UAC, as amended.
   C.   All restrooms shall be conveniently located.
   D.   Plumbing fixtures which normally require water for their operation
shall be supplied with an adequate potable water supply under pressure; and
facilities should be provided with hot water as required.
   E.   Wherever toilet facilities for males and females are located in the
same building, and adjacent to each other, they shall be separated by sound
resistant wall. Direct line of sight to each restroom shall be obstructed.
   F.   Soap and toilet tissue in suitable dispensers and individual towels or
other approved hand drying facilities and suitable waste receptacles with lids
shall be provided in each restroom. (Ord. 2013-09, 7-17-2013)
3-11-6: OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Each structure made available for occupancy shall comply with the
requirements of the currently adopted and applicable state and local building
codes.
   B.   Comfort of occupants shall be provided for by adequate heating,
lighting, and ventilation.
      1.   Total window area in any room should be equal to at least ten
percent (10%) and in no case less than five percent (5%) of the floor area.
      2.   For adequate ventilation, either of the following is required at all
times: a) that one or more windows be capable of being opened by occupants, or
b) that mechanical ventilation be provided.
      3.   Adequate means shall be employed to minimize odors in all rooms
intended for overnight use.
   C.   In dormitory type accommodations, if and where such are permitted and
approved, beds shall be separated by a horizontal distance of at least five
feet (5'), reducible to three feet (3') if beds are alternated head to foot
except in the case of double deck bunks, which shall have a minimum horizontal
separation of six feet (6') under all circumstances. If suitable permanent
partitions are installed between beds, spacing requirements may be modified
upon approval of the city and the director or director of the local health
department having jurisdiction.
   D.   Floors, walls and ceilings shall: 1) be so constructed as to be easily
cleaned, and 2) be kept clean and in good repair.
   E.   Each bed, bunk, cot or sleeping facility for use by occupants shall
afford reasonable comfort and be maintained in a sanitary condition.
      1.   Mattresses, mattress covers, quilts, blankets, pillows, pillow
slips, sheets, comforters, and other bedding shall be kept clean and in good
repair.
      2.   Bedding shall be made available to each occupant not furnishing his
own.
      3.   Pillows shall have pillow slips.
      4.   Sheets shall be large enough to completely cover mattresses.
      5.   Bedding shall be changed daily and/or between occupancy of the unit
by different guests or patrons.
   F.   All eating and drinking utensils for use by guests or patrons in rooms,
shall be: 1) single service; or 2) washed and sanitized in a manner prescribed
by applicable state law and/or regulation, and protected from subsequent
contamination.
   G.   All food service employees, and all food, ice, vending machines, food
storage, and preparation and serving facilities, shall: 1) comply and/or be
compliant with applicable state law and/or regulation, and 2) be protected from
contamination.
   H.   The dispensing of ice from storage bins where the general public has
free access is prohibited.
   I.   Where occupants are permitted to cook in a hotel, motel, or resort
unit, a space for kitchen facilities shall be provided, and shall be equipped
with at least a minimum of a kitchen sink installed in accordance with
requirements of the applicable plumbing code(s).
   J.   Guestrooms used for sleeping purposes shall be supplied with a
lavatory, hand soap, hot and cold running water, and clean individual towels
for each guest or patron; and clean individual towels shall be supplied daily
or in between occupant use.
   K.   All buildings, rooms, equipment, vending and ice machines, offered
amenities (including advertised pools, hot tubs, and spas), and grounds
surrounding them shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and operable condition;
and each hotel, motel, or resort unit may be cleaned, from time to time, during
the period of any occupant use, and shall be cleaned: 1) at least once a week
during any period of occupant use lasting a week or more, and 2) in the period
between occupancy by different guests or patrons.
   L.   All necessary means shall be employed to eliminate and control
infestations of insects and rodents on the premises of the transient lodging
facility and any unit thereof, including, but not limited to, the use of
approved screening or other approved control of outside openings in structures
intended for occupancy or food service facilities.
   M.   Pets are not permitted in: 1) dining and/or swimming pool areas; and 2)
guestrooms that are not designated as pet friendly.
      1.   Each operator must make a pet oriented election for each facility
and post at the registration desk one of the following four (4) signs
appropriate to the election:
         a.   An operator may elect not to allow any pets in the facility. An
operator who makes this election shall post a sign at the registration desk
that reads: "NO PETS ALLOWED IN THIS FACILITY".
         b.   An operator may elect to allow pets in all guestrooms of the
facility. An operator who makes this election shall post a sign at the
registration desk that reads: "PETS ALLOWED IN ALL GUEST ROOMS".
         c.   An operator may elect to allow pets in all guestrooms of the
facility, except as posted at specific guestrooms. An operator who makes this
election shall post a sign at the registration desk that reads: "PETS ALLOWED
IN ALL GUEST ROOMS EXCEPT IN ROOMS POSTED WITH `NO PETS ALLOWED'". An operator
who makes this election shall also post a sign at the entrance to the room in a
position clearly visible on entry into the room. The sign shall use the words,
"NO PETS ALLOWED", in uppercase letters at least three-fourths inch (3/4") or
1.9 centimeters in height. (Ord. 2013-09, 7-17-2013)
         d.   An operator may elect not to allow pets in any guestroom of the
facility, except as posted on specific guestrooms. An operator who makes this
election shall post a sign at the registration desk that reads: "NO PETS
ALLOWED IN GUEST ROOMS EXCEPT IN ROOMS POSTED AS `PET FRIENDLY'". An operator
who makes this election shall also post a sign at the entrance to the room in a
position clearly visible on entry into the room. The sign shall use the words,
"PET FRIENDLY ROOM", in uppercase letters at least three-fourths inch (3/4") or
1.9 centimeters in height. (Ord. 2014-03, 3-5-2014)
      2.   The operator shall post the facility election sign required by
subsection M1 of this section at the registration desk in clear view to each
potential guest who presents at the registration desk. This may require more
than one sign to be posted at the registration desk. The sign shall be in
uppercase letters at least one inch (1"), 2.54 centimeters, in height.
      3.   The signs at the guestrooms in a facility that allows pets in a
limited number of guestrooms shall be placed in a position clearly visible upon
entry into the room.
      4.   All signs must be easily readable and must not be obscured in any
way.
      5.   The operator shall ensure that accumulations of pet hair, fur,
feathers, feces, and soiled bedding are removed from rooms at least once per
day or as often as necessary to prevent unsanitary conditions or odors. Where
available, the operator shall designate an outdoor area on the premises of
public hotel, motel, and resort facilities for pet walking. The operator shall
keep the premises, including pet walking areas, free of pet waste. If an area
for pet walking is impractical or not available, the operator shall:
         a.   Require pet owners to keep pets in portable kennels; or
         b.   Keep pets diapered; or
         c.   Provide pet waste bags for pet owners to use to dispose of pet
waste produced while walking their pets while out of doors.
      6.   If an operator of a transient lodging facility chooses to modify the
status of a room from a pet friendly room to a nonpet friendly room, the
operator shall perform a full deep cleaning of the room: a) in a manner likely
to remove the allergens, and b) which shall include the shampooing of carpets,
laundering of bedding, laundering of drapes, washing of all walls, and cleaning
of all other objects and surfaces that may harbor allergens. (Ord. 2013-09, 7-
17-2013)
3-11-7: SWIMMING POOLS:
Any swimming pool, wading or therapy pool made available to occupants of any
transient lodging facility shall comply with all applicable state and local
regulations, including rule 392-302, UAC. (Ord. 2013-09, 7-17-2013)
3-11-8: SOLID WASTE:
Solid wastes originating in any transient lodging facility shall be stored in a
sanitary manner in watertight containers with lids, or the equivalent, approved
by the city and the local health department. The containers shall be
conveniently located, and the contents shall be disposed of, in a manner
approved by the state or local health department. (Ord. 2013-09, 7-17-2013)
3-11-9: MANAGEMENT:
Each transient lodging facility shall maintain an office on the premises, in
the charge and under the immediate supervision of an on site manager or
attendant, which shall be and remain continuously open and staffed whenever
said facility is open to receive guests, and, at a minimum, from seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. each day that the facility is
open for business and receiving or providing lodging for patrons or guests.
(Ord. 2013-09, 7-17-2013)
3-11-10: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
   A.   License: No transient lodging facility may operate or continue
operating without a current and valid business license from the city, issued
pursuant to the rules, regulations, and procedures of chapter 1 of this title
and this chapter.
   B.   Inspections: Each transient lodging facility, and associated personnel,
shall comply and cooperate with any fire, land use, code enforcement, building,
health, or other inspection conducted by municipal officials, with or without
notice.
   C.   Disclosure Of Available Rooms: The owner, manager, and/or attendant of
any transient lodging facility shall, at the time of licensing and upon
request, disclose to the business license officer, code enforcement officer,
and/or law enforcement personnel the current number of rooms available and/or
held out for public accommodation.
   D.   Guest Registers: The guest register for the transient lodging facility
shall be kept current and shall be made available for inspection by city
officials and law enforcement officers, upon request and in accordance with
applicable law and procedure.
   E.   Duty To Report: Any owner, manager, and/or attendant of any transient
lodging facility shall promptly report to the proper authorities any violation
(s) of law or municipal ordinance which (he or she has reason to believe) is
being or has been committed on the premises. (Ord. 2013-09, 7-17-2013)
3-11-11: OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Number: It is unlawful for any transient lodging facility unit to be
occupied by a greater number of persons than that number of persons: 1) allowed
by law, 2) it can safely accommodate, and 3) for which the unit is designed and
is, or will be, furnished (e.g., rollaway beds, cribs, etc.). (Ord. 2013-09, 7-
17-2013)
   B.   Length Of Stay: Patrons of the transient lodging facility shall not
contract for or occupy any unit or combination of units therein for a period
greater than twenty nine (29) consecutive days. (Ord. 2015-05, 7-1-2015)
3-11-12: BED AND BREAKFAST AND VACATION RENTAL FACILITIES (WHEN, WHERE, AND TO
THE EXTENT PERMITTED, INCLUDING THOSE GRANDFATHERED UNDER PRIOR LAW):
   A.   Transient Facilities: Bed and breakfast (“BnB”) and vacation rental
(“VR”) facilities (when, where, and to the extent permitted, including those
grandfathered under prior law) are and constitute transient facilities, subject
to government regulation, the licensing requirements of chapter 1 of this
title, and the transient room tax imposed pursuant to chapter 8 of this title.
However, there are substantial differences between the character of BnB and VR
facilities and other types of transient facilities, and the degree of
regulation necessary to protect against harm to occupants of BnBs and VRs and
adjoining properties. Therefore BnBs and VRs:
      1.   Shall be operated and maintained in general conformity with:
         a.   The spirit and intent of this chapter.
         b.   The intent of the city council that such uses be operated and
maintained in such a manner as to be compatible with and not adversely affect
neighboring permitted uses within the community.
      2.   Shall be operated and maintained, and otherwise governed, by the
terms, conditions, and provisions of sections
3-11-2 and
3-11-10 of this chapter (except that daily inspections shall not be required),
this section, and the remedial and penalty provisions of section
3-11-13 of this chapter.
   B.   Management: Each BnB facility must maintain an office on the premises
in the charge and under the immediate supervision of a manager or attendant at
all times. Such office shall remain continuously open and staffed whenever
there are guests registered or present and whenever the facility is open to
receive guests.
   C.   Disclosure Of Available Rooms:
      1.   Each BnB and vacation rental (hereinafter "VR") facility shall
disclose to the business license officer the current number of rooms available
and/or held out for public accommodation, or, in the case of VRs, the total
number of people the dwelling can safely accommodate (which number shall first
be determined by the city building official, in accordance with the applicable
building codes):
         a.   At the time of initial licensure or license renewal; and
         b.   Within seventy two (72) hours of any change in the number of such
available rooms or accommodation of guests.
      2.   The occupancy load shall be prominently posted within the BnB or VR
facility.
   D.   Display Of License: A current, valid business license shall be posted
in a conspicuous place in each BnB and VR facility.
   E.   Occupancy: It shall be unlawful for any BnB or VR facility unit to be
occupied by a greater number of persons than that which: 1) it is designed or
furnished to accommodate and 2) is permitted under the applicable building and
building related codes adopted by the city (see title 9, chapter 1 of this
code). The requirements of said codes differ for facility occupancies of ten
(10) or fewer persons, and for occupancies of greater than ten (10) persons.
   F.   Responsibility For Minors: No BnB or VR facility unit shall be rented,
leased, or registered to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. Each
person to whom a BnB or VR facility unit is rented, leased, or registered shall
be responsible for any minors occupying such unit, and shall remain on the BnB
or VR facility premises at all times while there are minors occupying such
unit.
   G.   Length Of Stay: No person shall occupy or contract to occupy any unit
or combination of units at any one BnB or VR facility for longer than twenty
nine (29) consecutive days, and no BnB or VR facility shall permit any person
to occupy or contract to occupy any unit or combination of units on the
facility premises for longer than twenty nine (29) consecutive days.
   H.   Sanitary Facilities:
      1.   Each BnB or VR facility unit held out for public accommodation must
comply with the minimum rules established by the Utah department of health.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to rent, lease, or otherwise hold out for
public accommodation any transient lodging facility unit which does not have:
         a.   A complete operable bathroom, including flush toilet, sink, and
bath or shower in working order; and
         b.   For each guest, an adequate daily supply of at least the
following sanitary supplies: hot and cold running water, soap, towels, toilet
paper, and clean linen.
      3.   Each BnB and VR facility shall be cleaned after the departure of
each guest and before the arrival of any subsequent guest.
   I.   Inspections:
      1.   Each BnB and VR facility shall comply with all applicable building
and building related codes, and shall cooperate with any fire, land use, code
enforcement, building, health, or other inspection conducted by municipal
officials, to ensure compliance.
      2.   An inspection of a BnB or VR facility/property, for compliance with
these regulations, will be performed at the time of business license review.
Additional inspections may be performed with twenty four (24) hour notice to
the license holder if deemed necessary by the city; provided that, no prior
notice is required in situations where emergency conditions exist or the city
has a good faith belief that the safety of the occupants is in danger and/or
the occupancy load of the facility is being exceeded.
   J.   Contact Information; Contact Person(s):
      1.   License holders and owners of BnB and VR facilities shall, at all
times that they are operational, provide and maintain with the city up to date
and current personal contact information regarding such holder, owner, operator
of the facility, and/or other responsible party (known herein as "contact
person(s)").
      2.   Such contact person(s) shall: a) be a resident of Washington County;
b) be able to provide information on current occupants to police and/or
emergency personnel as needed; and c) respond to complaints and concerns within
one hour of any phone call. Failure to respond is a violation hereof and may
result in fines to the business license holder and property owner.
   K.   BnB And VR Facilities In Residential Zones:
      1.   Restrictions imposed by this subsection are in recognition of the
premise that BnBs and VRs provide lodging for a transient population that may
or may not honor neighborhood mores or exhibit neighborly consideration to the
same extent as permanent residents. No new VR facility may be created or
operated, and no existing VR facility may be expanded, in residential zones:
these rules and regulations apply to those VR facilities licensed and
operational before they were no longer permitted in residential zones.
      2.   A business license for a BnB or VR in a residential zone shall only
be approved and issued, or renewed, by the city if:
         a.   The BnB or VR dwelling unit is located in an existing single-
family dwelling.
         b.   The owner of the BnB or VR facility provides address labels and
stamped envelopes for all other residential property owners within three
hundred feet (300') of the facility, so that the city may provide to those
owners: 1) a copy of the regulations set forth in this subsection, 2) the
contact information for the facility owner, and 3) the responsible party
contact number for concerns.
      3.   The BnB or VR facility and property shall be maintained to the
following minimum standards:
         a.   Structures shall be properly maintained, painted and kept in good
repair, and grounds and landscaped areas shall be properly maintained and
watered, in order that the use does not detract from the general appearance of
the neighborhood; and
         b.   Required parking areas and access to parking areas shall be
maintained and available for use at all times. Parking for this use shall be
contained on the site, and shall not be allowed on the public rights of way.
Parking may not impact more than forty percent (40%) of a front yard.
      4.   The use of a dwelling as a BnB or VR shall not change the appearance
of the dwelling or property for residential purposes.
      5.   Outdoor pools, hot tubs or spas shall not be used between the hours
of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
      6.   The owner or operator of the BnB or VR facility shall ensure that
occupants thereof do not:
         a.   Create noises that by reason of time, nature, intensity or
duration are out of character with noises customarily heard in the surrounding
residential neighborhood.
         b.   Disturb the peace of surrounding residential property residents.
         c.   Interfere with the privacy of or trespass onto surrounding
residential properties.
         d.   Allow pets to do anything listed in subsections K6a through K6c
of this section.
         e.   Engage in any disorderly or illegal conduct, including illegal
consumption of drugs and alcohol.
      7.   A sign informing guests of all regulations shown above must be
posted in a prominent location in or on the BnB or VR facility.
   L.   Application Of This Section: The requirements of this section shall be
in effect throughout the time a BnB or VR business license is in effect on the
property, notwithstanding that such property may be occupied by the owner or
nonpaying guests of the owner. The City finds that, given the practical
difficulty of determining whether or not the occupants are paying guests,
enforcement of the requirements shall be based on whether the property is
licensed as a BnB or VR at the relevant time.
   M.   Violations; Remedies: Owners, operators, and license holders of BnBs
and VRs, and owners of the property whereupon such BnBs and VRs are situated,
who violate the provisions of this section (herein known as "violators") are
subject to the remedies and penalties set forth in section
3-11-13 of this chapter, provided that: (Ord. 2015-05, 7-1-2015)
      1.   Violation of any subsection of this section shall constitute a
separate violation for each day it occurs or continues. Operation of a BnB or
VR facility without a current LaVerkin City business license is considered a
violation; and each day of operation shall be considered a separate offense.
Evidence of operation shall not require verification of the presence of guests,
but may be determined by any manner not proscribed by State or Federal law.
(Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
      2.   Violators shall be issued written citations containing a description
of the nature of the violation and the amount of fine levied in accordance with
the fee schedule for an infraction, provided that, such fine shall not be less
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      3.   The business license for a BnB or VR facility may be revoked,
suspended, or denied renewal if three (3) citations are issued within any
twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 2015-05, 7-1-2015; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 9-21-
2022)
3-11-13: PENALTY; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In addition to a possible denial, suspension, revocation or refusal by the City
to renew a business license as outlined in section
3-1-13 of this title, any licensee who shall operate a transient lodging
facility in violation of this chapter (and/or any person designated by the
licensee as the manager or person in charge of daily operation of said
facility, who shall permit or allow said facility to operate in violation of
this chapter) shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished for each
offense by a fine as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 2013-
09, 7-17-2013; amd. Ord. 2015-05, 7-1-2015)
3-11-13-5: DEVELOPMENTS AND RESORTS:
   A.   Applicability: This section shall pertain to developments and
recreational vehicle (RV) resorts provided for in section 10-6G2-2-5 of this
Code.
   B.   Operational And Maintenance Requirements:
      1.   Business License: A current and valid business license from the City
is required.
      2.   Operator/Manager: The resort must be managed by one or more licensed
property managers or a property management company ("manager"), which shall
maintain an office - within the resort or elsewhere within Washington County -
that is open during normal business hours.
      3.   Taxes: The resort shall maintain a Utah Sales Tax license and shall
assess and collect all required taxes from the patrons/users of resort
facilities, including Transient Room Taxes (see chapter 8 of this title).
      4.   Occupancy Limit: No patron of the resort may occupy the transient
facilities in the resort for more than twenty nine (29) consecutive days.
      5.   Caretaker And Resident Employees: An on site caretaker shall be
reasonably available at all times to monitor the resort and the health and
safety concerns of the resort's patrons and staff. That caretaker may be the
manager or representative thereof; and he or she (and his or her household, if
any) may reside within the resort, as well as a limited number of employees and
their households, subject to the provisions of subsection 10-6G2-2-5B4 of this
Code.
   C.   Violations; Remedies: Owners, operators, and license holders of RV
resorts and/or other transient lodging facilities allowed or otherwise provided
for herein, who violate the provisions of this section (herein known as
"violators"), are subject to the remedies and penalties set forth in section
3-11-13 of this chapter, provided that:
      1.   Violation of any subsection of this section shall constitute a
separate violation for each day it occurs or continues. Operation of the RV
resort and/or other transient lodging facility without a current and valid
LaVerkin City business license is considered a violation; and each day of
operation shall be considered a separate offense. Evidence of operation shall
not require verification of the presence of guests, but may be determined by
the existence of advertisements, of any kind, offering the property for rent or
other remuneration.
      2.   Violators shall be issued written citations containing a description
of the nature of the violation and the amount of fine levied in accordance with
the fee schedule for an infraction, provided that, such fine shall not be less
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      3.   The business license for the RV resort and/or other transient
lodging facility may be revoked, suspended, or denied renewal if three (3)
citations are issued within any twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 2017-02, 2-15-
2017)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Nuisances Defined; Declaration
4-1-1-1: Definition
4-1-1-2: Author Defined
4-1-1-3: Declaration Of Nuisance
4-1-1-4: Enumeration Of Nuisances
4-1-1-5: Restroom Or Sewer Facilities
4-1-1-6: Restrictions On Blocking Water
4-1-2: Nuisances On Property
4-1-2-1: Definition
4-1-2-2: Duty Of Maintenance Of Private Property
4-1-2-3: Storage Of Personal Property
4-1-2-4: Abatement By Owners
4-1-3: Abatement Procedure
4-1-3-1: Appointment And Duties Of Nuisance Inspector
4-1-3-2: Hearing
4-1-3-3: Failure To Comply; Abatement By City
4-1-3-4: Itemized Statement
4-1-3-5: Storage Of Items Removed From Property
4-1-3-6: Penalties And Enforcement
4-1-3-7: Policies For Order Of Compliance
4-1-3-8: Exemption For Critical Infrastructure Materials Operations
4-1-1: NUISANCES DEFINED; DECLARATION:
4-1-1-1: DEFINITION:
Whatever is dangerous to human life or health and whatever renders soil, air,
water or food impure or unwholesome is declared to be a nuisance and unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person either as an owner, agent or occupant to
create or aid in creating or contributing to or maintaining a nuisance. (1982
Code § 10-311)
4-1-1-2: AUTHOR DEFINED:
Where a nuisance exists upon property and is the outgrowth of the usual,
natural or necessary use of the property, the landlord or his agent, the tenant
or his agent, and all other persons having control of the property on which
such nuisance exists, shall be deemed to be the authors thereof and shall be
equally liable and responsible. Where any such nuisance shall arise from the
unusual or unnecessary use of such property or from the business thereon
conducted, then the occupants and all other persons contributing to the
continuance of such nuisance shall be deemed the authors. (1982 Code § 10-312)
4-1-1-3: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
   A.   Every act or condition made, permitted, allowed or continued in
violation of section
4-1-1-1 of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated
and punished as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Nuisances include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Befouling Water: Befouling water in any spring, stream, well or
water source supplying water for culinary purposes. (1982 Code § 10-313)
      2.   Privies, Cesspools: Allowing any privy vault or cesspool or other
individual wastewater disposal system to become a menace to health or a source
of odors or contamination to air or water. (1982 Code § 10-313; amd. 1998 Code)
      3.   Garbage Containers, Offensive: Permitting any garbage container to
remain on premises when it has become unclean and offensive.
      4.   Garbage Accumulation: Allowing vegetable waste, garbage, litter,
filth or refuse of any nature to accumulate within or upon any private alley,
yard or area, except when it is temporarily deposited for immediate removal.
      5.   Manure Accumulation: Permitting the accumulation of manure in any
stable, stall, corral, feed yard, yard or in any other building or area in
which any animals are kept.
      6.   Slaughterhouses, Feed Yards: Permitting any slaughterhouse, market,
meat shop, stable, feed yard or other place or building wherein any animals are
slaughtered, kept, fed or sold to remain unclean or in any state or condition
detrimental to health or creating a nuisance because of odors, or in which
flies or rodents breed. (1982 Code § 10-313)
      7.   Discharging Offensive Water Or Liquid Waste: Discharging or placing
any offensive water, chemical spray, liquid waste or refuse of any kind into
any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash, natural watercourse, ditch,
canal or any vacant lot or which, as the result of continued discharge, will
render the place of discharge offensive or likely to become so. (1982 Code §
10-313; amd. 1998 Code)
      8.   Collecting Grease, Offensive Matter: Keeping or collecting any stale
or putrid grease or other offensive matter.
      9.   Flies And Mosquitos: Having or permitting upon any premises any fly
or mosquito producing condition.
      10.   Public Drinking Vessels: Keeping any drinking vessel for public use
without providing a method of decontamination between uses.
      11.   Ablutions Near Drinking Fountain: Permitting or performing any
ablutions in or near any public drinking fountain.
      12.   Boarding House Or Factory, Sanitary Condition: Failing to furnish
any dwelling house, boarding house or factory or other place of employment with
such privy vaults, water closets, sinks or other facilities as may be required
to maintain the same in sanitary condition.
      13.   Cleaning Privy Vaults: Neglecting or refusing to discontinue use
of, clean out, disinfect and fill up all privy vaults and cesspools or other
individual wastewater disposal systems within twenty (20) days after notice
from an enforcement officer or official of the city.
      14.   Stagnant Water; Offensive Substances: Permitting any lot or
excavation to become the repository of stagnant water or any decaying or
offensive substances.
      15.   Obstructing Public Ways, Watercourses, Parks: Obstructing or
tending to obstruct or interfere with or render dangerous for passage any
street or sidewalks, lake, stream, drainage, canal or basin, or any public park
without first obtaining the written permission of the city council. (1982 Code
§ 10-313)
4-1-1-4: ENUMERATION OF NUISANCES:
The types of nuisances above stated shall be deemed in addition to and in no
way a limitation of the nuisances subject to this chapter. (1982 Code § 10-314)
4-1-1-5: RESTROOM OR SEWER FACILITIES:
All restroom or sewer facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with Utah law and city ordinances. All such facilities that do not
comply with such provisions are hereby declared to be a nuisance and are
subject to abatement as herein prescribed. (1982 Code § 10-315; amd. 1998 Code)
4-1-1-6: RESTRICTIONS ON BLOCKING WATER:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any drainage system,
canal, ditch, conduit or other watercourse of any kind or nature, natural or
artificial, to become so obstructed as to cause the water to back up and
overflow therefrom, or to become unsanitary.
   B.   Maintenance of any such watercourse in such condition shall constitute
a nuisance and the same shall be subject to abatement. (1982 Code § 10-316)
4-1-2: NUISANCES ON PROPERTY:
4-1-2-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this section the term "nuisance" is defined to mean any
condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which are deleterious or
injurious, noxious or unsightly, which includes, but is not limited to, keeping
or depositing on or scattering over the premises any of the following:
   A.   Lumber, junk, trash or debris. (1982 Code § 10-331)
   B.   Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as
automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers, or
other discarded items not currently in use. (1982 Code § 10-331; amd. 1998
Code)
4-1-2-2: DUTY OF MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall
maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or
maintain such premises in any manner causing substantial diminution in the
value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are
located. (1982 Code § 10-332)
4-1-2-3: STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY:
Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped and junked machinery, implements,
equipment or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for
the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of thirty (30) days or
more (except in licensed junk yards) within the city, is hereby declared to be
a nuisance and dangerous to the public safety. (1982 Code § 10-333)
4-1-2-4: ABATEMENT BY OWNERS:
The owner, owners, tenants, lessees or occupants of any lot within the city on
which such "storage", as defined in section
4-1-2-3 of this chapter, is made, and also the owner, owners or lessees of the
above described personal property involved in such storage, shall jointly and
severally abate such nuisance by its prompt removal into completely enclosed
and secured yards or buildings to be used for such purposes, or otherwise
remove such property from the city. (1982 Code § 10-334)
4-1-3: ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
4-1-3-1: APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF NUISANCE INSPECTOR:
   A.   Appointment: There is hereby established the position of nuisance
inspector, whose duties it shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
More than one person may be appointed to act as nuisance inspector under this
section.
   B.   Duties: The nuisance inspector is authorized to:
      1.   Perform all functions necessary to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
      2.   Inspect or cause to be inspected, as often as needed, all buildings,
structures, lots or places for the purpose of determining whether such are in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Existence Of Objectionable Condition: If he concludes there exists an
objectionable condition in violation of this chapter, the nuisance inspector
shall:
      1.   Ascertain the names of the owners and occupants and descriptions of
the premises where such objects and conditions constituting a nuisance exist.
      2.   Serve notice in writing upon the owner and occupant of such
premises, either personally or by certified mail, addressed to the owner and
occupant at their last known post office addresses as disclosed by the records
of the county assessor, or as otherwise ascertained, requiring such owner or
occupant, or both, as the case may be, to eradicate or destroy and remove the
nuisance within such time as the nuisance inspector may designate; provided,
that any person notified pursuant to this subsection have twenty (20) days
following the date of service of such notice to correct the objectionable
condition or request a hearing on the same. The nuisance inspector shall make
proof of service of such notice under oath, and file the same in the office of
the county treasurer. The notice shall:
         a.   Contain a specific statement of the nature of the violation and a
description of the premises on which the violation exists.
         b.   Inform the owner, or occupant that in the event he disagrees with
the determination of the nuisance inspector and does not wish to comply with
the provisions of the notice or that he objects to the factual or legal basis
for the notice, he may, within twenty (20) days following service of the
notice, request in writing a hearing before the city council at a time and
place to be set by the city council.
         c.   Inform the person that in the event he fails or neglects to
either correct the objectionable condition, or request a hearing within the
time limit given within the notice, the city may either pursue legal action
against him or correct the objectionable conditions, in which case it will
collect the costs of such correction by either charging the cost of correcting
violation against the property as a tax, or filing a court action for such
collections, in which case the person will also be assessed reasonable attorney
fees and court costs related to such action. Said notice shall also inform the
owner that his failure to correct the objectionable condition or request a
hearing within the time limits given shall constitute a waiver and consent by
him that the city and its agents may thereafter freely enter onto his property
to correct the condition.
      3.   In the event the owner or occupant makes a request for a hearing,
the city council shall immediately set the time and place for a hearing the
city recorder shall notify the owner, and occupant and other persons having an
interest in said property or the condition thereof in writing of the time and
place of the hearing. The hearing shall be heard within ten (10) days from the
date of service or mailing of the notice of hearing. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-16-2001)
4-1-3-2: HEARING:
   A.   Informal Hearing; Written Decision: At the written request of an owner,
occupant or other person having an interest in property which is the subject of
a notice to remove or abate weeds, objectionable conditions or objects from the
property, the city council shall conduct an informal hearing (which need not be
reported), wherein such persons may present such evidence and argument as is
pertinent to the question of whether or not the removal or abatement of the
objects or conditions is properly within the purview of this chapter. The city
council shall also permit the presentation of evidence and argument by the
nuisance inspector and other interested parties. Thereafter, within not less
than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days, the city council shall render its
written decision affirming, modifying or reversing the determination of the
nuisance inspector, a copy of which shall be mailed or served upon the owner or
any other person to whom the original notice was given by the nuisance
inspector.
   B.   Time Period For Compliance: The written decision of the city council
shall apprise the owner or occupant of whether the nuisance inspector's
original determination has been affirmed, modified or reversed, and, unless
reversed, it shall set forth the details and extent to which the owner or
occupant must make removal or other abatement of the objectionable objects or
conditions, if any. The owner or occupant shall be required to conform to the
decision of the city council within ten (10) days after service or mailing of a
copy of the decision, and the decision shall be deemed to be the modified
decision of the nuisance inspector, unless additional time is authorized by the
city council.
   C.   Filing Of Amended Notice: If a hearing before the city council is
requested, the nuisance inspector shall file an amended notice or written
decision of the city council, as the case may be, in the office of the county
treasurer. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-16-2001)
4-1-3-3: FAILURE TO COMPLY; ABATEMENT BY CITY:
If any owner, occupant or other person having an interest in the land in
question shall fail or neglect to conform to the requirements of the nuisance
inspector's original notice, or the written decision of the city council if a
hearing is held, within the date fixed for the compliance, which is the time
limit specified in said notice/written decision and in this chapter, relating
to the eradication of any nuisance, including destruction or removal of such
weeds, garbage, refuse, objects or structures, the nuisance inspector may
employ all necessary assistance to cause such objectionable objects or
conditions to be removed or destroyed at the expense of the owner. The owner's
failure to eradicate the nuisance by the date fixed for compliance shall
constitute a waiver and consent by him that thereafter the city and its agents
may freely enter onto his property to correct the condition. (Ord. 2001-04, 5-
16-2001)
4-1-3-4: ITEMIZED STATEMENT:
The nuisance inspector shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses
incurred in the removal and destruction of nuisances, including actual and
projected storage costs of items removed and temporarily stored pursuant to
section
4-1-3-5 of this chapter, and shall mail a copy thereof to the owner or occupant
or both or to persons having an interest in the property, demanding payment
within twenty (20) days of the date of mailing. The notice shall be deemed
delivered when mailed by registered mail, addressed to the last known address
of the property owner, occupant or persons having an interest in the property.
(1982 Code § 10-354)
4-1-3-5: STORAGE OF ITEMS REMOVED FROM PROPERTY:
Any personal property items removed from the property as a result of abatement
by the city shall be transported to a suitable location for temporary storage.
Said items shall be inventoried by the city, and a copy of the inventory shall
be provided to the owner along with the itemized statement of removal expenses
described in section
4-1-3-4 of this chapter and a notice that the owner shall have thirty (30) days
from the date the city removed the items to retrieve them, provided he first:
a) pays the full cost of the itemized statement including storage costs for the
number of days the items were stored by the city at a daily storage rate
determined by the city; and b) signs a waiver and consent form stating that if
the items are again found to be a nuisance on the owner's property, he shall
forfeit all claim of ownership to them. If the items are not retrieved by the
owner within thirty (30) days, the city may dispose of them in any manner it
sees fit, including sale of the items and retention of the sale proceeds. (Ord.
2001-04, 5-16-2001)
4-1-3-6: PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   In addition to and separate from possible abatement of the nuisance by
the city as described in this chapter, after the date fixed for compliance
described in this chapter, the city may pursue a civil or criminal action
against a property owner who has committed a nuisance violation as determined
by the nuisance inspector. A nuisance violation shall be a class C misdemeanor,
subject to all penalties and enforcement measures described in title 1, chapter
4 of this code. If the city pursues criminal action against the property owner
for any nuisance violation, the property owner may, upon conviction, be guilty
of a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4
of this code, and for the additional penalty of one hundred twenty five dollars
($125.00) for each and every day the violation continues after the date fixed
for compliance.
   B.   In respect to any amount owed the city for its abatement of the
nuisance, the nuisance inspector may refer the same to the county treasurer for
inclusion in the tax notice of the property owner. He shall do so by delivering
three (3) copies of the itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the
removal and destruction of the nuisance to the county treasurer within ten (10)
days after the completion of the work of removal, after which the county
treasurer shall have the responsibility to provide for collection of the same.
Alternatively, the city may file suit against the property owner for collection
of these costs, in which case reasonable attorney fees, interest and court
costs shall be awarded the city upon obtaining a judgment in the suit, in
addition to the costs of abatement.
   C.   Any property owner who has committed a nuisance violation as determined
by the nuisance inspector to be a fire hazard and who fails to implement
abatement procedures as requested shall, in addition to penalties and remedies
set forth above, be required to reimburse the city for all costs of fire
suppression in the event of a fire on the subject property. (Ord. 2005-35, 10-
5-2005)
4-1-3-7: POLICIES FOR ORDER OF COMPLIANCE:
   A.   Violation;
   B.   Notice;
   C.   Request for hearing by violator within twenty (20) days of notice, or
if no hearing request - enforcement;
   D.   Notice of hearing sent to violator;
   E.   Hearing before city council within ten (10) days of notice;
   F.   Written decision by council - between five (5) and ten (10) days after
hearing;
   G.   Compliance by violator within ten (10) days of decision (can be
extended to 30 days);
   H.   Enforcement (criminal action, civil action or abatement of nuisance by
city). (Ord. 2001-04, 5-16-2001)
4-1-3-8: EXEMPTION FOR CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE MATERIALS OPERATIONS:
   A.   Exemption. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, any
critical infrastructure materials operation that is operated in compliance with
all applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations shall not be
considered a public or private nuisance and shall be exempt from the
prohibitions of this Chapter, unless such operation bears a direct relationship
to public health or safety.
   B.   Definition. For purposes of this section, the term “critical
infrastructure materials operation” shall mean any operation for the
extraction, excavation, processing, or reprocessing of sand, gravel and rock
aggregate.
   C.   Limitations. Nothing in this section shall exempt a critical
infrastructure materials operator from compliance with all applicable state or
federal environmental, safety, or operational standards, or from liability for
negligence, unlawful conduct, or operations conducted outside the protections
afforded by Utah Code §17-41-430. (Ord. 2025-05, 9-3-2025)
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definition
4-2-2: Permit Required
4-2-3: Application For Permit
4-2-4: Issuance Of Permit
4-2-5: Control Of Animal And Fowl Facilities
4-2-6: Existing Businesses And Facilities
4-2-7: Accumulation Of Manure Prohibited
4-2-8: Penalty
4-2-1: DEFINITION:
"Offensive businesses", within the meaning of this chapter, shall include, but
not be limited to, packinghouses, dairies, tanneries, canneries, renderies,
junk or salvage yards, bone factories, slaughterhouses, butcher shops, soap
factories, foundries, breweries, distilleries, livery stables, blacksmith shops
or any other enterprise or establishment which creates excessive odors, fumes,
smoke, gases or noises. (1982 Code § 10-241B)
4-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall commence or change the location of an offensive business or
establishment in or within one mile of the limits of the city without first
filing an application for a permit to do so with the city clerk/recorder. (1982
Code § 10-241A)
4-2-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The application for a permit shall specify the location at which the business
or establishment is to be operated and maintained or the new location to which
it is to be moved. The application shall describe the type of activity which
will be conducted and describe the manner in which the business or
establishment shall eliminate, control or modify the emission by the business
of the undesirable odors, fumes, noises and other noisome features and the
manner in which it shall be screened from public view, if its appearance is
offensive. (1982 Code § 10-241C)
4-2-4: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   Report And Recommendation: The city clerk/recorder shall cause a study
to be made of the proposed business or relocation of any offensive business or
establishment by the Southwestern district health department and by personnel
engaged in the inspection of buildings and other facilities. A report and
recommendation shall be made to the city council. The city council, after
review, may grant to the applicant an opportunity to be heard and present
additional facts. Thereafter, the city council may: (1982 Code § 10-242; amd.
1998 Code)
      1.   Deny the application.
      2.   Recommend a modification thereof.
      3.   Grant a limited permit to enter into the business or make the change
of location subject to the requirement that the business or facility conform to
standards established by the city council with reference to controlling the
offensive features of the business.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: In the event a permit is granted, it shall be
subject to revocation either upon failure of the operator or owner to conduct
his business in the manner specified by the city council at the time of the
granting of the permit, or because a change of circumstances makes the
continued operation or maintenance of the business or facility a public
nuisance.
   C.   Modification Of Permit: The city council shall have power to revoke or
modify the permission to operate and maintain the business in such a manner as
it deems necessary for the public good. (1982 Code § 10-242)
4-2-5: CONTROL OF ANIMAL AND FOWL FACILITIES:
   A.   Location And Management: The city council shall have the power to
prohibit or control the location and management of any offensive, unwholesome
business or establishment in or within one mile of the city and may compel the
owner of any pigsty, privy, barn, corral, furbearing animal farm, feed yard,
poultry farm or other unwholesome or nauseous house or place to cleanse, abate
or remove the same.
   B.   Examination Of Operation: The city council may, on its own initiative
and shall, on complaint of a member of the public, examine the operation,
control or location of any business or facility for the purpose of determining
whether or not the operation of such business or facility should be improved so
as to minimize the offensive and unwholesome characteristics or whether the
business or activity should be moved or abated.
   C.   Notification Of Abatement: In the event that the city council decides
that the business or facility should be abated, removed or controlled, it shall
notify the owner or operator of the business or facility of such fact. (1982
Code § 10-244)
   D.   Hearing; Limited Permit: After a hearing, the city council may issue a
limited permit wherein it may prescribe the specifications and standards which
must be followed by the business or facility in order to be permitted to
continue in operation. (1982 Code § 10-244; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Abatement Or Removal: Upon a determination by the city council that the
business or facility is a nuisance, it shall have power to order the abatement
or removal of the facility or establishment. If the owner fails to conform to
such order, the city council shall have power to bring all necessary legal
proceedings to force removal, abatement or adherence to standards. (1982 Code §
10-244)
4-2-6: EXISTING BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES:
   A.   Investigation By City Council: The city council may require an
investigation of any existing offensive business or facility to determine
whether or not it should be permitted to remain in existence in or within one
mile of the city limits. If the city council determines that the continuation
of the business or facility has become a nuisance to persons situated within
the city limits or that ample control is not being exercised to minimize the
creation of excessive odors, fumes, smoke, gases and noise, it shall notify the
owner or operator thereof that the city council is considering revoking or
modifying the operator's permit.
   B.   Conform To Standards And Specifications: If the city council decides to
require a modification of the manner in which the business or facility is to be
maintained, it shall specify the standards or specifications to which the
enterprise must conform or otherwise lose its permit to engage thereafter in
the business or activity. (1982 Code § 10-243; amd. 1998 Code)
4-2-7: ACCUMULATION OF MANURE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of any stable, stall, shed,
apartment or yard in which any animal shall be kept or in any place within the
platted parts of the city, in which manure or liquid discharges of any animal
shall accumulate or collect, to permit such stable, stall, apartment or yard to
be kept in any unlawfully, unclean or unsanitary condition. (1982 Code § 10-
246)
4-2-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 3
WEEDS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definition
4-3-2: Standard Of Weed Control
4-3-3: Penalty
4-3-1: DEFINITION:
Weeds shall include any vegetation commonly referred to as a weed or which
shall have been designated a noxious weed by the Utah commissioner of
agriculture. (1982 Code § 10-322)
4-3-2: STANDARD OF WEED CONTROL:
   A.   Conditions Constituting Nuisance: It is hereby declared that the above
stated weeds constitute a nuisance when they create a fire hazard, a source of
contamination or pollution of the water, air or property, a danger to health, a
breeding place or habitation for insects or rodents or other forms of life
deleterious to humans or are unsightly or deleterious to their surroundings.
   B.   Removal: The cut weeds shall be removed from the premises within forty
eight (48) hours after cutting. (1982 Code § 3-323)
4-3-3: PENALTY:
It shall be an infraction and subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for any person owning or occupying real property to allow
weeds to grow or not to remove from such property any cuttings of such weeds or
any refuse, unsightly or deleterious objects after having been given notice
from the nuisance officer. (1982 Code § 3-321; amd. 1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Use Of Washington County Landfill
4-4-3: Required Use Of Automated/Semiautomated Containers
4-4-4: Residential Waste Collection And Disposal Services Provided By The City
4-4-5: Mandatory Use Of Service
4-4-6: Recycling Opt-Out Rules And Guidelines
4-4-7: Residential Waste Collection Procedures
4-4-8: Establishment Of Residential Fee
4-4-9: Fee For Availability Of Service
4-4-10: Monthly Billing; Discontinuance of Service
4-4-11: Collection Of Commercial Waste
4-4-12: Commercial Or Private Haulers
4-4-13: Collection Vehicles
4-4-14: Transportation Of Waste
4-4-15: Penalty
4-4-16: Scope Of Chapter
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
following meanings.
             The Residential Waste Collection Agreement, dated September 1, 2020, between
             Washington County Special Service District No. 1 and Allied Waste
AGREEMENT:   Transportation, Inc, a Delaware corporation, d/b/a Republic Services of St.
             George, licensed to do business in the State of Utah, the provisions of which
             are incorporated herein by this reference.
AUTOMATED OR A waste receptacle approved by the District, with a capacity of sixty (60) to
SEMI-        ninety-four (94) gallons, equipped with a tight fitting, permanently attached
AUTOMATED    lid and wheels for easy movement, and specifically designed for automated and
CONTAINER:   semi-automated pick up.
             Residential waste materials with lengths, weights or volumes greater than those
             allowed for automated containers, including but not limited to stoves,
             refrigerators, dryers, dishwashers, televisions, hot water tanks, washing
             machines, household furniture, four (4) or fewer tires, air conditioners,
             Christmas trees, bicycles, large toys, tree limbs of three (3) to six (6) feet
             in length and up to six (6) inches in diameter, and Bags used for seasonal
BULKY WASTE: disposal of leaves. Bulky Waste does not include automobiles, more than four (4)
             tires, motorcycles, boats, Construction/Demolition Waste, large dead animals,
             Hazardous Waste, Special Waste and trees (other than Christmas trees) or limbs
             exceeding six (6) feet in length and six (6) inches in diameter, and other
             similar items. All items must be free of extraneous materials and shall be
             capable of being lifted into republic's collection vehicle by two (2) men. A
             resident may not place more than three bulky waste items out for collection per
             call.
CITY:        The City of LaVerkin.
             Property:
             A.   Used primarily in connection with the supply of goods or professional
             services on a regular basis or in the regular course of business, and for which
COMMERCIAL:  a business or other license is required by state law or local ordinance.
             B.   A hotel, motel, recreational vehicle resort and small transient living
             quarters used for overnight or short term rental of less than thirty (30) days,
             or an apartment complex of more than eight (8) units used for a rental term of
             more than thirty (30) days.
COMMERCIAL   Any person or entity who in the regular course of regular course of business or
HAULER:      for a fee collects and disposes of commercial waste.
COMMERCIAL   Non-hazardous waste materials produced by businesses or resulting from normal
WASTE:       activities on or use of commercial property or premises.
             At or near any curb, sidewalk, or other location immediately adjacent to any
CURBSIDE:    street, highway or road which is safely accessible to Republic's waste
             collection vehicles.
DISTRICT:    Washington County Special Service District No. 1.
DUMPSTER OR  Any metal container with a volume of 1.5 cubic yards or more, designed for
ROLL-OFF:    storage of waste and to be compatible with collection equipment.
             A solid waste or combination of solid wastes, other than Household Waste, which
             because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious
             characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
HAZARDOUS    mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible
WASTE:       illness or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
             the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
             otherwise managed, and as further defined in R315-2-3 of the Utah Administrative
             Code.
             Any waste material, including garbage, trash, and sanitary wastes in septic
HOUSEHOLD    tanks, derived from households, including single-family and multiple-family
WASTE:       residences, apartments, hotels and motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew
             quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas.
             A solid waste that contains or may reasonably be expected to contain pathogens
INFECTIOUS   of sufficient virulence and quantity that exposure to the waste by a susceptible
WASTE:       host could result in an infectious disease. Infectious Waste is included in
             Household Waste unless subject to regulation in accordance with R315-316(1) of
             the Utah Administrative Code.
             Any material or substance included in waste materials that can be put to
RECYCLABLES  beneficial re-use or sold in recognized markets for purposes other than
OR           disposal, including, without limitation, uncontaminated, non-hazardous
RECYCLABLE   corrugated cardboard, white paper, newsprint and other paper; plastics and
MATERIALS:   plastic film; ferrous and non-ferrous metals; and glass or such other items as
             may be specified from time to time.
REPUBLIC:    Allied Waste Transportation, Inc, a Delaware corporation, d/b/a Republic
             Services of St. George, licensed to do business in the State of Utah.
             The use of property or premises containing a structure which is hooked to
             culinary water and power and is intended or used for human habitation, including
             but not limited to:
             A.   Single homes;
             B.   Mobile homes;
             C.   Town homes;
RESIDENCE OR D.   Condominiums;
RESIDENTIAL: E.   Short-term rentals (STR), including vacation rentals (VR) and bed-and-
             breakfasts (BnB), of less than thirty (30) days; and
             F.   Apartments not contained in or as part of an apartment complex of more than
             eight (8) units.
             Except as may be specified hereinafter, each residential unit or structure on
             property or premises classified as residential shall be considered a separate
             residence for purpose of billing and collection.
             Household waste, bulky waste, and other non-hazardous waste produced by or
             resulting from the normal activities on or use of residential property or
             premises. Residential waste includes but is not limited to waste wood, wood
             products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, seeds, leaves, chips,
             shavings, saw-dust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, plastic, aluminum cans,
RESIDENTIAL  flattened cardboard boxes, wooden boxes, rags, loose straw, used and discarded
WASTE:       mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots,
             combustible and waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging or
             wrapping crockery and glass, cold ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass,
             mineral or metallic substances and any and all other waste materials not
             included in the definition of bulky waste, construction/demolition waste, dead
             animals, garbage or hazardous waste. Residential waste does not include special
             waste or stable matter as defined herein.
             Discarded solid waste that may require special handling or other solid waste
             that may pose a threat to public safety, human health, or the environment.
             Special waste includes:
             A.   Ash;
             B.   Automobile bodies;
             C.   Infectious waste subject to regulation under R315-316(1) of the Utah
             Administrative Rules;
SPECIAL      D.   Waste tires;
WASTE:       E.   Dead animals;
             F.   Asbestos;
             G.   Waste exempt from the hazardous waste regulations under R315-261-4;
             H.   Very small quantity generator hazardous waste as defined by R315-260-10;
             I.   Waste containing PCBs;
             J.   Petroleum contaminated soils;
             K.   Waste asphalt;
             L.   Sludge;
             M.   Stable matter. (Ord. 2020-07, 12-16-2020)
 
4-4-2: USE OF THE WASHINGTON COUNTY LANDFILL:
All residential waste generated within the corporate limits of City shall be
transported to and disposed of at the Washington County Landfill or such other
waste disposal facility as may be approved by District. (Ord. 2020-07, 12-16-
2020)
4-4-3: REQUIRED USE OF AUTOMATED/SEMI-AUTOMATED CONTAINERS:
Except for residential developments approved by city where density and lack of
access by waste collection vehicles requires the use of dumpsters or roll offs
as a means of residential waste collection, each residence or residential unit
within the incorporated areas of city shall be required to utilize for
residential waste collection service an automated/semi-automated container or
containers which have been approved and delivered to the property by city or
its authorized agent. (Ord. 2020-07, 12-16-2020)
4-4-4: RESIDENTIAL WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE CITY:
The City shall provide the following services to all residences within its
corporate limits in accordance with the Agreement:
   A.   Basic Residential Waste Collection Service: once-a-week curbside
collection to all residences of residential waste placed in automated/semi-
automated containers or in dumpsters or roll offs, along with collection of
bulky waste, and
   B.   Collection of Recyclable Materials: every-other-week curbside
collection of recyclable materials placed in recycling containers by residences
participating in curbside residential recycling. (Ord. 2020-07, 12-16-2020)
4-4-5: MANDATORY USE OF SERVICE:
The use by all residences within the boundaries of city of the basic
residential waste collection services described in subsection A of Section
4-4-4 is hereby declared to be mandatory; however, participation in curbside
residential recycling as described in subsection B of Section
4-4-4 shall be determined in accordance with the opt-out rules and guidelines
specified in Section
4-4-6. (Ord. 2020-07, 12-16-2020)
4-4-6: RECYCLING OPT-OUT RULES AND GUIDELINES:
Participation in curbside recycling collection services shall be mandatory for
any residential unit within the boundaries of City for which the election to
opt out of such services is not made by the owner, or such other person
designated in writing by the owner, on or before November 30, 2020, in
accordance with the following opt out rules and guidelines:
   A.   Rules and Guidelines.
      1.   The election to opt out shall be made by the owner of the residence,
or by such other person designated in writing by the owner, or as otherwise
approved by the City.
      2.   For purposes of these rules and guidelines, all City residences/
residents who are not participants in curbside recycling collection services as
of the effective date of this Ordinance shall be deemed to have opted out of
receiving curbside recycling collection services.
      3.   Except as provided herein, all City residences / residents who do
not opt out by November 30, 2020 shall be deemed to be included in the curbside
recycling collection program for the term of the Agreement.
      4.   City residents/residences who opt out or who are deemed to have
opted out on or before November 30, 2020, as determined by City, may opt in at
any time but thereafter shall be included in the recycling program for the
remaining term of the Agreement.
      5.   City residents/residences who opt out or who are deemed to have
opted out on or before November 30, 2020, as determined by city, shall be
entitled to continue such opt out status in the event they move to another or
new residence within the boundaries of city.
      6.   New residents, i.e., people who move from outside of City to a
residence within the boundaries of LaVerkin, regardless of a prior election to
opt out, shall be automatically included in the recycling program for the
remainder of the term of the Agreement.
   B.   Variance: Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon written request from the
owner or occupant of the residence, the City Council shall have authority to
grant a variance to the application of above provisions based on a showing of
undue hardship or other extraordinary circumstances. (Ord. 2020-07, 12-16-2020)
4-4-7: RESIDENTIAL WASTE COLLECTION PROCEDURES:
Except where the use of dumpsters or roll offs are authorized, residential
waste shall be placed for collection in accordance with the following:
   A.   All residential waste shall be placed for collection in automated/semi-
automated containers.
   B.   All residential waste shall be placed for collection by six o’clock (6:
00) a.m. of the day scheduled for collection.
   C.   No hazardous waste, infectious waste or special waste shall be placed
for collection in any automated / semi-automated container or any dumpster or
roll-off.
   D.   Only recyclable materials, as determined from time to time by City,
shall be placed for collection in recycling automated/semi-automated collection
containers
   E.   Automated/semi-automated containers shall be placed within three (3)
feet of the curbside, blacktop or other roadway surface, with three (3) feet
clearance on either side of the container from parked cars or other objects,
and at other locations readily accessible to collection vehicles and personnel.
   F.   All empty waste containers shall be removed from the street as soon as
reasonably practicable but not later than 24 hours after being emptied.
   G.   Bulky waste shall be placed at or near the curbside, blacktop, or other
roadway surface, or at other locations readily accessible to collection
vehicles and personnel. (Ord. 2020-07, 12-16-2020)
4-4-8: ESTABLISHMENT OF RESIDENTIAL FEES:
There is hereby established a monthly residential waste collection and disposal
fee for each residence or residential unit in City, which shall include the
following amounts:
   A.   For basic residential waste collection service:
      1.   The amount to be paid to Republic in the amount of six dollars and
ninety cents ($6.90) per month per residence, which shall be subject to an
annual increase of two and a half percent (2.5%); and
      2.   The amount to be paid to the District for administrative costs and
expenses in the amount of four dollars and fifty-five cents ($4.55) per month
per residence, which shall be subject to an annual increase of ten cents
($0.10) or such other amount as may be reasonably determined from time to time
by resolution of District's Administrative Control Board, for operation of the
Washington County Landfill and District administrative expenses" since October
2020; and
   B.   For residences receiving curbside recycling collection services, the
following additional amounts:
      1.   The amount to be paid to Republic in the amount of four dollars and
ninety cents ($4.90) per month per residence, subject to an annual increase of
two and a half percent (2.5%); and
      2.   The amount of seventy-five cents ($0.75) per month per residence for
the cost of the recycling container.
      3.   The amount of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per month, to be retained by
the city to offset the costs of collection and billing incurred by the city;
provided that, such amount may be increased from time to time by resolution of
the City Council as the city deems necessary, proper, and justified. (Ord.
2020-07, 12-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2022-01, 1-19-2022)
4-4-9: FEE FOR AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE:
The residential fee established hereby for basic collection service is for the
availability of service provided by City through the District and its
authorized agent, Republic, and said fee shall be due and owing when service is
available, regardless of whether said service is actually utilized. (Ord. 2020-
07, 12-16-2020)
4-4-10: MONTHLY BILLING; DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Fees for residential waste collection and disposal services provided by
city shall be paid on a monthly basis, and shall be included in any billing for
other municipal services supplied by city, including water, power, sewer, etc.
Payments for residential waste collection and disposal services not received on
or before the twenty-fifth (25th) calendar day of the month in which the
service is billed shall be deemed delinquent, and the delinquency practices,
procedures, and provisions Section
8-1-4 of this Code shall apply.
   B.   Termination of solid waste services may only occur in connection with a
termination of culinary water service (permanent or temporary) and is governed
by the provisions of Section
8-1-5 of this Code. (Ord. 2020-07, 12-16-2020)
4-4-11: COLLECTION OF COMMERCIAL WASTE:
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the owner or lessee of any commercial
property or premises from transporting his or her own commercial waste to the
landfill, or contracting for its removal with a commercial hauler properly
licensed by District and authorized to conduct business within city. (Ord.
2020-07, 12-16-2020)
4-4-12: COMMERCIAL OR PRIVATE HAULERS:
No private or commercial hauler shall be allowed to collect or dispose of
commercial solid waste generated by businesses or through the use of commercial
property within City without having first obtained from District a license to
operate as a private or commercial hauler. (Ord. 2020-07, 12-16-2020)
4-4-13: COLLECTION VEHICLES:
All trucks or other vehicles used by any private or commercial hauler to
collect or transport solid waste within City shall:
   A.   Be maintained in a good mechanical condition,
   B.   Be equipped with fully enclosed sides and bottom and otherwise
constructed as to prevent the contents of the vehicle from spilling or blowing
while the vehicle is in motion,
   C.   Clearly bear on the outside of the body of the vehicle the name and
telephone number of the hauler, and
   D.   Comply with all provisions of all applicable state or federal
regulations or laws concerning the collection, transportation, or disposal of
solid waste. (Ord. 2020-07, 12-16-2020)
4-4-14: TRANSPORTATION OF WASTE:
All solid waste transported by any private or commercial hauler shall be
contained, tied, or enclosed in such a manner that leaking, spilling, or
blowing are prevented during transportation.
4-4-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to a penalty as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2020-07, 12-16-2020)
4-4-16: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter covers the unauthorized deposit of large items or significant
quantities of solid waste, garbage, refuse or rubbish within the city limits.
The unauthorized deposit on any property in the city of other than large items
or significant quantities of solid waste, garbage, refuse, rubbish, or litter
constitutes littering, and is covered by chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 2020-
07, 12-16-2020)
CHAPTER 5
GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Board Of Health
4-5-2: Health Director
4-5-3: Permit Required
4-5-4: Unwholesome Food
4-5-5: Removal Of Garbage
4-5-6: Discharge Of Sewage Pollution
4-5-7: Inadequate Plumbing
4-5-8: Penalty
4-5-1: BOARD OF HEALTH:
   A.   Established: The Southwestern district health department is hereby
designated as the board of health of the city. (1982 Code § 10-211)
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   Contract With Health Department: The city may contract with the
Southwestern district health department on such terms and conditions as the
parties may agree, to enforce the provisions of this chapter and such other
ordinances of the city, which authorize or require action or impose any duty on
the board of health.
      2.   Adopt Rules And Regulations: The board of health shall adopt such
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary to govern its meetings and
conduct.
      3.   Review And Approve Applications And Permits: The board of health
shall review and approve all applications for permits to operate any business
or engage in any construction for which a permit is required from the board of
health, pursuant to any ordinances or regulations of the city.
      4.   Recommend Rules And Regulations: The board of health shall recommend
to the mayor for promulgation by the city council such health rules,
regulations and ordinances as it deems necessary for the health of the persons
within the city. (1982 Code § 10-212)
4-5-2: HEALTH DIRECTOR:
   A.   Position Created: The health director of the Southwestern district
health department is hereby designated as the health director of the city.
(1982 Code § 10-221)
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   Appoint Or Designate Assistant: The health director may appoint or
designate any qualified person to act as his assistant for the purpose of
enforcing the ordinances of the city.
      2.   Enforce Terms And Conditions Of Contract: Subject to the terms and
conditions of the contract between the Southwestern district health department,
the health director shall:
         a.   Be the executive officer of the board of health.
         b.   Enforce all ordinances of the city and the state which relate to
the health and welfare of the residents of the city.
         c.   Enforce all rules, regulations and ordinances relating to:
            (1)   Plumbing, sanitation, contagious infectious diseases,
quarantine and sewage disposal.
            (2)   Producing, storing, keeping and selling meat, dairy or other
foods or food products.
            (3)   The quarantine and disposal of all animals affected with any
contagious or infectious diseases.
         d.   Have the power to impose and maintain a strict quarantine of all
infected persons and premises having contagious or infectious diseases, and to
require such persons or premises to be disinfected.
         e.   Have the right and authority, when he shall deem necessary to
secure or preserve the public health, to enter into or upon any premises,
building or other places during the daytime to examine, analyze or test any
building, structure, premises, product or goods manufactured, stored or kept
within the city for the purposes of enforcing this chapter. (1982 Code § 10-
222; amd. 1998 Code)
4-5-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following
businesses or activities without first obtaining a permit from the board of
health:
   A.   Food Or Food Products For Human Consumption: Handling, selling,
offering for sale, preparing or serving any food or food products or beverages
or water intended for human consumption.
   B.   Public Swimming Pool: Operating or permitting public access to any
public swimming pool.
   C.   Public Dump: Commercially operating any public dump, garbage or refuse
collection or disposal facility, or cleaning out or installing any privy,
cesspool or septic tank.
   D.   Fumigation Of Pests: Fumigating or eradicating pests, insects, vermin
or any other infestation from any building occupied or to be occupied by
humans. (1982 Code § 10-213)
4-5-4: UNWHOLESOME FOOD:
It is a class B misdemeanor for any person to sell or offer for sale any
unwholesome food or beverage which has been condemned by any government food
inspector. (1982 Code § 10-223)
4-5-5: REMOVAL OF GARBAGE:
   A.   Upon Vacating Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person, upon
vacating or moving from any dwelling, storeroom or other building, to fail to
remove all garbage, rubbish or ashes from such building or premises and the
grounds appurtenant thereto, or to fail to place the same in a thoroughly
sanitary condition within twenty four (24) hours after the premises are
vacated.
   B.   Rental Property: In situations where rental property is so vacated, the
owner of the property shall be concurrently responsible with the tenant thereof
for compliance with this section. (1982 Code § 10-224)
4-5-6: DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE POLLUTION:
   A.   Conform To Standards: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge
or permit the discharge of any sewage or filth from any premises into and upon
any public highway, stream, watercourse or public place, or into any drain,
cesspool or private wastewater disposal system which does not conform to
standards established by the state division of health or by the city.
   B.   Connection To Public Sewer System: The health director may order a
connection for sewage disposal to be made with the public sewer system provided
by the city if such is available; provided, that the public sewer system is
within three hundred feet (300') of the premises.
   C.   Prevention: The health director shall use all due measures to prevent
the fouling of any streams, watercourses, reservoirs or any source furnishing
water to any of the inhabitants of the city. (1982 Code § 10-225)
4-5-7: INADEQUATE PLUMBING:
The health director shall have power to require the prompt repair of all leaks
or other defects in plumbing throughout the city. He shall have power to
condemn and abate all plumbing which is deficient under the plumbing
ordinances. When, in the opinion of the health director, a change in occupants,
type of business or other cause requires changes in plumbing, he shall have the
power to compel the installation of an increased number of plumbing fixtures
and a change in their type or capacity, and to make such other alterations or
increases as may be necessary for the health and safety of the occupants of the
building and of the public generally. (1982 Code § 10-226)
4-5-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 6
LITTER; HANDBILLS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Handbills And Posters; Restricted Activity
4-6-3: Litter Regulations
4-6-4: Handbill Regulations
4-6-5: Penalty
4-6-6: Scope Of Chapter
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE: A receptacle designed and intended to receive solid
waste, litter, refuse, rubbish or garbage, including dumpsters, public or
private garbage cans or containers and automated/semiautomated containers
provided by the Washington County service district no. 1 through its authorized
subcontractor, Allied/Red Rock.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:
   A.   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
   B.   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest in sales thereof;
   C.   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. However, the terms of this
clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the
same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained
in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place
of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without
a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state,
or under any ordinance of the city, or;
   D.   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distribution.
DUMPING: The unauthorized deposit on any property in the city of large items or
of significant quantities of solid waste, garbage, refuse or rubbish as defined
herein, other than in authorized receptacles.
GARBAGE: Waste from the preparation, cooking or consumption of food, condemned
food products and all refuse and waste from the handling, storage, preparation
and sale of produce. Garbage originates primarily in kitchens, stores, markets,
restaurants, hotels and other places where food is handled, stored, sold,
cooked and consumed.
LITTER: Other than large items or significant quantities of "garbage",
"refuse", "rubbish", and "solid waste" as defined herein, and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a
danger to public health, safety, welfare or the appearance of the city of
LaVerkin.
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general or local circulation or any periodical or
current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per
year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill
or newspaper.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other
public area in the city, owned or used by the city.
REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans,
yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
SOLID WASTE: Shall have the same meaning as specified in section 19-6-502(7),
Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
VEHICLE: Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively on
stationary rails or tracks. (1982 Code § 10-431; amd. Ord. 2001-13, 8-15-2001)
4-6-2: HANDBILLS AND POSTERS; RESTRICTED ACTIVITY:
No person or business shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise fix, or
cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card,
poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the
attention of the public, or upon any sidewalk, curb or any other portion or
part of any public way or public place or any lamp post, electric light,
telegraph, telephone or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or
upon the columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any
bridge or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture
of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be authorized
or required by the laws of the United States, or state of Utah and the
ordinances of the city. (1982 Code § 10-449A)
4-6-3: LITTER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Litter In Public Places: No person shall throw or deposit litter in or
on any street, sidewalk or other public place except:
      1.   In authorized receptacles for collection or in official city garbage
dumps; or
      2.   For collection as authorized by the city council. (1982 Code § 10-
432)
   B.   Placement Of Litter In Receptacles: Persons placing litter in
authorized receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being
carried or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public
place or on private property. (1982 Code § 10-433)
   C.   Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited: No person shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter
from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway,
except as authorized by the city council. Persons owning or occupying property
shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (1982 Code §
10-434)
   D.   Merchants' Duty To Keep Sidewalks Free Of Litter: No person owning or
occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street
or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
places of business shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises
free of litter. (1982 Code § 10-435)
   E.   Litter Thrown By Person In Vehicle: No person, while a driver or
passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter on any street or other
public place, or on private property. (1982 Code § 10-436)
   F.   Truck Loads Causing Litter: No person shall drive or move any truck or
other vehicle unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited on any street, alley or
other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck,
the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or
other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of
any kind. (1982 Code § 10-437)
   G.   Litter In Parks: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park,
except in authorized receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the
park or on any street or other public place. Where authorized receptacles are
not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein. (1982 Code § 10-438)
   H.   Litter In Lakes And Fountains: No person shall throw or deposit litter
in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or
elsewhere within the city. (1982 Code § 10-439)
   I.   Litter On Occupied Private Property: No person shall dispose of, throw
or deposit litter on any occupied private property, whether owned by such
person or not, other than to make deposits in authorized receptacles in such
manner as to prevent the same from being removed, carried or deposited by the
elements outside of said receptacle. (1982 Code § 10-447; amd. Ord. 2001-13, 8-
15-2001)
   J.   Litter On Vacant Lots: No person shall throw or deposit litter on any
open or vacant private property, whether or not owned by such person. (1982
Code § 10-448)
4-6-4: HANDBILL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Throwing Or Distributing In Public Places; Penalty: No person shall
throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Unless otherwise
authorized by the city council, it is an infraction for any person to hand out,
distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided,
however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public
place for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver
thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (1982
Code § 10-440)
   B.   Placing On Vehicles: Unless otherwise authorized by the city council,
no person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
on any vehicle; provided however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public
place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver
thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to
accept it. (1982 Code § 10-441)
   C.   Depositing On Uninhabited Or Vacant Premises: No person shall throw or
deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any private premises
which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (1982 Code § 10-
442)
   D.   Prohibiting Distribution Where Properly Posted: No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill on any private
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on
said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign
bearing the words "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers or Agents", "No
Advertisements", or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the
occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right
of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left on such premises. (1982
Code § 10-443)
   E.   Distributing At Inhabited Private Premises: No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on private
premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or on
such private premises. However, in case of inhabited private premises which are
not posted, as provided in this section, such person, unless requested by
anyone on such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in
or on such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or
deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted
about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except
that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law or
regulations. (1982 Code § 10-444)
   F.   Exception For Mail And Newspapers: The provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers,
except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner so
as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on private property. (1982 Code § 10-445)
   G.   Posting Notice Prohibited: No person shall post or affix any notice,
poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the
public, to any lamp post, public utility pole or shade tree, or on any public
structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. (1982
Code § 10-446)
4-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
4-6-6: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter covers the unauthorized deposit on any property in the city of
other than large items or significant quantities of solid waste, garbage,
refuse, rubbish or litter. The unauthorized deposit of large items or
significant quantities of waste in city limits constitutes prohibited
"dumping", as described in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 2001-13, 8-15-2001)
CHAPTER 7
OUTDOOR LIGHT
SECTION:
4-7-1: Definitions
4-7-2: Scope And Applicability
4-7-3: Conformance With Applicable Codes
4-7-4: Regulations
4-7-5: Grandfathering Of Nonconforming Luminaires
4-7-6: New Subdivision Construction
4-7-7: Notification Requirements
4-7-8: Violations And Legal Actions
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, terms used shall be defined as follows:
DIRECT GLARE: The visual discomfort resulting from insufficiently shielded
light sources.
DIRECT LIGHT: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off the reflector or
reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens of a luminaire.
FIXTURE: The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include all or some
of the following parts: housing, mounting bracket, pole socket, lamp holder,
ballast, reflector, mirror, and/or a refractor or lens.
FLOOD OR SPOT LIGHT: Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or
a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a
particular direction.
FULLY SHIELDED LIGHTS: Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that
no light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the
horizontal plane as certified by a photometric test report.
GRANDFATHERED LUMINAIRES: Luminaires not conforming to this chapter that were
in place before August 7, 2002. When an ordinance "grandfathers" a luminaire,
it means that such already existing outdoor lighting does not need to be
changed unless a specified time period is provided for adherence to the
ordinance.
HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRE: The height of a luminaire shall be the vertical distance
from the ground directly below the centerline of the luminaire to the lowest
direct light emitting part of the luminaire.
INDIRECT LIGHT: Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off other
surfaces.
LAMP: The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Limit the exterior lighting originating on a property to a
maximum of 0.5 horizontal foot-candles (HFC) at a distance of twenty five feet
(25') beyond the property lines. (This specification will allow the controlled
placement of lighting poles and luminaires adjacent to the property lines.)
LUMEN: A unit of luminous flux. One foot-candle is one lumen per square foot.
For purposes of this chapter, the lumen output values shall be the initial
lumen output ratings of a lamp.
LUMINAIRE: A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps and a fixture.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING: The nighttime illumination of an outside area or object by
any manmade device located outdoors that produces light by any means.
TEMPORARY OUTDOOR LIGHTING: The specific illumination of an outside area or
object by any manmade device located outdoors that produces light by any means
for a period of less than seven (7) days, with at least one hundred eighty
(180) days passing before being used again. (Ord. 2005-11, 3-16-2005)
4-7-2: SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Compliance Required: All exterior outdoor lighting installed after the
effective date of this chapter in any and all zones in the city shall conform
to the requirements established by this chapter and other applicable ordinances
unless otherwise exempted. This chapter does not apply to indoor lighting.
   B.   Law Governing Conflicts: Should this chapter be found to be in conflict
with any provision of federal, state, county, or city statutes, codes, or other
sections of the city ordinances, the more restrictive shall govern unless
otherwise required by law. (Ord. 2005-11, 3-16-2005)
4-7-3: CONFORMANCE WITH APPLICABLE CODES:
All outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices shall be installed in
conformance with the provisions of the LaVerkin City ordinances, including, but
not limited to, the building code, the electrical code, and the sign code under
appropriate permit and inspection.
   A.   Power System And Street Lighting: All private and public outdoor power
systems, illuminating devices and streetlights within the LaVerkin City limits
whether in public street, easement, subdivision or any building project
requiring street improvement, shall conform to standards set by Utah Power as
the power provider of LaVerkin City, and shall be subject to final approval by
LaVerkin City.
   B.   Electrical Service: In addition to meeting all requirements of Utah
Power for the installation of power services, all subdivisions shall be
required to put power services underground.
   C.   Streetlights And Poles: Streetlight design and placement shall also be
subject to Utah Power's standards and approval by LaVerkin City. (Ord. 2005-11,
3-16-2005)
4-7-4: REGULATIONS:
   A.   Control Of Glare; Luminaire Design Factors:
      1.   All luminaires shall comply with the current standard, typical
horizontal luminaire, flat glass type. All luminaires are to be self-
activating, utilizing photoelectric control. In residential areas,
consideration shall be given to light pattern adjustment to preclude light
intrusion into homes. Night sky protection is provided by the luminaire design,
which prevents light above the horizontal plane of the fixture. Intersections
shall not have brighter lights than those used along the streets themselves.
Exception made for all intersections of local streets with collector streets.
      2.   Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than one
thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens, and all flood or spot luminaires with a
lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than nine hundred (900) lumens shall not
emit any direct light above a horizontal plane through the lowest direct light
emitting part of the luminaire.
      3.   Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than one
thousand eight hundred (1,800) lumens, and all flood or spot luminaires with a
lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than nine hundred (900) lumens, shall be
mounted at a height equal to or less than the value 3 + (D/3), where D is the
distance in feet to the nearest property boundary. The maximum height of the
luminaire may not exceed twenty five feet (25').
   B.   Exceptions To Control Of Glare:
      1.   Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of one thousand
eight hundred (1,800) lumens or less, and all flood or spot luminaires with a
lamp or lamps rated at nine hundred (900) lumens or less, may be used without
restriction to light distribution or mounting height, except that if any spot
or flood luminaire rated nine hundred (900) lumens or less is aimed, directed,
or focused such as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be directed
toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare
perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, the luminaire
shall be redirected or its light output controlled as necessary to eliminate
such conditions.
      2.   Luminaires used for public roadway illumination may be installed at
a maximum height of thirty four feet (34') on collector streets and twenty five
feet (25') on local streets, and may be positioned at that height up to the
edge of any bordering property.
      3.   Luminaires used primarily for sign illumination and property
illumination may be mounted at any height to a maximum of thirty feet (30'),
regardless of lumen rating.
   C.   Poles: All poles are to be fiberglass and shall comply with the current
PacifiCorp standard. Existing wooden poles shall be replaced at the time of
pole maintenance. Poles shall be designed to withstand eighty (80) mile per
hour winds. Pole heights shall not exceed thirty four feet (34') on collector
streets and twenty five feet (25') on local streets. Height shall be measured
vertically from the luminaire to the street. Pole spacing shall be equal to the
extent possible. Intersections shall be a priority in any consideration of
spacing. Poles in residential areas are to be located at intersections.
Specification drawings are on file in the city clerk's office.
   D.   Outdoor Advertising Signs:
      1.   Top Mounted Fixtures Required: Lighting fixtures used to illuminate
an outdoor advertising sign shall be mounted on the top of the sign structure.
All such fixtures shall comply with the shielding requirements of subsection A
of this section. Bottom mounted outdoor advertising sign lighting shall not be
used.
      2.   Translucent Signs: Outdoor advertising signs of the type constructed
of translucent materials and wholly illuminated from within do not require
shielding. Dark backgrounds with light lettering or symbols are preferred to
minimize detrimental effects. Unless conforming to the above dark background
preference, total lamp wattage per property shall be less than forty one (41)
watts.
      3.   Compliance Limit: Existing outdoor advertising structures shall be
brought into conformance with this chapter within ten (10) years from August 7,
2002.
   E.   Recreational Facilities: Any light source permitted by this chapter may
be used for lighting of outdoor recreational facilities (public or private),
such as, but not limited to, football fields, soccer fields, baseball fields,
softball fields, tennis courts, or show areas, provided all of the following
conditions are met:
      1.   All fixtures used for event lighting shall be fully shielded as
defined in subsection A of this section, or be designed or provided with sharp
cutoff capability so as to minimize uplight, spill light, and glare.
      2.   All events shall be scheduled so as to complete all activity before
or as near to ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. as practical, but under no
circumstances shall any illumination of the playing field, court, or track be
permitted after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. except to conclude a scheduled
event that was in progress before eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and circumstances
prevented concluding before eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
   F.   Prohibitions:
      1.   Laser Source Light: The use of laser source light or any similar
high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, when projected
above the horizontal, is prohibited.
      2.   Outdoor Advertising Off Site Signs: Electrical illumination of
outdoor advertising off site signs is prohibited.
      3.   Lights Giving Impression Of Movement: Flashing, blinking,
intermittent or other lights that move or give the impression of movement are
prohibited. (Ord. 2005-11, 3-16-2005)
   G.   Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this
chapter:
      1.   Holiday lighting.
      2.   Traffic control signals and devices.
      3.   Temporary emergency lighting in use by law enforcement, fire
departments, government agencies or other emergency services, including all
vehicular luminaires.
      4.   All hazard warning luminaires required by federal regulatory
agencies are exempt from the requirements of this chapter, except that all
luminaires used must be red and must be shown to be as close as possible to the
federally required minimum lumen output requirements for the specific task.
      5.   Nighttime display and lighting of the flag of the United States Of
America on public property including, but not limited to, the city hall, city
offices, fire station, and Crescent Park (situated at the northeast corner of
the intersection of State Routes (SR) 9 and 17) in accordance with the
provisions of section 6 of title 4, chapter 1 of the United States Code. (Ord.
2013-11, 11-6-2013)
   H.   Temporary Outdoor Lighting: Any temporary outdoor lighting that
conforms to the requirements of this chapter shall be allowed. Nonconforming
temporary outdoor lighting may be permitted by the planning commission after
considering:
      1.   The public and/or private benefits that will result from the
temporary lighting;
      2.   Any annoyance or safety problems that may result from the use of the
temporary lighting; and
      3.   The duration of the temporary nonconforming lighting.
The applicant shall submit a detailed description of the proposed temporary
nonconforming lighting to the planning commission, which shall consider the
request at a duly called meeting of the planning commission. Prior notice of
the meeting of the planning commission shall be given to the applicant. The
planning commission shall render its decision on the temporary lighting request
within two (2) weeks of the date of the meeting. A failure by the planning
commission to act on a request within the time allowed shall constitute a
denial of the request. (Ord. 2005-11, 3-16-2005)
4-7-5: GRANDFATHERING OF NONCONFORMING LUMINAIRES:
   A.   This chapter shall take effect immediately upon approval by the city
council and shall supersede and replace all previous ordinances pertaining to
outdoor lighting.
   B.   All luminaires lawfully in place prior to August 7, 2002, shall be
grandfathered. However, any luminaire that replaces a grandfathered luminaire,
or any grandfathered luminaire that is moved, must meet the standards of this
chapter. Advertising signs are grandfathered only for a period of ten (10)
years, as specified in subsection 4-7-4D3 of this chapter.
   C.   Grandfathered luminaires that direct light toward streets or parking
lots that cause disability glare to motorists or cyclists shall be either
shielded or redirected within ninety (90) days of notification so that the
luminaires do not cause a potential hazard to motorists or cyclists. (Ord.
2005-11, 3-16-2005)
4-7-6: NEW SUBDIVISION CONSTRUCTION:
New subdivision lighting shall be installed in compliance with this title and
as required by section
11-4-2 of this code. (Ord. 2005-11, 3-16-2005)
4-7-7: NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The LaVerkin City building permit shall include a statement asking
whether the planned project will include any outdoor lighting.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days after August 7, 2002, the code enforcement
officer shall send a copy of the outdoor lighting ordinance with cover letter
to all local electricians and local electric utilities (including at least
those in LaVerkin City, Hurricane City, St. George City, Cedar City, Colorado
City, and others as listed in the yellow pages). (Ord. 2005-11, 3-16-2005)
4-7-8: VIOLATIONS AND LEGAL ACTIONS:
   A.   Violation: It shall be a civil infraction for any person to violate any
of the provisions of this chapter. Each and every day during which the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Violations And Legal Actions: If after investigation, the code
enforcement officer finds that any provision of this chapter is being violated,
the officer may elect to give notice by hand delivery or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of such violation to the owner and/or to the occupant
of such premises demanding the violation be abated within thirty (30) days from
the date of hand delivery or date of mailing of the notice. If the violation is
not abated within the thirty (30) day period, the code enforcement officer may
institute actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, to enjoin,
restrain, or abate any violations of this chapter and to collect the penalties
for such violations.
   C.   Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance: A person who has been convicted of
violation of this chapter may be subject to the penalties set forth in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2005-11, 3-16-2005)
CHAPTER 8
EXCESSIVE NOISE
SECTION:
4-8-1: Excessive Noise Prohibited
4-8-2: Exceptions To Section
4-8-1
4-8-3: Penalty
4-8-1: EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued in any excess, unnecessary or unusual loud noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others within the limits of the city.
   A.   It shall be unlawful to sound any horn or signaling device on any
automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle for an unnecessary or unreasonable
period of time including the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated
by engine exhaust.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to play, operate or use upon a public street or
highway any device of the type commonly known as a sound truck, loudspeaker,
sound amplifier, radio, CD or cassette with more than a standard sound
amplifier or any other instrument of similar kind or character which emits loud
and raucous noises and is attached to or upon any vehicle operated or standing
upon any street or highway which can be heard from a distance of one hundred
feet (100').
   C.   No driver of any vehicle shall permit the vehicle to emit any excessive
or unusual noises or annoying smoke.
   D.   The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated in
residential areas of any television, radio, musical instrument, phonograph or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants.
If the volume is louder than necessary between the following times it shall be
deemed in violation:
      1.   Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M.
      2.   At any other time when the volume of such device can be heard at a
distance of one hundred feet (100') from which it is located.
   E.   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets,
particularly between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence.
   F.   The operation of any garbage pickup, in any area zoned residential
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   G.   The operation of any power mower, cultivator, or the like or related
devices in areas zoned residential between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   H.   The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair
of any building other than between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M and ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety.
   I.   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading and
unloading any vehicle or the opening destruction of bails, boxes, crates and
other containers. (Ord. 2004-06, 3-3-2004)
4-8-2: EXCEPTIONS TO SECTION 4-8-1:
   A.   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when in the
line or scope of duties.
   B.   Noises resulting from emergency work.
   C.   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration
permitted by law and for which permission or a license or permit has been
granted by the city. (Ord. 2004-06, 3-3-2004)
4-8-3: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punished by a fine. Failure to pay the fine imposed
within fourteen (14) days after the violation shall result in imposition of an
increased penalty in addition to the above fine. Any fine not paid within
thirty (30) days after issuance will result in a further penalty. All fines and
penalties will be established by resolution of the city council and may be
changed from time to time. (Ord. 2004-06, 3-3-2004)
CHAPTER 9
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
4-9-1: Short Title And Purpose
4-9-2: Definitions
4-9-3: Discharge Of Fireworks; Restrictions
4-9-4: Disposal Of Fireworks
4-9-5: Penalty
4-9-1: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the RESTRICTION ON FIREWORKS IN THE
CITY OF LAVERKIN. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the discharge of
fireworks in all areas within the city of LaVerkin. (Ord. 2006-29, 8-16-2006)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Any
other words and phrases not defined in this chapter shall be given their
ordinary, commonly understood and accepted meanings.
CLASS C COMMON STATE APPROVED EXPLOSIVE: A firework that: a) is purchased at
retail for use by a consumer; and b) is not a class C dangerous explosive.
CLASS C DANGEROUS EXPLOSIVE: A. A class C explosive that is:
1. A firecracker, cannon cracker, ground salute, M-80, cherry bomb, or other
similar explosive;
2. A skyrocket, missile type rocket, or single shot or reloadable aerial shell;
or any similar rocket, including an aerial salute, a flash shell, a comet, a
mine, or a cake containing more than five hundred grams (500 g) of pyrotechnic
composition; or
3. A bottle rocket, roman candle, or rocket mounted on a wire or stick; or a
device containing a bottle rocket, roman candle, or rocket mounted on a wire or
stick.
   B.   But does not include exempt explosives.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: Large firework devices that consist of explosive materials
that are intended for use in outdoor aerial fireworks displays to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation,
including aerial shells, salutes, roman candles, flash shells, comets, mines,
and other similar explosives.
EXEMPT EXPLOSIVE: Includes a model rocket, toy pistol cap, emergency signal
flare, snake or glowworm, party popper, trick noisemaker, match, wire sparkler
under twelve inches (12") in length, and such other similar device as may be
expressly permitted by state and federal law.
FIREWORKS: A. Include class C explosives, as defined by section 53-7-202, Utah
Code Annotated (1953, as amended).
   B.   Include class C dangerous explosives and class C common state approved
explosives, as defined in this section and by section 53-7-202, Utah Code
Annotated (1953, as amended).
   C.   But do not include exempt explosives, class A explosives, or class B
explosives, as defined by section 53-7-202, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as
amended).
PYROTECHNIC: Any composition or device manufactured or used to produce a
visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation; but does
not mean or include exempt explosives as herein defined.
TRICK NOISEMAKER: A. A tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic composition that
produces a white or colored smoke as its primary effect when ignited; or
   B.   A device that produces a small report intended to surprise the user,
including a: 1) "booby trap", which is a small tube with a string protruding
from both ends that ignites the friction sensitive composition in the tube when
the string is pulled; 2) "snapper", which is a small paper wrapped device
containing a minute quantity of explosive composition coated on bits of sand
that explodes producing a small report; 3) "trick match", which is a kitchen or
book match coated with a small quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition
that produces a small shower of sparks when ignited; 4) "cigarette load", which
is a small wooden peg coated with a small quantity of explosive composition
that produces a small report when ignited; and 5) "auto burglar alarm", which
is a tube that contains pyrotechnic composition that produces a loud whistle
and smoke when ignited, may contain a small quantity of explosive to produce a
small explosive noise; and is ignited by a squib. (Ord. 2011-06, 6-15-2011)
4-9-3: DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Sale: Subject to federal, state, and local laws and ordinances
governing such sales, to include applicable zoning and business license
regulations, and as provided by state law governing the periods during which
such sales may occur, class C common state approved explosives may be sold
within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city of LaVerkin each year: 1)
beginning on June 23, and ending on July 27; 2) beginning on December 29, and
ending on December 31; and 3) two (2) days before and on the eve of the Chinese
New Year.
   B.   Discharge:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to discharge fireworks of any kind from moving
vehicles, on or onto hillsides, or near dry vegetation.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to discharge class C dangerous explosives.
      3.   Subject to the above prohibitions on the discharge of fireworks, the
following stages shall apply to the discharge of class C common state approved
fireworks and display fireworks, which stages (and duration thereof), except
for stage one, shall be set by resolution of the LaVerkin City council,
depending on the climatic conditions existing at a given time:
         a.   Stage One; Limited Restrictions: Unless stage restrictions are
declared by resolution of the city council, the provisions of this subsection
shall apply. During a period of stage one restrictions:
            (1)   Except where expressly prohibited by federal, state or local
law or ordinance, or where otherwise posted, and subject to the provisions of
subsection B3a(2) of this section, persons exercising reasonable caution and
prudence may discharge class C common state approved explosives each year:
               (A)   Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on July 4 and July 24; and
               (B)   Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., beginning on July 1 and ending on July 7, and
beginning on July 21 and ending on July 27, except as set forth in subsection
B3a(1)(A) of this section; and
               (C)   Beginning at eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. on December 31
and ending at one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on January 1; unless New Year's Eve falls
on a Sunday and the city council has, by resolution, designated the Saturday
preceding New Year's Day as the date upon which to celebrate New Year's Eve in
LaVerkin, in which case such discharge may commence at eleven o'clock (11:00)
A.M. on said Saturday;
               (D)   Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. on the
eve of the Chinese New Year and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. of the day of the
Chinese New Year.
            (2)   During the dates or time periods set forth in subsection B3a
(1) of this section, no class C common state approved explosives may be
discharged within the jurisdictional limits of the city:
               (A)   By persons not exercising reasonable caution and prudence;
or
               (B)   In violation of park curfews as established by this title.
            (3)   The city, as part of a community sponsored event, may
discharge: a) class C common state approved fireworks and b) display fireworks
at such times and places as permitted by state law and in connection with
community sponsored events, to include, but not be limited to, the periods
allowed by law from June 23 through July 27; on the evening of the city's
"Winterfest" celebration; on December 31 and January 1; and on the day before
and the day of the Chinese New Year.
         b.   Stage Two; Enhanced Restrictions: During a period of stage two
restrictions:
            (1)   Except where expressly prohibited by federal, state or local
law or ordinance, or where otherwise posted, and subject to the provisions of
subsection B3b(2) of this section, persons exercising reasonable caution and
prudence may only discharge class C common state approved fireworks within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the city of LaVerkin, at location(s) and during
such time frame(s) as specifically designated by LaVerkin City; which may be
coextensive with, or for a portion of or set of dates and/or times within, the
following time periods:
               (A)   Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on July 4 and July 24; and
               (B)   Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., beginning on July 1 and ending on July 7, and
beginning on July 21 and ending on July 27, except as set forth in subsection
B3b(1)(A) of this section; and
               (C)   Beginning at eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. on December 31
and ending at one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on January 1; unless New Year's Eve falls
on a Sunday and the city council has, by resolution, designated the Saturday
preceding New Year's Day as the date upon which to celebrate New Year's Eve in
LaVerkin, in which case such discharge may commence at eleven o'clock (11:00)
A.M. on said Saturday;
               (D)   Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. on the
eve of the Chinese New Year and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. of the day of the
Chinese New Year.
            (2)   During the dates or time periods set forth in subsection B3b
(1) of this section, no class C common state approved explosives may be
discharged within the jurisdictional limits of the city:
               (A)   By persons not exercising reasonable caution and prudence;
or
               (B)   In violation of park curfews as established by this title.
            (3)   The city, as part of a community sponsored event, may
discharge: a) class C common state approved fireworks and b) display fireworks
at such times and places as permitted by state law and in connection with
community sponsored events, to include, but not be limited to, the periods
allowed by law from June 23 through July 27; on the evening of the city's
"Winterfest" celebration; on December 31 and January 1; and on the day before
and the day of the Chinese New Year.
         c.   Stage Three; Restricted To City Use: During a period of stage
three restrictions:
            (1)   The use and/or discharge of fireworks within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the city of LaVerkin shall be restricted to city
use only. Discharge of class C common state approved fireworks or display
fireworks shall be limited to professional pyrotechnic displays at community
sponsored events and by licensed display operators; and may be used and/or
discharged at such times and places as permitted by state law and in connection
with community sponsored events, to include, the periods allowed by law from
June 23 through July 27; on the evening of the city's "Winterfest" celebration;
on December 31 and January 1; and on the day before and the day of the Chinese
New Year.
            (2)   It shall be unlawful for persons to discharge fireworks of
any kind within the jurisdictional limits of the city.
         d.   Stage Four; Full Restriction: It shall be unlawful to discharge
fireworks of any kind anywhere within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city
of LaVerkin during a period of stage four restrictions.
   C.   General Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to use and/or
discharge fireworks except as expressly permitted in this section. (Ord. 2012-
02, 4-4-2012)
4-9-4: DISPOSAL OF FIREWORKS:
Persons wishing to dispose of their fireworks in a safe and proper method after
said allowances may do so at the fire department. (Ord. 2006-29, 8-16-2006)
4-9-5: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation violating: a) the date and time restrictions
for discharging fireworks, as set forth in section
4-9-3 of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction; and b) any other
provision of this chapter, or the provisions of section 53-7-226, Utah Code
Annotated (1953, as amended), shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord.
2012-02, 4-4-2012)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-1-1: Definitions
5-1-2: Division of Animal Control
5-1-3: Dog License Procedure
5-1-4: Rabies Control
5-1-5: Kennel Prohibited
5-1-6: Specific Violations
5-1-7: Vicious Animals
5-1-8: Killing of a Dog
5-1-9: Impoundment of Animals
5-1-10: Sale of Dogs, Cats and Rabbits
5-1-11: Liability, Restitution; Order for Destruction Vicious Animals
5-1-12: Penalty for Violation
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following
meanings:
                            To intentionally deposit, leave, or drop off any
                            live animal without providing for the care of that
                            animal in accordance with accepted animal husbandry
ABANDON:                    practices or customary farming practices, or in a
                            situation where conditions present an immediate,
                            direct and serious threat to the life, safety or
                            health of the animal. Abandon does not include
                            returning wildlife to its natural habitat
                            Any peace officer or other person(s) designated by
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:     the LaVerkin City Police Chief as the person(s)
                            charged with enforcement of this Chapter.
                            Where an animal is caused to fight with (a) another
ANIMAL FIGHTING EXHIBITION: animal of like kind for amusement or gain, or (b) a
                            different kind of animal or creature for amusement
                            or gain.
                            any domesticated animal off the premises of the
                            owner or other person having the care, custody or
                            control of an animal, and not under the immediate
AT LARGE:                   control of such owner or other person. In the case
                            of a dog, immediate control means on a leash, cord,
                            chain, confined within a vehicle, or within the
                            direct command of the owner or other person.
BITE:                       an actual puncture, tear or abrasion of the skin
                            inflicted by the teeth of an animal.
                            Any document which establishes that such dog, cat
                            or rabbit was directly obtained from a public
CERTIFICATE OF SOURCE:      animal control agency or shelter, society for the
                            prevention of cruelty to animals shelter, humane
                            society shelter, or other recognized animal rescue
                            organization.
                            Animals that provide companionship, relieve
EMOTIONAL SUPPORT ANIMAL:   loneliness, or help with depression and anxiety,
                            but do not have special training to perform tasks
                            that assist people with disabilities.
IMPOUND:                    The picking up and taking to the animal shelter of
                            any animal by the animal control officer.
                            Any residence or commercial establishment having
KENNEL:                     more than (4) dogs for the purpose of boarding,
                            breeding, keeping, buying, selling, grooming,
                            letting for hire or training for a fee.
OWNER:                      Any person who owns or who has the care, custody
                            and control of an animal.
                            Any dog that: (a) is trained, or is in training, to
                            do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an
                            individual with a disability, including a physical,
SERVICE DOG:                sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental
                            disability, and (b) performs work or tasks or is in
                            training to perform work or tasks, that are
                            directly related to the individual disability.
                            A dog for which the license for the current year
UNLICENSED DOG:             has not been paid, or to which the tag provided for
                            in this chapter is not attached.
                            Any animal which: (a) attacks or bites another
                            animal or person without provocation, (b) has a
VICIOUS ANIMAL:             known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
                            or bite another animal or person without
                            provocation.
                            Any animal of a species that in its natural habitat
WILD ANIMAL:                is wild. (Ord. 99-09, 9-1-1999; amd. Ord. 2024-15,
                            8-7-2024)
 
5-1-2: DIVISION OF ANIMAL CONTROL: 
   A.   Created. There is hereby created within the LaVerkin City Police
Department a Division of Animal Control under the supervision of the LaVerkin
City Chief of Police, who shall designate such peace officers or other persons
to act as animal control officers for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Powers. Any peace officer or person designated as animal control
officer shall have the following powers:
      1.   To capture, apprehend and impound any animal found in violation of
this chapter, including any dog for which a license is required but has not
been obtained, and any other animal in violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
      2.   To enter onto private property, including during times of emergency
into dwelling units, to investigate any violation of this chapter or take
possession of any animal in violation of this chapter.
      3.   To issue citations to any person in violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
      4.   To take such other action as may be reasonably necessary to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of LaVerkin in the enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter, including killing a dog in accordance with
Section
5-1-8 hereafter.
   C.   Duties: Any peace officer or person designated as animal control
officer shall have the following duties:
      1.   Investigate all reports of violations of this chapter.
      2.   Keep records of all reports of violations of this chapter and
citations issued.
      3.   Provide adequate care for all animals transported to the LaVerkin
animal shelter.
      4.   Operate the city animal shelter in a clean, orderly and efficient
manner.
      5.   Keep adequate records of all animals impounded and all monies
collected.
      6.   Take such action as may be necessary to prevent cruelty to animals.
      7.   Perform such other tasks as may be directed from time to time by the
LaVerkin City Chief of Police. (Ord. 2024-15, 8-7-2024)
5-1-3: DOG LICENSING PROCEDURE:
   A.   License Required: All dogs must be licensed each year in accordance
with the following:
   B.   Time Limit to Obtain: Any owner or other person having the care,
custody or control of a dog shall be required to obtain a license for such dog
within thirty (30) days after the dog reaches the age of four (4) months, or
within five (5) days of the date of the acquisition of an unlicensed dog which
is four (4) months or older.
   C.   Application for License: An application for licensing of a dog must be
submitted to the city office or animal shelter on a form prescribed by the
city, containing the following information:
      1.   The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
applicant, and, if the applicant is not the owner of the dog, the name,
address, telephone number and email address of the owner.
      2.   The breed, sex, color and age of the dog.
      3.   The date of rabies vaccination, accompanied by a vaccination
certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian.
   D.   Fees: The annual license fee in such amount as may be established from
time to time by resolution of the LaVerkin City Council shall accompany the
license application.
   E.   Effective Date: Any license issued pursuant to this section shall be
effective from the date of purchase through the end of December of the same
calendar year. A new application must be submitted, and a new license by the
end of February for the current calendar year. Any license not obtained by the
end of February shall be subject to a late fee.
   F.   License Tags: Upon payment of the license fee and issuance of the
license, the Division of Animal Control shall issue to the owner a certificate
and a license tag for each dog licensed subject to the following:
      1.   The tag shall have stamped thereon the license number corresponding
with the tag number on the certificate.
      2.   The owner shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of the
animal and see that the collar and the tag are constantly worn.
      3.   Failure to attach the tag as provided shall be in violation of this
chapter, except that dogs which are kept primarily for show purposes are exempt
from wearing the tag.
      4.   Dog tags are not transferable from one dog to another.
      5.   No refunds shall be made on any dog license fee for any reason
whatsoever.
      6.   Replacements for lost or destroyed tags shall be issued upon proof
of prior receipt and payment of $2.00 to the Division of Animal Control.
      7.   Any person removing or causing to be removed the collar, harness or
tag from any licensed dog without the consent of the owner or keeper thereof,
except a licensed veterinarian or animal control officer who removes such for
medical and other reasons, shall be in violation of this chapter.
   G.   Exemptions to licensing requirements. The provisions of subsections A
through F of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Dogs which have a current, valid license from another city/town and
whose owners are not residents of the City but who are in the City for less
than thirty (30) days.
      2.   Dogs licensed elsewhere and whose owners remain in the City for more
than thirty (30) days may transfer the license for up to two dogs to a City
license upon payment of a $5.00 fee and submission of proof of current rabies
vaccination. (Ord. 2024-15, 8-7-2024)
5-1-4: RABIES CONTROL:
   A.   Vaccination required. Every owner or person having the care, custody
and control of any dog over the age of four months within the City shall have
the dog vaccinated against rabies by a duly licensed veterinarian, shall secure
from the veterinarian a certificate thereof, and shall attach to the collar or
harness, which such person is hereby required to place upon the dog, a tag
showing that such vaccination has been done; provided, that the City Council
may, by resolution, provide that owners of any dog may themselves purchase
serum and vaccinate their own dogs. The resolution shall also prescribe the
condition with which the owner must comply to obtain the tag hereinafter
required.
   B.   Public places; Vaccination; Tag Required. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of any dog to suffer, allow or permit such dog to be or go upon any
sidewalk, street, alley, public place or square within the City without first
having had such dog vaccinated every two years against rabies as above provided
within the past two years, and without there being on such dog a collar or
harness with a license tag thereon showing that such dog has been so
vaccinated.
   C.   Duty to Report Bites. Any person having knowledge of any individual or
animal having been bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall
report the incident immediately to the Division of Animal Control, giving the
name and address of the person bitten and of the owner or custodian of the
biting animal, if available. Failure to provide such information or otherwise
assist the division to provide such information or otherwise assist the
division in discovering possible exposure to rabies or in ascertaining the
immunization of an animal shall be in violation of this chapter.
   D.   Vaccination; Certificate. Rabies vaccination is required for dogs and
cats. The owner of a dog or cat shall have said animal vaccinated within thirty
(30) days after it reaches the age of four months. Unvaccinated dogs or cats
over four (4) months of age acquired by the owner or brought into the
jurisdiction must be vaccinated within thirty (30) days. Every dog shall be
revaccinated thereafter every thirty-six (36) months, and every cat shall be
revaccinated thereafter every twelve (12) months with a modified rabies virus
vaccine approved by the division. This provision shall not apply to a
veterinarian temporarily maintaining on their premises animals owned by others.
Each veterinarian, when vaccinating any animal for rabies, shall complete a
certificate of rabies vaccination (in duplicate) a copy of which shall be
distributed to the owner and original retained by the issuing veterinarian,
which includes the following information:
      1.   Owner's name and address.
      2.   Description of animal (breed, sex, marking, age, name).
      3.   Date of vaccination.
      4.   Rabies vaccination tag number.
      5.   Type of rabies vaccine administered.
      6.   Manufacturer's serial number of vaccine.
   E.   Unvaccinated Animals. Any unvaccinated animal shall be impounded but
may be reclaimed prior to disposal by payment of impound fees and by obtaining
a rabies vaccination within 72 hours of release. Any animal not reclaimed prior
to the five-day period may be disposed of pursuant to provisions of this
chapter.
   F.   Biting Animals. Management of biting animals shall be as follows:
      1.   A healthy dog, cat, or ferret that bites a person shall be confined
and observed at least daily for ten days from the date of bite, regardless of
vaccination status. Unless otherwise recommended by medical personnel, the
rabies vaccine shall not be administered during the observation period. Such
animals shall be evaluated by a veterinarian at the first sign of illness
during confinement. A veterinarian or animal control officer shall immediately
report any illness in the animal to the local health department. If signs
suggestive of rabies develop, a veterinarian or animal control officer shall
direct that the animal be euthanized, its head removed, and the head shipped
under refrigeration, not frozen, for examination of the brain by a laboratory
approved by the Utah Department of Health and Human Services.
      2.   If the dog, cat, or ferret shows no signs of rabies or illness
during the ten-day period, the veterinarian or animal control officer shall
direct that the unvaccinated animal be vaccinated against rabies at the owner's
expense before release to the owner. If a veterinarian is not available, the
animal may be released, but the owner shall have the animal vaccinated within
72 hours of release. If the dog, cat, or ferret was appropriately vaccinated
against rabies before the incident, the animal may be released from confinement
after the 10-day observation period with no further restrictions.
      3.   Any stray or unwanted dog, cat, or ferret that bites a person may be
euthanized immediately by a veterinarian or animal control officer and the head
submitted, as described in R386-702-12(2)(a) of the Utah Administrative Rules
for rabies examination. If the brain is negative by fluorescent-antibody
examination for rabies, one can assume that the saliva contained no virus, and
the person bitten need not be treated.
      4.   If a wild animal, including a raccoon, skunk, coyote, fox, or bat
and any carnivorous animal other than a domestic dog, cat, or ferret, bites or
scratches a person, the person or attending medical personnel shall notify an
animal control or law enforcement officer. A veterinarian, animal control
officer or representative of the Division of Wildlife Resources shall kill the
animal at once, without unnecessary damage to the head, and submit the brain,
as described in Subsection R386-702-12(2)(a) of the Utah Administrative Rules
for examination for evidence of rabies.
      5.   Any animal bitten or scratched by a wild, carnivorous animal or a
bat that is not available for testing shall be regarded as having been exposed
to rabies. The animal shall be placed in a strict quarantine for four months
for dogs and cats, or six months for ferrets.
      6.   For maximum protection of the public health, unvaccinated dogs,
cats, and ferrets bitten or scratched by a confirmed or suspected rabid animal
shall be euthanized immediately by a veterinarian or animal control officer. If
the owner is unwilling to have the animal euthanized, the animal control
officer shall order that the animal be held in strict isolation in the city
animal shelter at the owner's expense, for at least four months for dogs and
cats, and six months for ferrets. The animal shall be vaccinated one month
before being released. If any illness suggestive of rabies develops in the
animal, the veterinarian or animal control officer shall immediately report the
illness to the local health department and the animal control officer shall
direct that the animal be euthanized and the head shall be handled as described
in R386-702-12(2)(a).
      7.   Dogs, cats, and ferrets that are currently vaccinated and are bitten
by rabid animals, shall be revaccinated immediately by a veterinarian and
confined and observed by the animal's owner for 45 days. If any illness
suggestive of rabies develops in the animal, the owner shall report immediately
to the local health department and the animal shall be euthanized by a
veterinarian or animal control officer and the head shall be handled as
described in Subsection R386-702-12(2)(a).
      8.   Livestock exposed to a rabid animal and currently vaccinated with a
vaccine approved by the United States Department of Agriculture for that
species shall be revaccinated immediately by a veterinarian and observed by the
owner for 45 days. Unvaccinated livestock shall be slaughtered immediately. If
the owner is unwilling to have the animal slaughtered, the animal shall be kept
under close observation by the owner for six months.
      9.   Unvaccinated animals other than dogs, cats, ferrets, and livestock
bitten by a confirmed or suspected rabid animal shall be euthanized immediately
by a veterinarian or animal control officer. (Ord. 2024-15, 8-7-2024)
5-1-5: KENNEL PROHIBITED:
Except as provided hereinafter, no more than four (4) dogs shall be kept,
maintained, or harbored at any residential dwelling unit or commercial
establishment within the City of LaVerkin; provided, however, that for purposes
of this section, the following dogs shall not be included in the number of
permissible dogs:
   A.   Certified service dogs, and
   B.   Puppies which are the offspring of a dog which is included in the
number of permissible dogs and which are under the age of four (4) months and
not weaned or vaccinated. (Ord. 2024-15, 8-7-2024)
5-1-6: SPECIFIED VIOLATIONS:
In addition to any violation specified elsewhere in this chapter, it shall be
unlawful:
   A.   For the owner or any person having the care, custody and control of a
dog, to allow or permit such dog to attack, chase or worry any person, domestic
animal having a commercial value, any species of hoofed, protected wildlife, or
to attack domestic fowl.
   B.   For any person to own or have the care, custody or control of any
animal which without provocation (i) bites or injures a person or domestic
animal, or (ii) has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack or
bite human beings or domestic animals.
   C.   For the owner of any dog, or any person having the care, custody and
control of a dog, to allow or permit such dog to cause or become a nuisance by:
      1.   Causing damage to or destruction of the property of another;
      2.   Exhibiting characteristics of a vicious animal, as defined herein;
      3.   Causing unreasonable fouling of the air by odors;
      4.   Causing unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings;
      5.   Defecating on any public sidewalk, park or building, or on any
private property without the consent of the owner of such private property,
unless the person owning, having a proprietary interest in, harboring or having
care, charge, control, custody or possession of such animal shall remove any
such defecation to a proper trash receptacle;
      6.   Loud, frequent or continuous barking, whining, howling or making
other annoying, disturbing or disruptive noises at such times and in such a
manner so as to interfere with the right of another to the quiet enjoyment of
his/her property, as attested to by the signing of a complaint by another
person;
      7.   Molesting passersby by barking, snapping, pawing, clawing, biting,
chasing or growling;
      8.   Chasing passing motorcycles, bicycles or other vehicles;
      9.   Attacking other domestic animals;
      10.   Exhibiting such other behaviors which are offensive or dangerous to
the public health, welfare or safety, as determined by the department of public
safety.
   D.   For the owner or person having the charge, care, custody or control of
any cattle, sheep, goat, horse, mule, dog or domestic fowl, to allow such
animals to run at large, regardless of the efforts made or precautions taken by
such owner or persons to prevent such animal from doing so.
   E.   Interference With Officer: For any person, after verbal warning, to
intentionally interfere with, molest, hinder or obstruct any peace officer or
any animal control officer in the lawful discharge of their duties as herein
prescribed.
   F.   Retaking Animal: For anyone to take any animal out of the possession of
anyone lawfully holding the same under the provisions of this chapter, either
by stealth, force, fraud or to intercept or hinder any person lawfully taking
up or attempting to take up such animals.
   G.   Abandonment: For any person to abandon an animal.
   H.   Harbor Stray Dogs: For any person to harbor or keep any dog which
appears to be lost or strayed, or fail to notify the animal control officer
within twenty-four (24) hours after finding such lost or strayed dog and the
department shall impound the dog as herein provided.
   I.   Unenclosed Premises: For any owner to chain, stake out or tether any
dog, cattle, horse, sheep, goat, mule or domestic fowl on any unenclosed
premises in such a manner that the animal may go onto the neighboring property
owner's property, unless such owner has permission of the neighboring property
owner.
   J.    Killing Or Poisoning: For any person to purposely and intentionally
kill any domestic animal by poisoning, or expose any domestic animal to any
poisonous substance with the intent that such substance be ingested by such
animal.
   K.   Mistreating: For any person to overdrive, overwork, overload, drive
when overloaded, torture, beat, mutilate, carry or transport in any vehicle or
other conveyance in a cruel or inhumane manner, or otherwise inflict serious
physical injury on any animal or cause any of these acts to be done.
   L.   Fail To Provide Sustenance and Shelter: For any person to fail to
provide any animal in his charge, care or custody with necessary sustenance,
drink and shelter from the elements, or cause any of these acts to be done.
   M.   Animal Fighting Exhibition: For any person to participate or engage in
any animal fighting exhibition, whether as a sponsor, venue provider,
participant or spectator; provided, however, that this section shall not apply
to the lawful hunting of, fishing for, or trapping of, wildlife.
   N.   Intentional Exhibition: For any person to intentionally exhibit any
stud, horse or bull or other animal in a manner which is indecent or offensive,
or let any male animal to any female animal for the purpose of providing
entertainment or viewing to any person.
   O.   Trespassing Animals or Fowl: It shall be unlawful for any owner or
person having the care, custody and control of any domestic fowl or animal to
permit such fowl or animal to trespass upon the premises of another person.
   N.   Wild Animals: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for
sale, barter, give away, keep or purchase any wild animal which is not
domesticated, or an animal belonging to an endangered species, except for the
animal shelter, a zoological park, veterinary hospital, circus, sideshow,
amusement show or facility for education or scientific purposes if protective
devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the public
are provided. (Ord. 2024-15, 8-7-2024)
5-1-7: VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   A.   In connection with the issuance of a citation for a violation of
5-1-6 B., an animal control officer may:
      1.   require the owner or custodian of a vicious animal to deliver
possession of the animal to an animal control officer, or
      2.   summarily impound a vicious animal which is at large or which is an
immediate danger to humans or domesticated animals.
   B.   If, after demand, the owner or custodian fails or refuses to deliver
possession of the animal to an animal control officer, the animal control
officer may request an order from a court of competent jurisdiction requiring
the owner or custodian to deliver possession of the animal to an animal control
officer.
   C.   If a vicious animal is impounded without the knowledge of the owner or
custodian, notice that the animal has been impounded shall be given to the
owner or custodian of the animal, if the same is known, by attaching a notice
to a door at the residence thereof or by mailing a notice thereto. The notice
shall state that:
      1.   The animal has been impounded without a court order,
      2.   The owner or custodian may contest the impoundment by filing a
written objection with the court within five (5) days after receipt of the
notice of impoundment, and
      3.   If no objection is filed, that the animal shall remain impounded at
the cost of the owner or custodian until the court issues an order for
disposition of the animal.
   D.   The owner or custodian of an animal impounded other than by a court
order may contest the impounding by filing a notice with the proper court
within five (5) days after the impounding.
   E .   A vicious animal impounded with or without a court order shall be
disposed of as ordered by the court. (Ord. 2024-15, 8-7-2024)
5-1-8: KILLING OF DOG AUTHORIZED:
   A.   Any person, including an animal control officer, may injure or kill a
dog while:
      1.   The dog is attacking, chasing or worrying domestic fowls, other
domestic animals having a commercial value, a service animal, or any species of
hoofed protected wildlife, or
      2.   The dog is being pursued for having committed any act described in
subparagraph 1 above. (Ord. 2024-15, 8-7-2024)
5-1-9: IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Animal Shelter: The Division of Animal Control shall provide suitable
premises and facilities to be used as an animal shelter where impounded animals
can be adequately kept and supplied with food and humane care. It shall provide
for the painless and humane destruction of animals where necessary, or it may
furnish medical treatment for impounded animals as provided hereinafter.
   B.   Animals Subject to Impoundment: The animal control officer shall take
all animals which are taken into custody to the animal shelter to be impounded.
The following animals may be impounded and taken into custody by the animal
control officer without the filing of a complaint:
      1.   Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of
this chapter.
      2.   Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this
chapter.
      3.   Any animal which is by this chapter required to be licensed and is
not licensed; any animal not wearing a tag shall be presumed to be unlicensed
for purposes of this section.
      4.   Any sick or injured animal whose owner cannot be located.
      5.   Any abandoned animal.
      6.   Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
      7.   Any animal to be held for quarantine.
      8.   Any vicious animal not properly confined.
      9.   Any animal not having proof of rabies which bites a person shall be
impounded and quarantined for a period of not less than ten (10) days.
   C.    Notice; Time of Impoundment:
      1.   Notice of impoundment shall be emailed or mailed to the last known
address of the owner of any animal which is wearing a license tag or other
identification, or, if the impounded animal is not wearing a license tag or
other identification, notice shall be given by the best available means under
the circumstances. For animals voluntarily delivered or relinquished by the
owner to the animal control facility, no further notice of any kind need be
given to the owner.
      2.    Animals taken to the animal shelter shall be impounded for a
minimum of five (5) days, excluding Sunday, except when:
         (a)   The animal is redeemed by the owner prior to the expiration of
the five (5) day impound period upon payment by the owner of all impound fees,
daily boarding fees, license fees, vaccination fees, and veterinary fees if
applicable.
         (b)    The animal is humanely destroyed after a determination by the
animal control officer and licensed veterinarian that the animal is suffering
from a serious injury, illness or malnutrition and should be destroyed for
humane reasons or to preserve the public health, safety and welfare, unless the
animal is immediately redeemed by the owner.
      3.    Any impounded animal suffering from an injury, illness or other
condition which, in the judgment of the animal control officer, requires minor
veterinary treatment or care, may, with or without the consent of the owner, be
taken to a veterinary hospital for any necessary treatment, the cost of which
shall be paid by the owner as part of the cost of redemption, or, unless waived
by the city, added to the cost of adoption.
      4.   Any impounded animal suffering from an injury, illness or other
condition which, in the judgment of the animal control officer, requires
extensive veterinary treatment or care, may:
         (a)   At the discretion of the animal control officer and with the
owner's agreement, be taken for examination and treatment by a veterinarian,
with the cost thereof to be paid by the owner as part of redemption; or,
         (b)   In the event the owner is not known or unwilling to give
consent, the animal shall, at any time before or after the five (5) day
impoundment period, be humanely destroyed.
      5.   Upon the expiration of the five (5) day impoundment period, all
healthy impounded animals shall be adopted or otherwise disposed of as
determined by the animal control officer, subject to payment of all impoundment
fees, daily boarding fees, adoption fees, license fees, and vaccination fees,
or as otherwise determined by the animal control officer.
   D.   Redemption of Impounded Animals:
      1.   Subject to the provisions of Section
5-1-4 F. 1. and Section
5-1-7 C., the owner of any impounded animal or his/her authorized
representative may redeem such animal before adoption or other disposition,
provided that he/she pays:
         (a)   The impound fees.
         (b)   The daily boarding charge.
         (c)   Any veterinary costs incurred during the impound period,
including rabies vaccination.
         (d)   License fees, if required.
   E.   Records Maintained: The impounding facility shall keep a record of each
animal impounded and permanent impound records, which include the following
information:
      1.   Complete description of the animal, including tag numbers.
      2.   The manner and date of impound.
      3.   The location of pick up and name of the person picking up the
animal.
      4.   The manner and date of disposal.
      5.   The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser.
      6.   The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the
impound facility.
      7.   All fees received.
      8.   All expenses accruing during impoundment. (Ord. 2024-15, 8-7-2024)
5-1-10: SALE OF DOGS, CATS AND RABBITS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any pet store or
other business within the boundaries of LaVerkin to sell, lease, trade or adopt
out any live dog, cat, or rabbit, unless such dog, cat or rabbit was obtained
from a public animal control agency or shelter, society for the prevention of
cruelty to animals shelter, humane society shelter or other recognized animal
rescue organization. In addition, such pet store or business shall:
      1.   Obtain and keep on file a certificate of source, as well as a record
of a medical exam and clearance, for each of the animals.
      2.   Upon request, make such certificate and record available to any law
enforcement officer, animal control officer, code enforcement officer, or any
other city employee responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
      3.   Provide a copy of such certificate and record to any customer
purchasing any such dog, cat or rabbit.
      4.   Maintain a current business license issued by the City of LaVerkin.
      5.   Permit inspection of the business premises during regular business
hours by an animal control officer to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      6.   Operate such store or business in such a manner so as to not
constitute a public nuisance.
      7.    Provide an isolation area for animals which are sick or diseased
and which is sufficiently removed from other animals.
      8.   Keep all animals appropriately caged or under the control of the
store or business.
      9.   At all times operate the store or business in compliance with all
provisions of this chapter providing for the general care of animals.
      10.   Not sell animals which are un-weaned, too young, or whose
development is otherwise such that their sale poses a serious risk of death for
the animal.
      11.    Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
      12.   Provide to the purchaser of any dog an application approved by the
Division of Animal Control for a dog license.
      13.   Provide the purchaser of an animal with written instructions as to
proper care and control of that species.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, lease, trade or adopt out
any dog, cat or rabbit from any public street, sidewalk, right of way, park,
swap meet, private business parking lot or from inside any private business.
   C.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit
the sale, gift, trade, adoption or other transfer of ownership of animals at a
private residence, animal shelter, animal exhibition or show, or in connection
with 4-H activities. (Ord. 2024-15, 8-7-2024)
5-1-11: LIABILITY; RESTITUTION; ORDER FOR DESTRUCTION:
   A.   The owner of any animal causing damage to the property of another or
injury to another person shall be strictly liable for such damage or injuries.
   B.   A person who owns or keeps a dog is liable for injury or death caused
by the dog to another animal, regardless of whether the dog is vicious, or
whether the owner knows the dog is vicious, except where:
      1.   The injury or death occurred on the person's private property while
the dog is reasonably secured within a fence or other enclosure, and
      2.   The animal entered the person's private property without consent.
   C.   Any court of competent jurisdiction may, in any case where criminal
charges are filed and as deemed appropriate by the court, order the payment of
restitution by the owner of any dog for the amount of damages or injuries
caused by the dog. (Ord. 2024-15, 8-7-2024)
5-1-12: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
Infraction and shall be required to pay a fine of not more than $750, plus
restitution if applicable. For purposes of this section, each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. Nothing in this
chapter shall prevent an offense from being charged under the provisions of the
Utah Code Ann. 1953, as amended, as a violation of Utah state law. (Ord. 2024-
15, 8-7-2024)
CHAPTER 2
OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Adoption Of State Codes And Provisions
5-2-2: Discharge Of Explosives And Firearms
5-2-1: ADOPTION OF STATE CODES AND PROVISIONS:
   A.   Codes or Provisions Adopted.
      1.   Criminal Code. Subject to the provisions of subsections B and C
hereof, the Utah Criminal Code, as contained in Title 76 of Utah Code Annotated
(1953, as amended in and through 2023), is hereby adopted and incorporated as a
part of the LaVerkin City Code and incorporated as a part of the Ordinances of
the City of LaVerkin; provided that-where a legislatively-adopted addition to,
change in, or amendment to the Utah Criminal Code does not become effective
until a date subsequent to the effective date of this Section-such addition,
change or amendment shall not be effective hereunder until the effective date
of such provision of the Utah Criminal Code.
      2.   Code of Criminal Procedure. Subject to the provisions of subsections
B and C hereof, Title 77 of Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended in and
through 2023), titled the Utah Code of Criminal Procedure, and Sections 78A-6-
1001 through 78A-6-1003 of Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended in and through
2023) are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the LaVerkin City Code and
incorporated as part of the Ordinances of the City of LaVerkin; provided that-
where a legislatively-adopted addition to, change in, or amendment to said
title and/or sections does not become effective until a date subsequent to the
effective date of this Section-such addition, change or amendment shall not be
effective hereunder until the effective date of such legislative addition,
change, and/or amendment.
      3.   Provisions of the Human Services Code. Subject to the provisions of
subsections B and C hereof, Chapters 3, 4a, and 5b of Title 62A of Utah Code
Annotated (1953, as amended in and through 2023), titled the Human Services
Code, are hereby adopted and incorporated as a part of the LaVerkin City Code
and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of the City of LaVerkin; provided
that-where a legislatively-adopted addition to, change in, or amendment to said
portion of the Human Services Code does not become effective until a date
subsequent to the effective date of this Section-such addition, change or
amendment shall not be effective hereunder until the effective date of such
provision of the Human Services Code.
      4.   Provisions of the Health Code. Subject to the provisions of
subsections B and C hereof, Chapter 8a of Title 26 of Utah Code Annotated
(1953, as amended in and through 2023), titled the Utah Emergency Medical
Services System Act, are hereby adopted and incorporated as a part of the
LaVerkin City Code and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of the City of
LaVerkin; provided that-where a legislatively-adopted addition to, change in,
or amendment to the Utah Emergency Medical Services System Act does not become
effective until a date subsequent to the effective date of this Section-such
addition, change or amendment shall not be effective hereunder until the
effective date of such provision of the Utah Emergency Medical Services System
Act.
      5.   Public Education. Subject to the provisions of subsections B and C
hereof, Part 5 of Chapter 3 of Title 53A of Utah Code Annotated (1953, as
amended in and through 2023), relating to offenses committed on school
property, is hereby adopted and incorporated as a part of the LaVerkin City
Code and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of the City of LaVerkin;
provided that-where a legislatively-adopted addition to, change in, or
amendment to said portion of Title 53A does not become effective until a date
subsequent to the effective date of this Section-such addition, change or
amendment shall not be effective hereunder until the effective date of such
provision of Title 53A.
      6.   Controlled Substances. Subject to the provisions of subsections B
and C hereof, the Utah Controlled Substances Act, as contained in Chapter 37 of
Title 58, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended in and through 2023), is hereby
adopted and incorporated as a part of the LaVerkin City Code and incorporated
as a part of the Ordinances of the City of LaVerkin; provided that-where a
legislatively-adopted addition to, change in, or amendment to the Utah
Controlled Substances Act does not become effective until a date subsequent to
the effective date of this Section-such addition, change or amendment shall not
be effective hereunder until the effective date of such provision of the Utah
Controlled Substances Act.
      7.   Drug Paraphernalia. Subject to the provisions of subsections B and C
hereof, the Utah Drug Paraphernalia Act, as contained in Chapter 37a of Title
58, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended in and through 2023), is hereby
adopted and incorporated as a part of the LaVerkin City Code and incorporated
as a part of the Ordinances of the City of LaVerkin; provided that-where a
legislatively-adopted addition to, change in, or amendment to said portion of
the Utah Drug Paraphernalia Act does not become effective until a date
subsequent to the effective date of this Section-such addition, change or
amendment shall not be effective hereunder until the effective date of such
provision of the Utah Drug Paraphernalia Act.
      8.   Imitation Controlled Substances. Subject to the provisions of
subsections B and C hereof, the Utah Imitation Controlled Substances Act, as
contained in Chapter 37b of Title 58, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended in
and through 2023), is hereby adopted and incorporated as a part of the LaVerkin
City Code and incorporated as a part of the Ordinances of the City of LaVerkin;
provided that-where a legislatively-adopted addition to, change in, or
amendment to said portion of the Utah Imitation Controlled Substances Act does
not become effective until a date subsequent to the effective date of this
Section-such addition, change or amendment shall not be effective hereunder
until the effective date of such provision of the Utah Imitation Controlled
Substances Act.
      9.   Wildlife Resources Code. Subject to the provisions of subsections B
and C hereof, the Wildlife Resources Code of Utah, as contained in Title 23,
Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended in and through 2023), is hereby adopted
and incorporated as a part of the LaVerkin City Code and incorporated as a part
of the Ordinances of the City of LaVerkin; provided that-where a legislatively-
adopted addition to, change in, or amendment to said portion of the Wildlife
Resources Code of Utah does not become effective until a date subsequent to the
effective date of this Section-such addition, change or amendment shall not be
effective hereunder until the effective date of such provision of the Wildlife
Resources Code of Utah.
      10.   Pawnshop and Secondhand Merchandise Transaction Information Act.
Subject to the provisions of subsections B and C hereof, the Pawnshop,
Secondhand Merchandise, and Catalytic Converter Transaction Information Act, as
contained in Chapter 32a of Title 13, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended in
and through 2023), is hereby adopted and incorporated as a part of the LaVerkin
City Code and incorporated as a part of the Ordinances of the City of LaVerkin;
provided that-where a legislatively-adopted addition to, change in, or
amendment to said portion of the Pawnshop and Secondhand Merchandise
Transaction Information Act does not become effective until a date subsequent
to the effective date of this Section-such addition, change or amendment shall
not be effective hereunder until the effective date of such provision of the
Pawnshop and Secondhand Merchandise Transaction Information Act.
   B.   Those portions of the State codes and/or provisions, as adopted in this
Section, referring to or dealing with felonies or other offenses which are not
subject to or authorized for enforcement by the City of LaVerkin, or
punishments associated therewith, are not made a part of the adopted LaVerkin
City Code.
   C.   Where and to the extent that the provisions of the Utah Code, as
adopted by this Section, are in conflict with the provisions of the LaVerkin
City Code, they shall supersede such LaVerkin City Code provisions; provided
that, where such conflict exists because the City has enacted legislation that
is more restrictive than provided by State law, and the City is not prevented
by State law from being more restrictive, then the conflicting LaVerkin City
provision(s) shall govern. Where and to the extent that provisions of the Utah
Code are not in conflict with the provisions of the LaVerkin City Code, they
shall supplement said City Code.
   D.   Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under or pursuant
to the State codes and/or provisions adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to
use the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the
LaVerkin City Code that is applicable and/or has been violated. (Ord. 2019-06,
8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 9-2-2020; Ord. 2021-04, 7-21-2021; Ord. 2022-06,
6-15-2022; Ord. 2023-09, 6-7-2023)
5-2-2: DISCHARGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND FIREARMS:
It shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, for any person to detonate or discharge within the City
contrary to the provisions of this section any kind of explosive device or
firearm other than legal, State approved fireworks, explosives or a BB gun, air
gun or any toy gun. Further, it shall be an infraction for any person to
operate any legal, State approved fireworks, explosives or a BB gun, air gun or
any toy gun in an unsafe manner that poses a threat to any person, domestic
animal or property. Discharge of a firearm within City limits is allowed by any
officer of the law in the performance of his duty, or any citizen when lawfully
defending person or property. Otherwise, discharge of a firearm within city
limits is only allowed subject to the following conditions:
   A.   Persons discharging a firearm must comply with the requirements of Utah
Code Annotated section 76-10-508 as amended, including, but not limited to, not
discharging a firearm from an automobile or other vehicle, or from, upon or
across any highway or street, or in any park, and further that road signs,
communications equipment, utility poles and railroad equipment cannot be the
targets of such discharge, and that such discharge cannot occur within six
hundred feet (600') of any building without the permission of the property
owner;
   B.   Other than in the case of the lawful slaughtering of animals, such
discharge may occur only during daylight hours;
   C.   Individuals discharging a firearm may not be under the influence of
alcohol or any controlled substance;
   D.   The discharge and use of the firearm must be undertaken in a safe and
prudent manner that does not pose a threat to any person, domestic animal or
property. This provision shall not be construed to prevent the lawful
slaughtering of animals by those permitted to do so under state law, as long as
such slaughtering is undertaken in a safe and prudent manner;
   E.   Persons discharging firearms must retrieve all targets, expended
cartridges and litter resulting from their discharge;
   F.   Other than when used for lawful hunting or slaughtering of animals,
firearms may only be aimed and discharged at freestanding paper, cardboard
targets or metal targets not attached to any building or any other structure,
and which the person discharging the firearm has verified do not present any
hazard to any person, domestic animal or property. Firearms may not be aimed or
discharged at any glass or metal object, or at any city or county property,
including signs;
   G.   In addition to the above, when a person discharges a firearm at the
established and recognized shooting range on BLM property located off SR-9 at
the top of what is known as the "LaVerkin Twist", such firearms may only be
discharged in an easterly direction, toward the elevated hillside. (Ord. 157,
1982; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2001-02, 1-17-2001)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS; CURFEW
SECTION:
5-3-1: Curfew Established
5-3-2: Responsibility Of Parents And Guardians
5-3-3: Penalty
5-3-1: CURFEW ESTABLISHED:
No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be or remain upon any of the
streets, alleys or public places or vacant lots at night between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. following, unless such
person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal
custody of such minor person, or unless the employment or lawful business of
such minor makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places
between such specified hours, in which event such minor person shall obtain a
permit from the law enforcement agency to be upon the streets, alleys or public
places during such hours. Where a permit is required from the law enforcement
agency under this section, such permit shall be kept upon the person and it
shall be unlawful to be upon the streets, alleys or public places within such
curfew hours without such permit. On any night when school, civic or church
functions are taking place, the hours of curfew shall be twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. following, in order to provide adequate
time to attend such functions provided for minor persons. The curfew extension
applies only to those youth attending and participating in such functions.
(Ord. 95-09, 9-6-1995; amd. Ord. 2001-18, 10-17-2001)
5-3-2: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS AND GUARDIANS:
No person, guardian or other person having legal charge or custody of any
person under the age of eighteen (18) shall knowingly allow or permit any such
person or child, ward or person under such age, while in such legal custody, to
go or be in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places when such going
or being in or upon such streets, alleys or public places would be a violation
by such minor person of any provision of section
5-3-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-09, 9-6-1995)
5-3-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
STATE CODE PROVISIONS ADOPTED; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Adoption By Reference Of Certain Provisions Of The State Insurance,
Motor Vehicle, And Public Safety Codes
6-1-2: Definitions
6-1-3: Traffic Control
6-1-4: Parking Regulations
6-1-5: Penalty
6-1-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF THE STATE INSURANCE,
MOTOR VEHICLE, AND PUBLIC SAFETY CODES:
   A.   Codes or Provisions Adopted.
      1.   Motor Vehicle Insurance.
         a.   Subject to the provisions of subsections B and C hereof, Part III
of Chapter 22, of Title 31A, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended in and
through 2023), titled Motor Vehicle Insurance, is hereby adopted and
incorporated as a part of the LaVerkin City Code and incorporated as part of
the Ordinances of the City of LaVerkin provided that-where a legislatively-
adopted addition to, change in, or amendment to said Part of Title 31A does not
become effective until a date subsequent to the effective date of this Section-
such addition, change or amendment shall not be effective hereunder until the
effective date of such provision of Title 31A.
         b.   Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under the
provisions of Part III of Chapter 22 of Title 31A of the Utah Code Annotated
(1953, as amended), as adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to use the
section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the LaVerkin
City Code that is applicable and/or has been violated.
      2.   Motor Vehicle and Driver License Regulations.
         a.   Subject to the provisions of subsections B and C hereof, Chapters
1a, 6a, 8, 12a, 21, 22 and 26 of Title 41 of Utah Code Annotated (1953, as
amended in and through 2023), titled Motor Vehicles, is hereby adopted and
incorporated as a part of the LaVerkin City Code and incorporated as part of
the Ordinances of the City of LaVerkin; provided that-where a legislatively-
adopted addition to, change in, or amendment to said portion of the Title 41
does not become effective until a date subsequent to the effective date of this
Section-such addition, change or amendment shall not be effective hereunder
until the effective date of such provision of Title 41.
         b.   Subject to the provisions of subsections B and C hereof, and
Chapter 3 of Title 53 of Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended in and through
2023), titled Uniform Driver License Act, is hereby adopted and incorporated as
a part of the LaVerkin City Code and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of
the City of LaVerkin; provided that-where a legislatively-adopted addition to,
change in, or amendment to the Uniform Driver License Act does not become
effective until a date subsequent to the effective date of this Section-such
addition, change or amendment shall not be effective hereunder until the
effective date of such provision of the Uniform Driver License Act.
         c.   Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under the
provisions of Chapters 1a, 6a, 8, 12a, 21 or 22 of Title 41 of Utah Code
Annotated (1953, as amended), and/or Chapter 3 of Title 53 of Utah Code
Annotated (1953, as amended), as adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to use
the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the
LaVerkin City Code that is applicable and/or has been violated.
   B.   Those portions of the State codes and/or provisions, as adopted in this
Section, referring to or dealing with felonies or other offenses which are not
subject to or authorized for enforcement by the City of LaVerkin, or
punishments associated therewith, are not made a part of the adopted LaVerkin
City Code.
   C.   Where and to the extent that the provisions of the Utah Code, as
adopted by this Section, are in conflict with the provisions of the LaVerkin
City Code, they shall supersede such LaVerkin City Code provisions; provided
that, where such conflict exists because the City has enacted legislation that
is more restrictive than provided by State law, and the City is not prevented
by State law from being more restrictive, then the conflicting LaVerkin City
provision(s) shall govern. Where and to the extent that provisions of the Utah
Code are not in conflict with the provisions of the LaVerkin City Code, they
shall supplement said City Code.
   D.   Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under or pursuant
to the State codes and/or provisions adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to
use the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the
LaVerkin City Code that is applicable and/or has been violated. (Ord. 2019-06,
8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2020-04, 9-2-2020; Ord. 2021-04, 7-21-2021; Ord. 2022-06,
6-15-2022; Ord. 2023-09, 6-7-2023)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in the Traffic Code to
the terms below shall have the following meanings:
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY OF THE STATE OF UTAH: The City Law Enforcement
Agency or his agent.
LOCAL AUTHORITIES: The City Council.
MAGISTRATE: The Justice of the Peace or Judge of the City.
STATE ROAD COMMISSION OR STATE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION: The City and its
officers, departments, agencies and agents. (1982 Code § 11-322; amd. 1998
Code)
6-1-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Prima Facie Speed: Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or in any
other ordinance of the City, the prima facie speed limits on the streets of the
City shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. (1982 Code § 11-323; amd. 1998
Code)
   B.   Erection Of Stop Or Yield Signs: Whenever any ordinance of the City
designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the Public
Works Director to place and maintain a stop sign or, where safety and
efficiency require at any intersection, a yield sign on each and every street
intersecting such through street, unless traffic at such intersection is
controlled at all times by traffic control signals. However, at the
intersection of two (2) through streets or at the intersection of a through
street and a heavily traveled street, stop signs shall be erected at the
approaches to either street as determined by the Public Works Director and on
the basis of an engineering and traffic study. (1982 Code § 11-326; amd. 1998
Code)
   C.   Angle Parking: Angle parking shall be permitted upon the streets or
parts of streets properly marked by the Public Works Director for angle
parking. (1982 Code § 11-324; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating, causing or permitting violation of any
provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor,
notwithstanding other language or provisions in the Utah Traffic Code, Rules of
the Road, hereby adopted, together with any amendments. (1982 Code § 11-327;
amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-4: PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Signs; Erection: The City Council may authorize or direct any person
employed by the City to erect or install any sign or traffic control device
required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (1982 Code § 11-342)
   B.   Properly Posted Areas: It shall be a Class B misdemeanor to park or
leave standing at any time a motor vehicle, as defined in the Utah Traffic
Code, Rules of the Road, as adopted by the City, together with any amendments,
in any of the places properly posted, except when necessary to avoid
interference with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control device. (1982 Code § 11-343; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Blocking Streets Or Highways: In addition to the parking provisions
contained in the Utah Traffic Code, as adopted by the City, it shall be a Class
B misdemeanor for any person to:
      1.   Remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in such a
manner as to obstruct the free passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
thereon.
      2.   Wilfully remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway
in such manner for more than one minute after being requested to move by any
police officer.
      3.   Wilfully remain on such street or highway in such manner as to
obstruct the free passage of any person or vehicle into or out of any property
abutting upon the street or highway or any property having access to such
street or highway. (1982 Code § 11-341)
   D.   Unlawful Parking:
      1.   Parking At Curb: No motor vehicle shall be parked with the left side
of the vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets. It shall be
unlawful to stand or park any motor vehicle in a street other than parallel
with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve
inches (12") of the regularly established curb line, except on those streets
which have been marked for angle parking; then vehicles shall be parked at the
angle to the curb indicated by such marks.
      2.   Vehicles For Sale: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any
street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle from
which merchandise is peddled on any business street.
      3.   Loading Zone: When so posted, it shall be unlawful for the driver of
a passenger vehicle to stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer
than is permitted by the posted sign for the loading or unloading of
passengers, or for the driver to stand or park any freight carrying motor
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and
deliver materials in any place designated as a loading zone and marked as such.
      4.   Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, except
physicians on emergency calls or designated emergency vehicles, when properly
posted, to park any motor vehicle on any street in violation of the posted
restrictions.
      5.   Alleys: No person shall park a motor vehicle within an alley in such
manner or under such conditions as to leave less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position
as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
      6.   Cab Stands; Bus Stands: No motor vehicle other than a licensed
taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a taxicab stand
and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a
bus loading zone. (1982 Code § 11-344)
      7.   Time Limit; Impoundment: It shall be an infraction for any person to
park or leave standing on any public road, street, alley or city property any
motor vehicle for forty eight (48) or more consecutive hours, and any vehicle
so parked or left standing may be impounded or removed by the city law
enforcement agency. For purposes of impoundment and removal, the city law
enforcement agency may impound and remove any motor vehicle which reasonably
appears to have remained unmoved for forty eight (48) consecutive hours. The
cost of impoundment and removal shall be charged to the owner or any person who
claims the impounded motor vehicle. (1982 Code § 11-344; amd. 1998 Code)
6-1-5: PENALTY:
Unless a different penalty classification is provided, any person violating any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: License Required
6-2-2: Minor Accompanied By Adult
6-2-3: Restrictions
6-2-4: Designated Roadways
6-2-5: Penalty
6-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
All operators of off highway vehicles shall be duly licensed to operate such
vehicles in accordance with all applicable state laws, rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2008-09, 6-4-2008)
6-2-2: MINOR ACCOMPANIED BY ADULT:
   A.   All operators of off highway vehicles who are ages eight (8) through
sixteen (16), inclusive, and have obtained a safety certificate issued by the
division of parks and recreation, shall, while operating such vehicle within
city limits, be under the direct visual supervision of, or accompanied by, an
adult, eighteen (18) years of age or older.
   B.   As used herein:
    ACCOMPANIED: An adult shall:
      1.   Travel and be in visual and vocal contact with the operator; and
      2.   Travel in a licensed all-terrain type I or II vehicle, or motorcycle
(as defined by statute).
   DIRECT SUPERVISION: Oversight at a distance, of not more than three hundred
feet (300'), within which:
      1.   Visual contact is maintained; and
      2.   Advice and assistance can be given and received. (Ord. 2008-09, 6-4-
2008)
6-2-3: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Off highway vehicles shall be used and operated only on or over
streets, roads or highways within LaVerkin City that are designated by this
chapter as open to such vehicle use.
   B.   Off highway vehicles shall be operated on designated roadways with the
specific purpose of accessing riding areas away from populated areas, whether
public or private.
   C.   Off highway vehicles shall be operated at all times in accordance with
local, county and state laws and regulations.
   D.   Off highway vehicles may only be operated within the city limits
between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   E.   Off highway vehicles shall not be operated on LaVerkin City roadways at
speeds in excess of the lesser of twenty five (25) miles per hour or the posted
speed.
   F.   It is encouraged, but not required, that off highway vehicles be
operated on the outer four feet (4') of the asphalt on oiled roadways and on
unimproved gravel or dirt roadways within the LaVerkin City limits.
   G.   If equipped with headlights, off highway vehicles shall be operated
only with the lights functioning and turned on.
   H.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to give authorization to
ride on private property without permission of the property owner. (Ord. 2008-
09, 6-4-2008)
6-2-4: DESIGNATED ROADWAYS:
The following described streets, roads and highways are hereby designated as
open to off highway vehicle use in conformance with this chapter and all other
applicable local, county and state laws, and regulations:
   A.   North/South Routes: All public streets, roads and highways (and private
streets, roadways, alleys, and rights of way, with permission of the owner
thereof), situated within the jurisdiction of LaVerkin, excluding SR-17 and SR-
9 except at a designated crossing spot located at Main Street and SR-9.
   B.   East/West Routes: All public streets, roads and highways (and private
streets, roadways, alleys, and rights of way, with permission of the owner
thereof), situated within the jurisdiction of LaVerkin, excluding SR-17 and SR-
9 except at designated crossing spots located at: 1) Center Street and SR-9,
and 2) 900 North Street and SR-17. (Ord. 2008-09, 6-4-2008)
6-2-5: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person violating section
6-2-2 and subsection 6-2-3D of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction
and, upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code; provided, that the fine for a violation of section
6-2-2 of this chapter may not exceed that provided by section 41-22-30, Utah
Code Annotated (1953, as amended).
   B.   Unless a different penalty classification is provided, any person
violating any other provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-09, 6-4-2008)
CHAPTER 3
PARKING
SECTION:
6-3-1: Adoption By Reference
6-3-2: Stopping Or Parking On Roadway
6-3-3: Parallel Stopping Or Parking Upon Roadways
6-3-4: Stopping Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
6-3-5: Parking Time Limited
6-3-6: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
6-3-7: Parking In Handicapped Zones
6-3-8: Parking In Fire Lanes
6-3-9: Commercial Vehicle Parking Prohibited
6-3-10: Parking On Narrow Roadways
6-3-10-1: Parking Near School Property
6-3-11: Traffic Control Devices
6-3-12: Penalty
6-3-13:    Vehicles Parked In Violation Of This Chapter
6-3-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
LaVerkin City hereby adopts by reference all sections of the Utah Code
Annotated pertaining to parking to the extent that such state statutes related
to parking are not addressed or modified by this chapter. (Ord. 2004-07, 3-3-
2004)
6-3-2: STOPPING OR PARKING ON ROADWAY:
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon any roadway within the city when it is practical to stop, park
or leave such vehicle off the roadway. In every event, an unobstructed width of
the roadway opposite a standing vehicle and a clear view of such stopped
vehicles shall be available from a distance of two hundred feet (200') in each
direction upon such roadway. (Ord. 2004-07, 3-3-2004)
6-3-3: PARALLEL STOPPING OR PARKING UPON ROADWAYS:
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle as close as
practical to, but in no event greater than eighteen inches (18") away from, the
curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-07, 3-3-2004)
6-3-4: STOPPING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
No person shall stop or park a vehicle, whether attended or unattended:
   A.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   B.   On a sidewalk;
   C.   Within an intersection;
   D.   On a crosswalk;
   E.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a
highway tunnel;
   F.   In front of a public or private driveway;
   G.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
   H.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   I.   Within thirty feet (30') of the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   J.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly posted with a sign; or
   K.   On any City street, roadway, or public property that has been
temporarily closed by the City under and in accordance with Section
7-2-4 .A (the contents and provisions of which, as they relate to parking, are
hereby incorporated herein as though fully set forth); and
   L.   At any place where official traffic control devices or signs prohibit
parking. (Ord. 2004-07, 3-3-2004; amd. Ord. 2024-12, 8-16-2023)
6-3-5: PARKING TIME LIMITED:
No person who owns or has possession or control of any vehicle shall park or
allow the vehicle to be parked upon any street for more than a consecutive
period of forty eight (48) hours. (Ord. 2004-07, 3-3-2004)
6-3-6: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park, stand, stop, or operate a vehicle upon any roadway,
parking lot or area abutting any roadway within the City (except driveways
located on private property) for the principal purpose of:
   A.   Displaying such vehicle for sale, except in a licensed auto sales lot;
   B.   Greasing, repairing or servicing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
   C.   Displaying or advertising any matter; or
   D.   Selling food or any other merchandise. (Ord. 2004-07, 3-3-2004)
6-3-7: PARKING IN HANDICAPPED ZONES:
Except for those vehicles carrying a distinctive handicapped license plate or
transferable identification card and actually transporting a handicapped
person, no person shall park any motor vehicle in a parking space located on
any public property or private property which is used or intended for use by
the public, which is clearly identified as reserved for use by the handicapped.
(Ord. 2004-07, 3-3-2004)
6-3-8: PARKING IN FIRE LANES:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, whether attended or unattended,
in any portion of a fire lane, which is clearly marked or identified as being a
fire lane. (Ord. 2004-07, 3-3-2004)
6-3-9: COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public
road, street or alley or Municipal property any commercial vehicle or trailer,
except for the commercial delivery or loading of cargo, and for such purpose
the parking or standing shall be limited to a period not in excess of four (4)
hours. "Commercial vehicle" is defined as any vehicle or vehicle/trailer
combination that is used for the purpose of conducting business or for
commercial transport; trailer as used herein refers to a carrier used in tandem
with a tractor or motorized vehicle. (Ord. 2004-07, 3-3-2004)
6-3-10: PARKING ON NARROW ROADWAYS:
   A.   No person shall park a vehicle on any private or public street, alley
or other roadway where the width of such roadway is less than twenty feet
(20').
   B.   No person shall park a vehicle on any other narrow roadway within the
City that the City Council has declared to be of insufficient width to safely
provide for on-street parking, including but not limited to the following:
      1.   100 North (within the proposed Valle Vista Subdivision, including
the cul-de-sac).
      2.   75 South (within the proposed Chaco Ridge Subdivision, including the
cul-de-sac).
      3.   130 North (east of 100 East, within the Bella Terra Subdivision,
including the cul-de-sac).
      4.   560 West (from Center Street to 100 South).
      5.   The narrowed portion of the northerly portion of 180 West Street,
measuring approximately one hundred ninety six feet (196') and terminating at
the intersection of 180 West Street and 300 North Street. (Ord. 2018-03, 6-6-
2018)
6-3-10-1: PARKING NEAR SCHOOL PROPERTY:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle, other than a school bus or emergency or public
safety vehicle, on or along the south side of Center Street, from the corner of
State Route 9 (SR-9) to the corner of Main Street to the east, from seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on days that school is in
session.
   B.   Exception:
      1.   It is acknowledged that: a) the elementary school currently facing
and fronting on Center Street may have large scale events, during the school
day, from time to time, which are or are anticipated to be attended by parents
and guardians of children attending the school, as well as other members of the
public; b) parking at and in the immediate vicinity of the school is currently
limited and insufficient to handle the parking needs of such visiting public,
and the restriction provided for in subsection A of this section will further
negatively impact the school's ability to accommodate such parking needs; and
c) certain limited/expanded use of the parking areas on the south side of the
street may be safely allowed on a short term, controlled, and limited basis, in
coordination with the City of LaVerkin, and if addressed in a cooperative
effort between the City and school administrative personnel and staff.
      2.   To accommodate and in connection with such events, parking may be
permitted along all or a portion of the south side of Center Street for the
period of the event and a half hour before and after the same:
         a.   Upon written request of the elementary school principal; and
         b.   Coupled with:
            (1)   The submission by school personnel (in coordination with and/
or with the considered input of the LaVerkin City Police Department) of a
written plan that addresses the safety issues posed or enhanced by allowing
such parking (and including the date, time, and nature of the event, and any
increased monitoring of student safety, by school personnel, of the areas of
and near where such parking is desired, during times when school children may
be present); and
            (2)   Approval of said request by the City Administrator or his or
her designee; and
            (3)   The posting by the school of visible temporary signage
indicating that such use is permissible for said event. (Ord. 2015-10, 10-21-
2015)
6-3-11: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
   A.   The City Council may authorize or direct any person employed by the
City to erect or install any sign or traffic control device required to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   When the City determines that it is appropriate to use painted curbs or
zones to indicate parking restrictions, such markings shall designate the zones
and have the following meaning:
"Red" shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time, except for the
individual purpose of emergency vehicles. (Ord. 2004-07, 3-3-2004)
6-3-12: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punished by a fine. Failure to pay the fine imposed
within fourteen (14) days after the violation shall result in imposition of an
increased penalty in addition to the above fine. Any fine not paid within
thirty (30) days after issuance will result in a further penalty. All fines and
penalties will be established by resolution of the City Council and may be
changed from time to time. (Ord. 2004-07, 3-3-2004)
6-3-13: VEHICLES PARKED IN VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER:
Vehicles parked in violation of the provisions of this Chapter (as set out or
incorporated) are subject to immobilization and/or being moved, relocated,
towed, and/or impounded. Whenever any law enforcement officer finds a vehicle
in violation of this Chapter, such officer is hereby authorized, at his or her
option, and subject to available resources, to:
   A.   Require the owner, operator, or other person having charge of the
vehicle to relocate the vehicle to a location that is not in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter;
   B.   Immobilize the vehicle;
   C.   Move and/or relocate the vehicle to a location that is not in violation
of the provisions of this Chapter.; and/or
   D.   Have the vehicle towed and/or impounded, at the expense of the owner,
operator, and/or claimant of the vehicle. (Ord. 2023-12, 8-16-2023)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT TAXES
SECTION:
7-1-1: State Code Adopted By Reference
7-1-1: STATE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah municipal improvement district act 1 , as amended, are
hereby adopted by the city. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered
violations of this chapter, and each such violation shall subject the violator
thereof to penalty provisions under this chapter if proceeded hereunder. (1998
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 17A-3-301 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Public Works Department
7-2-2: Obstructions In Streets
7-2-3: Sidewalk Regulations
7-2-4: Unauthorized Vehicles On Streets
7-2-4-1: Temporary Road And Public Property Closures
7-2-5: Penalty
7-2-6: Dedication Of Private Streets
7-2-1: PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created a public works department, which
shall have general supervision of streets, sidewalks, bridges and other public
ways.
   B.   Director: The department shall be under the direction and control of
the public works director. (1982 Code § 11-311; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Powers And Duties: The department shall:
      1.   Have charge of the construction, maintenance and repair of streets,
sidewalks, bridges, curbs, gutters, culverts, drains, waterways and other
public ways. It shall have control of all waters flowing on the streets,
sidewalks and public ways, whether originating from storm, flood, drainage or
irrigation waters.
      2.   Keep a record of and promptly investigate all complaints of
defective streets, culverts, drains, ditches, sidewalks and other public ways
and, when proper, repair, replace or take such action as deemed best, and shall
record the action taken on each complaint.
      3.   Enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances
relating to the maintenance and use of streets, culverts, drains, ditches,
waterways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other public ways.
      4.   Repair, or cause to be repaired, all defects coming to the
department's attention and take reasonable precautions to protect the public
from injuries due to such defects pending their repair. (1982 Code § 11-312)
7-2-2: OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises to place or permit to be placed upon or in the sidewalk, parking area,
gutter or on the street next to such premises: (1982 Code § 11-362; amd. 1998
Code)
   A.   Refuse: Any broken wares, glass, filth, rubbish, sweepings, refuse
matter, ice, snow, water, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substances.
(1982 Code § 11-362)
   B.   Building Materials: Any wagons, lumber, wood boxes, fencing, building
material, dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise or other thing which shall
obstruct such public street, gutter, parking area or sidewalk, or any part
thereof, or the passage over and upon the same, or any part thereof, except as
expressly authorized by ordinance.
Construction dumpsters, no larger than six (6) yards, are exempted under this
section during home construction, with building official approval, as long as
corner setbacks are observed and dumpster has reflective material for nighttime
safety. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
   C.   Permanent Or Temporary Structures: Any permanent or temporary
structure, mechanism, device, vehicle or other thing of any kind or character,
except trees planted pursuant to the provisions of applicable ordinances. (1982
Code § 11-362)
7-2-3: SIDEWALK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Driving Or Parking: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
park a self-propelled vehicle or lead, drive or ride any livestock upon any
sidewalk, except across a sidewalk at established crossings. (1982 Code § 11-
366; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Businesses To Keep Clean: It shall be unlawful for any owners or
occupants of any place of business to refuse, neglect or fail to cause the
sidewalk abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
   C.   Placing Goods For Sale Or Show: No goods, wares or merchandise shall be
placed, maintained or permitted for sale or show in or on any parking area,
street or sidewalk. (1982 Code § 11-368; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Placing Goods For Receipt Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, or suffer to be placed or kept upon any sidewalk, any goods,
wares or merchandise which they may be receiving or delivering. (1982 Code §
11-369; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Obstructing Travel: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
any activity which obstructs free travel on any sidewalk or street. (1982 Code
§ 11-370; amd. 1998 Code)
7-2-4: UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES ON STREETS:
   A.   Specified:
      1.   Metal Traction Vehicles: No person shall drive a metal traction
vehicle on any public street or highway. All such vehicles must be hauled on a
rubber tired vehicle or trailer. Smooth metal drummed street rollers used for
street repair and upgrading are exempt.
      2.   Weight; Manner Of Driving: No person shall drive a vehicle on any
public street or highway in such a manner or because of gross weight or other
factors so as to cause damage to the public street or highway.
   B.   Waiver For Permission: Any person having need within the city because
of road construction, maintenance or other, for an "unauthorized vehicle", as
defined herein, to be used on any public street or highway may petition the
city for a waiver of this section. Upon review of the petition by the city, and
if said waiver is granted by written permission, the unauthorized vehicle may
be allowed upon a public street or highway for the time and scope of work
outlined in the written permission provided. Excepting where the highway is a
state road, the petitioner must also successfully petition the state.
   C.   Violation; Penalty: Any person violating any part of this section shall
be responsible for restitution of all damages and shall be guilty of an
infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord., 5-3-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
7-2-4-1: TEMPORARY ROAD AND PUBLIC PROPERTY CLOSURES:
   A.   Types of Closures:
      1.   Construction: From time to time, part or all of a city street,
roadway, and/or sidewalk may be temporarily closed by the City or State for
various purposes, including road construction, reconstruction, and/or road
maintenance; utility street cuts and other work associated with the
installation, maintenance, and/or repair of public utilities; and (on a time-
limited basis, and with the approval of the City and/or applicable public road
authority) construction, installation, and/or removal of structures, utilities,
dumpsters, and/or other improvements on adjacent property and/or the placement
of any dumpster.
      2.   Public Event: From time to time, part or all of a city street,
roadway, and/or sidewalk may be temporarily closed by the City for City-
sponsored outdoor special events (including but not limited to city
celebrations, parades, and/or carnivals; runs and/or other nonmotorized races
or athletic events; temporary outdoor food and/or craft sales; dances, concerts
and/or other musical events; and other special events and activities of and
sponsored by the City).
   B.   General Restrictions during Closures:
      1.   Construction Closure: Except as provided in subsection C below, and
when properly posted, it shall be unlawful to operate, park or stand, or allow
the continued parking or standing after notice of any motor or motorized
vehicle, and/or to walk upon or operate a self-propelled (nonmotorized) vehicle
or mode of transportation, on any city street, roadway, and/or sidewalk that
has been temporarily closed for use by the public—for construction under
subsection A.1—during the period of such posted closure.
      2.   Public Event Closure: Except as provided in subsection C below, and
when properly posted, it shall be unlawful to operate, park or stand, or allow
the continued parking or standing after notice, of any motor or motorized
vehicle of any person on any city street, roadway, and/or sidewalk, or other
public property, that has been temporarily closed for use by the public—for a
public event under subsection A.2—during the period of such posted closure.
   C.   Exceptions to the General Restrictions. The restrictions set forth in
Subsection B above shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Associated construction vehicle(s) and personnel at roadway and
adjacent constructions sites.
      2.   Physicians on emergency calls and their vehicles, and emergency
vehicles and their occupants responding to a medical call for assistance.
      3.   Public safety personnel and their vehicles when said officials are
acting or responding in their official capacities.
      4.   City personnel, vehicles, and equipment, in an official capacity,
involved in the regulation, inspection, enforcement, and oversight of
construction identified in subsection B.1.
      5.   City personnel and authorized volunteers, and their vehicles, acting
in an official governmental capacity, in support—or the provision, conduct,
operation, or security—of a City-sponsored public or special event identified
in subsection B.2.
      6.   Persons with special needs, children under the age of twelve (12),
and persons residing, working, or engaging in commerce on or visiting the
closed portion of the public street, roadway, or sidewalk, provided they safely
access such residence or business using City-approved alternate accessways.
   D.   Except in the event of an emergency or time-sensitive situation, no
roadway closure (and any restrictions associated therewith) shall be in effect
unless and until:
      1.   A “road closed” or similar sign and/or traffic control device has
been installed giving notice of the closure and/or a law enforcement officer is
present to stop and give directions to the traveling public with regards to
said closure.
      2.   With regards to a vehicle already parked on the roadway or any
residence or business located along the roadway to be closed, a 24-hour advance
written notice (a) has been posted on the car and/or (b) conspicuously posted
on the property of or provided to a resident/owner/occupant of any affected
residence or business located along the roadway. Notice of the intended road
closure shall state the date(s) and time(s) that such closure is expected to be
in effect, subject to weather and force majeure, and shall direct the recipient
of the notice to a place where (s)he can obtain further information about the
closure, where to park vehicles during the period of time that the closure is
in effect, and where unlawfully parked vehicles are, may be, or have been
relocated. (Ord. 2023-12, 9-16-2023)
7-2-5: PENALTY:
Unless a different penalty classification is provided, any person violating any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
7-2-6: DEDICATION OF PRIVATE STREETS:
The city may accept by formal public dedication any existing improved private
street having a width of not less than thirty feet (30') existing as of the
passage date hereof, provided that the following conditions are met prior to
the acceptance of any such dedication: (Ord. 2000-25, 12-6-2000)
   A.   In no event will the city consider or approve an application for public
dedication of any road, street or lane having a hard surface travel area of any
less than twenty six feet (26'). (Ord. 2005-14, 4-20-2005)
   B.   Any person or party requesting that the city accept for public
dedication any private street must commence that process by submitting a
written petition signed by all parties owning property adjoining the street for
which application is being made. In addition, the city shall also require to be
completed at the petitioner's sole expense, and in a form acceptable to the
city, the following:
      1.   A traffic impact study performed by a licensed engineer or other
professional qualified to conduct such a study, which study shall cover such
issues as the adequacy of the street width to service the needs of property
owners fronting on the street, overall traffic flow including future traffic in
light of projected city growth, fire and emergency access, and pedestrian and
other safety issues.
      2.   A utility service study performed by a licensed engineer or other
professional qualified to conduct such a study, showing the location,
identification and condition of all utility lines lying within the street to be
dedicated.
   C.   The city shall review the traffic study and may refuse to accept the
dedication of the street if the study shows that the street width, design or
manner of construction is not adequate to meet the needs of the public.
   D.   The city shall review the utility study and shall also review any city
staff recommendations with respect to utility services that would be dedicated
as lying within the proposed street dedication. The city may refuse the
application for dedication if the utility study or the staff recommendation
shows that the location and/or condition of the utility service lines are such
that by accepting the dedication of the utility service lines the city would be
incurring a substantial expense to ameliorate the same.
   E.   The city may also refuse the application for dedication if city staff
does not approve of the street, including any curb, gutter and/or sidewalk
dedicated with the street, and if the street fails to meet all other city
specifications and requirements for grading, construction, surfacing and
quality of streets except for the inclusion of sidewalks, curbs and gutters and
the width of the street.
   F.   In addition to the conditions set forth above, petitioner must prior to
final approval of the application for dedication of a private street or streets
agree in writing to and pay for all costs associated with bringing all street
improvements, all utility services, and all utility service lines up to all
other city standards then prevailing for construction of streets exclusive of
width. The petitioner shall have one year from the time of application to
complete the ordinance requirements. (Ord. 2000-25, 12-6-2000)
CHAPTER 3
STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-3-1: Permit Required; Inspection
7-3-2: Changing Existing Construction
7-3-3: Building Materials On Paved Streets Or Sidewalks Prohibited
7-3-4: Overflowing Of Water
7-3-5: Irrigation Ditches
7-3-6: Removal Of Earth
7-3-7: Barricades And Warning Signs
7-3-8: General Traffic Regulations
7-3-9: Road Closures
7-3-10: Design Standards
7-3-11: Pavement Structural Design
7-3-12: Curbside Mailboxes
7-3-13: Access Control
7-3-14: Survey Monumentation Standards
7-3-15: Excavation And Restoration Of Surface Improvements
7-3-16: Street Signs And Pavement Markings
7-3-17: Sidewalks, Concrete, Gutters
7-3-18: Construction Methods And Equipment
7-3-19: Quality Control
7-3-20: Definitions Of Abbreviations
7-3-21: Penalty
7-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; INSPECTION:
   A.   Required: No person, as owner or agent, servant, contractor or
employee, shall construct any permanent street or sidewalk for public use
without first obtaining from the city a permit to do so.
   B.   Unlawful Violation Of Specifications: It shall be unlawful for any
person either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or employee to construct a
street or sidewalk which does not conform to specifications established by the
city engineer or other authorized representative of the city unless special
permission to deviate from such specification is first obtained from the city
council.
   C.   Inspection: All streets and sidewalks shall be inspected by the public
works director or his duly authorized representative. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-2: CHANGING EXISTING CONSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway across a sidewalk
or cut or change the construction of sidewalk, curb or gutter without first
obtaining from the city a permit to do so. The acceptance of such permit shall
be deemed an agreement on the part of such person to construct said driveway in
accordance with specifications furnished by the city. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-3: BUILDING MATERIALS ON PAVED STREETS OR SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Occupy Or Use: Occupy or use any portion of the public streets or
sidewalks for building materials when erecting or repairing any building upon
land abutting thereon.
   B.   Place, Pile Or Permit: Place or pile or permit to be placed or piled,
any sand, gravel, lime, cement, mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance
or mixture, or allow the same to remain on any portion of any paved street or
sidewalk.
   C.   Make, Mix Or Permit: Make or mix or permit to be made or mixed any
mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or mixture on any portion of
any paved street or sidewalk. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-4: OVERFLOWING OF WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow water to overflow from any ditch,
canal, well or irrigation stream onto the streets, sidewalks or property of the
city. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-5: IRRIGATION DITCHES:
All owners or occupants of lots in the city who require water from a ditch for
irrigation or other purposes shall dig ditches, erect flumes, lay pipes and
install culverts, as needed, and maintain the same to convey water under
sidewalks to or from their respective lots. All culverts, ditches, pipes, and
flumes conveying water under sidewalks shall meet such reasonable standards and
specifications as may be established by the public works director. (Ord. 2006-
23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-6: REMOVAL OF EARTH:
No person shall dig, cut, or remove any sod or earth from any street or other
public place without a permit from the public works director. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-
5-2006)
7-3-7: BARRICADES AND WARNING SIGNS:
The contractor shall provide, erect, and maintain all necessary barricades,
suitable and sufficient lights, danger signals, signs, and other traffic
control devices. All necessary precautions shall be taken to protect the work
area and to safeguard the public. Streets closed to traffic shall be protected
by effective barricades, and obstructions shall be illuminated during hours of
darkness. Suitable warning signs shall be provided to control and direct
traffic properly. All traffic control operations and signing shall be performed
in accordance with the instructions outlined in the "Manual On Uniform Traffic
Control Devices" (MUTCD), latest edition. A traffic control plan will be
required for submittal and approval on each project. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-8: GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
   A.   The contractor shall be responsible for the protection and restoration,
or replacement, of any improvement existing on public or private property at
the start of work, or placed there during the progress of the work. Existing
improvements shall include, but not be limited to, asphalt surfacing, curbs,
waterways, ditches, driveways, culverts, fences, signs, sidewalks, landscaping
and walls. All existing improvements shall be reconstructed to equal, or
better, condition than that which existed at the time of their removal.
However, as a minimum, the requirements contained in these specifications shall
be adhered to.
      1.   All traveled surfaces shall be maintained flush with the existing
surfaces at all times until permanent repairs are completed.
      2.   Prior to the beginning of any work activity involving tunneling
under, or making any excavation in any street, alley, or other public place,
the contractor shall comply with all requirements for permits and bonding. The
contractor shall also comply, during the work activity, with all of the
requirements contained in these specifications.
   B.   The owner will set construction stakes establishing lines and grades
for road work, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, structures and centerlines for
utilities and necessary appurtenances as may be deemed necessary. In the event
that the owner is anyone other than a public body (i.e., the developer), the
public body shall have the right to approve the independent laboratory, and
costs shall be borne by that owner (i.e., the developer). The LaVerkin City
representative or the developer in the event that the owner is anyone other
than a public body, will furnish the contractor all necessary information
relating to the lines and grades. These stakes and marks shall constitute the
field control by and in accordance with which the contractor shall establish
other necessary controls and perform the work.
      1.   The contractor shall perform the work in accordance with the entity
responsible for improvement's stakes and marks, and shall be charged with full
responsibility for conformity and agreement of the work with such stakes and
marks.
      2.   The contractor shall be held responsible for the preservation of all
stakes and marks, and if the construction stakes or marks have been carelessly
or wilfully destroyed or disturbed by the contractor, the cost for replacing
them will be charged against him.
   C.   The contractor shall at all times so conduct his work as to assure the
least possible obstruction to traffic and adjacent residents. The safety,
convenience, and the protection of persons and property, of the public and
residents along the street, highway, and areas adjacent to the work area shall
be provided for by the contractor.
   D.   Temporary traffic control devices shall be used to guide traffic
through construction areas. They include traffic cones to channel traffic,
portable barricades for warning, vertical panel channeling devices to divert
traffic, and lighting devices between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
   E.   In every instance, advance warning devices shall be used to alert the
motorist of an obstruction in the roadway. They include diamond shaped signs,
flags, and flasher type high level warning devices.
   F.   All temporary traffic control devices used between sunset and sunrise
shall be properly reflectorized, in accordance with requirements of the MUTCD,
and given adequate maintenance to retain the reflectorization or lighting
capability. At all times, they shall be erect, clean, and in full view of the
intended traffic movement.
   G.   All traffic control devices shall be immediately removed from roadway
or sidewalk when no longer needed.
   H.   A traffic lane shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') of clear street
width with a safe motor vehicle operating speed of at least twenty five (25)
miles per hour.
   I.   A minimum of two (2) traffic lanes, one for each direction, shall be
maintained open to traffic at all times on all major streets.
   J.   In the event of abnormal weather conditions, such as windstorms,
rainstorms, etc., the contractor or his authorized representative shall
immediately inspect his work area and take all necessary actions to ensure
public access and safety are maintained. Such precaution shall be required
twenty four (24) hours a day and seven (7) days a week.
   K.   Any liability for injury or accident shall be the responsibility of the
developer until such time any excavation or repair has been accepted and
approved by the LaVerkin City representative.
   L.   The contractor shall maintain all existing stop, yield, street name
signs and other traffic control devices until construction requires their
removal. At that time, the contractor shall obtain authorization from LaVerkin
City to remove said signs and posts without damage and deliver them to a
storage site as directed by LaVerkin City representative. The contractor will
reinstall all traffic signs.
   M.   The contractor shall provide the LaVerkin City representative with the
emergency phone number of his representative(s) responsible for maintenance of
barricades, warning signs, and other traffic control devices.
   N.   Prior to any construction in front of driveways, the contractor shall
notify the property owner twenty four (24) hours in advance. Inconvenience
caused by construction across driveways and sidewalks shall be kept to a
minimum by restoring the serviceability within twenty four (24) hours, or as
otherwise approved by the LaVerkin City representative. If it is necessary to
leave open excavation for a long period of time the contractor shall provide
structurally adequate steel plates to bridge the excavation. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-
5-2006)
7-3-9: ROAD CLOSURES:
   A.   Arrangements for partial or complete street closure permits shall be
obtained through the LaVerkin City representative. An advance notice of forty
eight (48) hours for major streets and twenty four (24) hours for local streets
and alleys is required from the contractor.
   B.   Unless otherwise approved by the LaVerkin City representative, all
existing traffic lanes shall be maintained open to traffic.
   C.   Local access shall be maintained to all properties on the project at
all possible times. When local access cannot be maintained, the contractor must
notify the affected property owner at least twenty four (24) hours in advance.
Access shall be restored the same day of completion of work which caused loss
of access.
   D.   A traffic lane shall not be considered as satisfactorily open to
traffic unless it is paved with hot mix or cold mix asphalt paving if
surrounded by or adjacent to existing pavement. Where pavement did not
previously exist or where all of the existing pavement has been removed, a
traffic lane shall not be considered as satisfactorily open to traffic unless
it is graded reasonably smooth and maintained dust free as directed by the
LaVerkin City representative.
   E.   At any time project construction shall require the closure or
disruption of traffic in any roadway or alley such that normal refuse
collection will be interfered with, the contractor shall, prior to causing such
closure or disruption, make arrangements with the appropriate refuse removal
service in order that collection service can be maintained. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-
2006)
7-3-10: DESIGN STANDARDS:
All streets within LaVerkin City shall be designed structurally to conform to
these specifications. Streets shall conform to the standards and technical
design requirements contained within this section. Asphalt pavements shall be
constructed of three inches' (3") compacted hot mix asphalt installed in
accordance with the requirements of the standard drawings and specifications on
file in the city.
   A.   Basic Street Cross Section Standards: Requirements for the basic street
cross section configurations are shown in the standard drawings. Alternate road
cross sections may be used, if applicable safety and traffic standards are met
and approved by the LaVerkin City public works director.
   B.   Private Street Cross Section Standard: Private streets must be
constructed to public street standards.
   C.   Improvement Requirements:
      1.   Curb, Gutter And Sidewalk: Required curb, gutter, and sidewalk shall
be constructed in accordance with the standard drawings and specifications on
file in the city.
      2.   Driveways: Driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the
standard drawings and specifications on file in the city.
      3.   Pavement: All streets, public or private, shall be surfaced to
grade, with asphalt pavement, to the minimum width and thickness in accordance
with standard drawings and specifications on file in the city.
      4.   Fog Coat: Within thirty (30) days or after the asphalt has cured,
whichever comes first, a fog coat shall be applied to all streets within the
subdivision by the subdivider.
      5.   Street Lighting: Street lighting shall be provided on all public
streets. The construction shall be in accordance with the standard drawings and
specifications on file in the city.
      6.   Valley Gutters: When constructed they shall be in accordance with
the standard drawings. The LaVerkin City public works director may, with
justification, prohibit construction on any street.
      7.   Wheelchair Ramps: Wheelchair ramps shall be constructed at all
street intersections, when new construction occurs, in accordance with the
standard drawings, and federal ADA requirements. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
   D.   Technical Design Requirements: The following requirements apply to
public and private streets:
      1.   Street Grades:
         a.   All street grades shall have a maximum of twelve percent (12%).
Minimum grade shall be 0.5 percent unless approved by the city engineer.
         b.   Maximum street grades may be increased to fifteen percent (15%)
and upon prior approval of the LaVerkin city council. Approval may be given
based upon evaluation of evidence submitted which shows a smaller amount of
disturbance to the existing terrain if larger percentages are used and result
in no significant decrease in safety features. Any approvals for increased
grades must be consistent with access requirements of fire apparatus as defined
by the fire department. (Ord. 2007-02, 1-3-2007)
      2.   Intersections:
         a.   Wherever possible, all street intersections shall be ninety
degree (90°) angles.
         b.   In the event an acute angle intersection is required, the
LaVerkin City public works director may require mitigation by realigning to
achieve a ninety degree (90°) intersection. At a minimum, this can be
accomplished by use of a fifty foot (50') section prior to the PC of the curve
or a landing area design in which a vehicle is brought ninety degrees (90°) to
the intersecting road. Other design approaches to mitigate the acute angle may
be required by LaVerkin City.
         c.   Intersections should not be located on or near sharp curves,
i.e., curves with radii close to AASHTO minimums. Intersections should be
located sufficient distance from all curves to provide proper sight distance
for vehicles on the intersecting road or driveway and on the through road.
         d.   New intersections with more than four (4) "legs" are not
permitted. For arterial access, only four-leg and "T" intersections are
permitted. When designing local road networks, four-leg, "T" and "L"
intersections are desired. The "L" intersection will only be permitted when the
street length, in either direction from the angle point, is three hundred feet
(300'), or less. Exceptions to these requirements may be granted by LaVerkin
City on a case by case basis. The developer must provide compelling
justification before deviations will be granted.
         e.   When designing local road networks, block lengths without an
intervening connector street shall not exceed eight hundred feet (800') in
length unless previous approval has been obtained from the LaVerkin City
representative. Cul-de-sacs are not included in this requirement.
         f.   New access locations created by development shall be unified
whenever possible to create the fewest number of access points onto arterials
or major collectors.
         g.   The intersection of two (2) local roads should be designed to
operate without a requirement for any traffic control device, whenever
possible.
         h.   Access to corner lots should be from the lesser classified road,
at greatest distance possible from the intersection.
         i.   Direct access will not be allowed for parking, loading, or
driveway areas that require backing maneuvers onto arterial streets.
      3.   Intersection Spacing: The minimum distance between intersections on
low volume streets is one hundred fifty feet (150'); for the minor and major
collector streets, the minimum distance is two hundred fifty feet (250').
Minimum distance measurements are centerline to centerline. The minimum spacing
requirement on arterials shall be based upon current and projected turning
movement volumes at the intersections in question. The LaVerkin City public
works director shall review and give final approval to any intersection
requests on arterials in which the spacing would be less than four hundred feet
(400') apart.
      4.   Driveway Spacing: Driveways shall be spaced far enough apart so that
the traffic stopped to make left turns at one intersection does not interfere
with traffic movements at the adjacent intersection.
      5.   Cul-De-Sac: A minimum centerline radius of fifty feet (50') shall be
maintained on all cul-de-sacs.
      6.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks on all urban streets shall be concrete,
constructed to city specifications.
         a.   In industrial and manufacturing areas, road pavement may be
widened ten feet (10') in lieu of concrete sidewalks if approved by LaVerkin
City.
         b.   Sidewalk in areas of high pedestrian flow shall require greater
width as determined by LaVerkin City.
      7.   Curb And Gutter:
         a.   High Water Flows: Areas of high water flow may require larger
gutter capacity than shown on the standard drawing. High back or wedge back
curb may be used in accordance with standard drawings and with direction from
the LaVerkin City representative. Sidewalk depth shall be at least six inches
(6").
         b.   Curb Corners: All curb corners shall have a radius of not less
than fifteen feet (15'); at intersections involving collector or major streets,
of not less than twenty five feet (25'); in industrial areas, not less than
twenty five feet (25').
      8.   Design Speed: The design of geometric features such as horizontal
and vertical alignment will depend on the design speed selected for each
street. The design speed is primarily determined by the street function and is
the maximum speed for safe and comfortable operation of a vehicle. The use of
design speeds other than those listed below must be approved by LaVerkin City,
who may decide that the speed provided in this section be reduced to that which
is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having due regard to the
actual and potential hazards. Local streets designed for thirty (30) miles per
hour shall be posted at twenty five (25) miles per hour. Minor collectors
designed for thirty five (35) miles per hour shall be posted at thirty (30)
miles per hour.
      9.   Clear Sight Distance At Intersections: At intersections, adequate,
clear sight distance should be provided to permit drivers entering the higher
order street from a driveway or stop controlled intersection to see approaching
traffic from a long enough distance to allow them to decide when to safely
enter the higher order street and complete their turning maneuvers in advance
of approaching traffic. Clear sight distance, for both left and right turning
vehicles, shall be in accordance with the following AASHTO guidelines:
 
   Through Street Design Spe   Sight Distance
                               
      20 mph                   230 feet
      25 mph                   290 feet
      30 mph                   375 feet
 
      10.   Vertical Alignment:
         a.   Vertical curves shall be provided in all changes in grade where
the algebraic difference is one percent (1%) or greater.
         b.   Longitudinal street grades shall not be less than one-half
percent (1/2%) unless adequate alternative street drainage is provided, nor
more than twelve percent (12%), except as allowed in this chapter.
         c.   Vertical curve stopping sight distance design shall utilize
criteria recommended by the latest edition of the AASHTO publication.
         d.   Minimum cross slope from street crown shall be two percent (2%)
unless otherwise approved by LaVerkin City.
         e.   Vertical alignment with the intersection is also of special
nature, and design alternatives may be required. As a guideline, the approach
area where vehicles stop while waiting to enter an intersection shall not
exceed five percent (5%) from the gutter line of the street being intersected
for a distance of fifty feet (50'), though a range of fifty feet (50') to one
hundred feet (100') is more desirable. This applies to all intersections,
except those where both intersecting streets are minor or major collectors. In
this situation, the landing area for a minor collector which is controlled by a
stop or yield sign shall be designed for a grade of two (2) to three percent
(3%) for a distance of one hundred feet (100').
      11.   Safe Stopping Sight Distance: The minimum sight distance or length
of roadway ahead visible to the driver is to be provided for through traffic
traveling at, or near, the design speed to stop before reaching a stationary
object in its path shall comply with the requirements set forth below (AASHTO
guidelines):
 
   Design Spe   Required Distance
                
      20 m      125 feet
      25 m      150 feet
      30 m      200 feet
 
      12.   Horizontal Curves: The recommended minimum centerline radii for
horizontal curves are outlined below:
 
   Curve Radius In Feet
             
      2      185 feet
      3      310 feet
 
      13.   Deceleration Lanes:
         a.   Deceleration lanes may be required on streets in conjunction with
driveways and/or intersections adjacent to a proposed development. They are
specifically required when all of the following factors are determined to
apply:
            (1)   At least five thousand (5,000) vehicles per day are using, or
are expected to be using, the street;
            (2)   The 85th percentile traffic speed on the street is a least
thirty five (35) miles per hour; or forty five (45) miles per hour for a two
(2) lane (1 lane each direction) roadway; and
            (3)   At least fifty (50) vehicles will be making right turns into
the driveway during a one hour peak period.
         b.   The lane lengths for a deceleration lane shall be determined on a
case by case basis and must receive prior approval of LaVerkin City and/or
UDOT. In addition to the above guidelines, deceleration lanes may be required
in connection with the results of a traffic impact study.
      14.   Alignment And Continuity; Off Site:
         a.   Normally, off site pavement construction requires asphalt
concrete paving to the right of way centerline plus ten feet (10'). When
asphalt pavement is existing, the developer's engineer may submit to the
LaVerkin City representative sufficient information prepared by a professional
engineer to indicate vertical and horizontal alignment is maintained and
adequate drainage is provided for. The developer may be required to replace all
or any portion of existing roadway, in a manner that two-way traffic can be
maintained without the use of potentially hazardous alignment transitions
(vertical or horizontal) and in a manner to ensure that adequate drainage is
provided for. As a minimum, there shall be twenty five feet (25') of paving to
accommodate through traffic. When off site pavement construction consists of
improvement to the right of way centerline (approximately), deceleration and
acceleration transition tapers shall be placed at each end of the improvements.
The transition tapers shall be designed and constructed based upon the posted
speed zoning.
         b.   When paving for partial street construction, the edges of the
pavement are to be protected by placing a minimum two feet (2') of aggregate
base material beyond the edge of pavement matching the pavement grade.
         c.   Wherever partial street construction is required, grades shall be
set for the future curb line and approved by the LaVerkin City representative.
The future grades shall be compatible with the curb and centerline grades for
the partial street construction. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-11: PAVEMENT STRUCTURAL DESIGN:
   A.   Requirements: The structural details shown on the standard drawings are
minimum requirements. The actual structural section for each roadway shall be
designed by accepted engineering design methods for flexible pavement (i.e.,
AASHTO or CALTRANS). Required subgrade soil properties shall be obtained from
an on site geotechnical investigation. Required traffic design information is
provided within this section.
   B.   Geotechnical Investigation: The geotechnical investigation shall be
conducted by an approved geotechnical consultant under the direction and
control of a Utah registered professional engineer. The investigation shall
include a thorough exploration and sampling program of the subgrade to
determine the nature and engineering properties of the on site soils within the
roadway construction area. For new construction and reconstruction projects,
the minimum sampling and testing requirements are provided on the following
schedule.
   C.   Subgrade Sampling And Testing Schedule:
 
                    Minimum Number Of Test Holes
                    To A Depth Of At Least 5 Feet Minimum Number Of R-Values
Project Length Under Below Subgrade                (Or CBR-Values)
Construction (Feet)
Less than 1,000      3                             2
1,000 to 5,000       1 every 500 feet              3, with at least 1 per major
                                                   soil type
5,001 to 16,000      1 every 800 feet              4, with at least 1 per major
                                                   soil type
More than 16,000     1 every 1,000 feet            2 per mile with at least 1
                                                   per major soil type
 
Notes:
      1.   Sieve analysis: 1 for each stratum of each test hole and PI (or sand
equivalent).
      2.   Density: 2 per test hole.
      3.   pH and resistivity: 1 for each corrugated metal pipe location.
      4.   Soluble Salt: 1/3 of the number of test hole locations.
      5.   It is stressed that the above schedule presents minimal sampling and
testing requirements. The responsible geotechnical engineer should analyze each
project to determine actual sample locations, frequency, and testing program.
(Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-12: CURBSIDE MAILBOXES:
All curbside mailboxes shall be installed in accordance with postal service
requirements. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-13: ACCESS CONTROL:
The access control requirements for arterials and major collectors are provided
below. In any case where these conflict with adopted zoning ordinance
requirements the zoning ordinance shall rule.
   A.   When necessary for the safe and efficient movement of traffic, access
points may be required to be designed for right turns in and out only.
   B.   When approved, or directed by the LaVerkin City representative, a
driveway access design may be a "street type intersection" with curb returns.
(Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-14: SURVEY MONUMENTATION STANDARDS:
This section sets forth the general standards for survey monuments. Class I or
class II survey control monuments, as shown in the standard drawings of
specifications on file in the city, shall be installed on all dedicated and
private streets. All survey control monuments shall be installed in strategic
locations as determined by LaVerkin City's representative to ensure adequate
survey control required for subsequent resurvey in the area.
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   Only a land surveyor, duly registered in the state of Utah, shall be
authorized to determine or establish the exact location for a survey monument.
Only such registered land surveyor shall be authorized to perpetuate and
reference existing class I survey monuments located within the limits of public
or private streets.
      2.   All class I monuments shall be cross tied and referenced to
permanent features and mapped sufficiently for future use in relocation and
replacement. All cross tie information shall be submitted to the LaVerkin City
engineer and should be kept in a permanent record by the professional surveyor
doing the work.
      3.   Any section, witness or reference corners which fall within roadway
or parking lot construction areas shall be reset with a class I type monument
with appropriate cap as shown in the charts on file in the city. All corners
being replaced shall be referenced in a manner as to accurately reset the
corner. A copy of the field notes shall be submitted to the appropriate public
agency surveyors for approval before corners are destroyed. The appropriate
public agency surveyors, city or county, shall give direction on requirements
for referencing the corner to be replaced and the method of reinstallation
before corners are destroyed.
   B.   Monuments: Class I or II monuments shall be set in accordance with the
recorded maps so that the survey, or any part thereof, may be readily retraced.
Such monuments shall be set at:
      1.   All angle points in survey boundary (class II).
      2.   All angle PTs and PCs on and along survey boundary (class II).
      3.   All street centerline intersections (class I).
      4.   At a PI outside of right of way (class II).
         a.   If PI falls outside limits of pavement then PCs and PTs shall be
monumented with class I.
         b.   If PI falls inside the pavement area then a class I monument is
required and no monumentation required for PCs and PTs.
      5.   All intersections of street center lines at survey boundary (class
II).
      6.   Six hundred foot (600') intervals, unless otherwise approved by
LaVerkin City's representative. If line of sight is not obtainable within a six
hundred foot (600') interval, then monuments will be required to be closer
together unless otherwise approved by LaVerkin City's representative.
      7.   Class I and II monuments shall be installed in accordance with
LaVerkin City requirements. All monuments shall be set in such a manner that
the accuracy of their relative positions is not less than second order class
II, in accordance with the specifications established by the U.S. federal
geodetic control committee. When monuments are being reset, the initial order
used in the setting shall be used, but in no event shall it be less than second
order class II.
      8.   All the above established points, which fall within the limits of
public or private rights of way, shall be referenced to four (4) firmly
established ties within a radius of twenty feet (20') to one hundred feet
(100'). The angle from tie to tie shall be as near ninety degrees (90°) as
possible, radiating from the established intersection points. A copy of the
survey notes documenting the setting of the reference ties shall be kept by the
responsible surveyor and a copy shall be delivered to the appropriate county
surveyor's depository and LaVerkin City's representative.
      9.   When a section corner, quarter corner or sixteenth corner falls
within a fully improved roadway and must be set, or reset, the responsible
surveyor shall contact the appropriate LaVerkin City representative for
directions and/or requirements.
      10.   All monuments shall have a nonferrous cap mounted in accordance
with the standard drawings section of these specifications. The surveyor's
registration or license number shall be stamped on the nonferrous cap.
      11.   Monuments must be set prior to the final acceptance of the
improvements.
      12.   Where hard rock or other physical obstructions are encountered,
monument length sufficient to resist removal may vary within reasonable limits.
(Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-15: EXCAVATION AND RESTORATION OF SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS:
All excavation and restoration of surface improvements shall be in accordance
with the specifications and standards as set forth in chapter 4 of this title.
(Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-16: STREET SIGNS AND PAVEMENT MARKINGS:
This section covers preparation and installation of street signing and
application of pavement markings. All signs required on the street system
within a development, shall be installed by the developer in accordance with
the standard drawings.
   A.   Signing Materials, Fabrication And Placement: All street name signage
shall follow the requirements for materials, fabrication and installation
outlined in the standard drawings of these specifications:
      1.   Street name sign face materials shall consist of reflective high
intensity grade sheeting. The sign face colors shall conform to the local
requirements for public and private streets. The street name sign blank shall
consist of high tensile degreased aluminum in accordance with the standard
drawings.
      2.   The street name signs shall be installed on galvanized steel posts
that conform to the requirements contained in the standard drawings. The
installation method and location shall be in accordance with the standard
drawings.
      3.   All advisory and regulatory traffic signing shall conform to the
requirements relating to color, face material, blank material, size and method
of installation as found in the MUTCD for streets and highways.
      4.   All street name, advisory and regulatory signing shall be installed
in such a manner as to provide adequate advance visibility for an approaching
driver.
   B.   Pavement Markings: Pavement markings shall include all traffic lane
striping and other traffic oriented street markings.
      1.   The standards regarding color, size and layout of pavement markings
outlined in the MUTCD for streets and highways, shall be followed. However, in
such cases where the Utah department of transportation standards take
precedence, these standards shall be followed.
      2.   Centerline markings on two-lane, two-way roads shall be either:
         a.   A four inch (4") wide broken yellow line where passing is
permitted, or
         b.   A double line consisting of a four inch (4") wide broken yellow
line and a four inch (4") solid yellow line where passing is permitted in one
direction, or
         c.   A double line consisting of two (2) 4-inch solid yellow lines
where passing is prohibited in both directions.
      3.   Lane lines separate lanes of traffic traveling in the same
direction. They shall be four inch (4") wide broken white lines. A four inch
(4") wide solid white line may be used as the lane line in critical areas where
it is advisable to discourage lane changing, such as on bridges having width
restrictions and in intersection areas where lane changing disrupts traffic
flow. Reflective glass beads shall be applied during the painting process.
      4.   Traffic paint shall conform to the latest requirements contained in
the state of Utah department of transportation "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". Traffic paint shall be applied only when all of
the following conditions are met:
         a.   The air temperature is above fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F);
         b.   The surface temperature of the surface to be painted is between
forty (40) and one hundred degrees Fahrenheit (100°F);
         c.   The surface to be painted is clean and dry; and
         d.   The weather is not windy, foggy, or humid.
      5.   The painting shall be done in a neat and competent manner. Paint
shall be applied smoothly and uniformly in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications. The finish shall be uniform in appearance and hiding. The total
exterior dry film thickness shall be not less than three (3) mils.
      6.   All permanent pavement striping (lines and crosswalks) shall be
sixty (60) mil hot sprayed thermoplastic. Temporary pavement markings shall be
reflectorized traffic paint or other material approved by LaVerkin City's
representative.
      7.   Raised pavement markers shall conform, in terms of materials and
application, to the latest standards found in the requirements of the state of
Utah department of transportation. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-17: SIDEWALKS, CONCRETE, GUTTERS:
   A.   Concrete Work: This section of the standards defines the materials to
be used and the requirements for mixing, placing, finishing, and curing all
Portland cement concrete work on public improvements.
   B.   Materials: Concrete construction materials in improvements shall
conform to the following requirements:
      1.   Portland Cement Concrete Material: The concrete shall be composed of
coarse aggregate, fine aggregate, Portland cement and water, and shall conform
to the following requirements:
         a.   Portland Cement: ANSI/ASTM C 150, type V, unless otherwise
indicated.
         b.   Aggregates: Except as otherwise specified herein, concrete
aggregates shall conform to all applicable provisions of the latest revision of
ASTM standard specification C 33.
            (1)   Fine Aggregate: Fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand
or, subject to approval by LaVerkin City's representative, other inert
materials with similar characteristics, having clean, hard, durable, uncoated
grains and shall conform to the requirements of these standards. The amount of
deleterious substances shall not exceed the following limits:
 
   Material                                         Percent (By Weight)
Clay lumps                                             1.00
Coal and lignite                                       0.50
Material passing number 200 sieve                      3.00
Other deleterious substances such as shale, alkali,    3.00
mica, coated grains, soft and flaky particles, etc.
 
               (A)   The sum of the percentage of all deleterious substances
shall not exceed three percent (3%) by weight.
               (B)   Fine aggregate shall be well graded and shall range in
size from fine to coarse within the following percentages by weight:
                  Percent Passing
   Sieve Size   (By Weight)
                  Percent Passing
   Sieve Size   (By Weight)
   3/8 inch        100
   No. 4           90
   No. 8           80   -   90
   No. 16          50   -   75
   No. 30          30   -   50
   No. 50          10   -   20
   No. 100         2   -   5
 
            (2)   Coarse Aggregate: Coarse aggregate shall consist of crushed
or natural stone, gravel, slag or other approved inert material with similar
characteristics or combination thereof, having clean, hard, durable, uncoated
particles free from deleterious matter. Deleterious substances shall not be
present in the aggregate in excess of the following limits:
 
   Material                                         Percent (By Weight)
Clay lumps                                             0.25
Coal and lignite                                       0.30
Material passing number 200 sieve                      1.00
Soft fragments                                         2.00
Other deleterious substances such as shale, alkali,    3.00
mica, coated grains, soft and flaky particles, etc.
 
               (A)   The sum of the percentages of all deleterious substances
in any size or delivered to the mixer shall not exceed five percent (5%), by
weight.
               (B)   Coarse aggregate may be rejected if it fails to meet the
following test requirements:
(i) Los Angeles Abrasion Test: If the percent of loss by weight exceeds ten
percent (10%) at one hundred (100) revolutions, or forty percent (40%) at five
hundred (500) revolutions.
(ii) Sodium Sulfate Test For Soundness: If the weighted average loss after five
(5) cycles is more than twelve percent (12%) by weight.
(iii) Mix Design: A preapproved mix design shall be used for all concrete
delivery.
(iv) Aggregate Size: The maximum size of the aggregate shall be not be larger
than one-fifth (1/5) of the narrowest dimension between forms within which the
concrete is to be encased, and in no case larger than three-fourths (3/4) of
the minimum clear spacing between reinforcing bars or between reinforcing bars
and forms. For unreinforced concrete slabs, the maximum size of aggregates
shall not be larger than one-fourth (1/4) the slab thickness.
         c.   Water 1 :
            (1)   Sufficient potable water shall be added to the mix to produce
concrete with the minimum practical slump, and in no case shall the slump be
greater than four inches (4"). However, a greater slump may be allowed with
plasticizers, no loss of strength and the LaVerkin City representative's prior
approval.
            (2)   The maximum permissible water-cement ratio, including free
moisture in the aggregate, shall be five (5) gallons per bag of cement (0.44)
for class A and five and three-fourths (53/4) gallons per bag of cement (0.51)
for class C concrete.
         d.   Entraining Agent: An air entraining agent shall be used in all
concrete exposed to the weather. The agent shall conform to ASTM designation C
260. Air content for air entrained concrete shall be five percent (5%) by
volume, plus or minus one percent (±1%). The air entraining agent shall be
added as a liquid to the mixing water by means of mechanical equipment capable
of accurate measurement and control.
         e.   Admixtures:
            (1)   Pozzolan: If authorized by LaVerkin City's representative,
pozzolan conforming to the requirements of ASTM C 618 class F may be added to
the concrete mix with no reduction in cement.
               (A)   Pozzolans shall be sampled and tested as prescribed in
ASTM C 618 and ASTM C 311. The contractor shall obtain and deliver to LaVerkin
City a certification of compliance signed by the pozzolan supplier identifying
the pozzolan and stating that the pozzolan delivered to the batching site
complies with applicable specifications.
               (B)   Pozzolan material shall be handled and stored in the same
manner as Portland cement. When facilities for handling bulk pozzolan are not
available, the pozzolan shall be delivered in original unopened sacks bearing
the name and brand of supplier, the type, and source of the pozzolan, and the
weight contained in each sack plainly marked thereon.
               (C)   Different brands or types of pozzolan shall not be mixed
together unless written permission has first been obtained from LaVerkin City's
representative. All pozzolan used in the manufacture of concrete for any
individual structure shall be of the same type, and from the same source unless
otherwise approved by LaVerkin City.
            (2)   Calcium Chloride: No calcium chloride shall be added to any
concrete mix. Nonchloride accelerators may be used with permission of LaVerkin
City.
         f.   Concrete Mix 2 : For the purpose of practical identification,
concrete has been divided into classes. The basic requirements of class A and
class C and the use for each is defined in the following table:
   CONCRETE MIX SPECIFICATIONS
 
      Minimum Cement Content Maximum
                             Water                  Minimum
                 (Pounds/    Content   Maximum      28 Day
Class (Bags/Cubi Cubi c      (Gallons/ Slump        Compressive Primary Use
      c Yard)    Yard)       Bag Of                 Strength
                             Cement)                (psi)

                                                                Reinforced
                                                                structural
                                                                concrete;
                                       4 inches                 sidewalks;
                                                               curbs and
A     6          564         5         1 1/2 inches    4,000 gutters;
                                       for machine              cross
                                       placement                gutters;
                                                                pavements;
                                                                unreinforced
                                                                footings
                                                                Minor
                                                                nonstructural
                                                                items such as
C     5          470         5.75      4 inches        2,500 thrust
                                                                blocks;
                                                                anchors, mass
                                                                concrete,
                                                                etc.
 
Unless specifically waived by LaVerkin City's representative, all concrete
placed shall be class A.
      2.   Concrete Reinforcing Materials: Concrete reinforcing materials shall
conform to the following requirements.
         a.   Steel Bars:
            (1)   All bar material used for reinforcement of concrete shall be
intermediate or hard grade steel conforming to the requirements of ASTM
designated A 615 and shall be deformed in accordance with ASTM designation A
615. All reinforcing steel shall be minimum grade sixty (60).
            (2)   Reinforcing steel bars shall conform to the requirements of
ASTM A 615, and the specifications for billet steel bars for concrete
reinforcement ASTM A 615, or the specification for rail steel concrete
reinforcement bars, ASTM A 616. All bars shall be deformed, round, and have a
net section equivalent to that of plain bar of equal nominal size. Only
intermediate and/or hard grades will be used and no twisted bars will be
accepted.
            (3)   All reinforcing steel, at the time concrete is placed, shall
be free from flaws, cracks, rust, oil, dirt, paint (unless epoxy coated) or
other coatings that will destroy or reduce the bond.
         b.   Wire Or Wire Mesh Reinforcement: Welded wire fabric for concrete
reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A 185. Wire for
concrete reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of the "Standard
Specification For Cold Drawn Steel Wire For Concrete Reinforcement" ASTM A 82.
All wire reinforcement, wire mesh, or expanded metal shall be of the type
designated unless an alternate type is approved by the LaVerkin City
representative.
         c.   Steel Fiber Reinforcement: Deformed steel fiber for concrete
reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A 820, type I, deformed
fiber, except that the average tensile strength shall be not less than one
hundred fifty thousand (150,000) psi.
      3.   Curb, Gutter, Sidewalk And Concrete Base Materials: This subsection
defines materials, practices and designs to be used in the construction of all
public curbs, gutters and sidewalks. Concrete base materials shall conform to
the following requirements:
         a.   Materials: All curb, gutter and sidewalk shall consist of air
entrained type V Portland cement concrete constructed on a prepared subgrade in
accordance with these specifications. All work shall conform to the lines and
grades, thickness, and typical cross sections as shown on the approved plans or
established by LaVerkin City. Certified copies, in triplicate, of the mill test
of cement shall be furnished upon request of LaVerkin City's representative.
         b.   Lateral Marks: The contractor shall be responsible for stamping
an "S" in the curb face at all sewer lateral locations and a "W" in the curb
face at all water lateral locations along the curb.
         c.   Subgrade: The subgrade shall be excavated and filled with
suitable material, to within six inches (6") of the required grades for curbs
and gutters, waterways, and driveways. For sidewalks, the subgrade shall be
excavated and filled with suitable material to within four inches (4") of the
required grades. All soft, yielding, and otherwise unsuitable material shall be
removed and replaced with suitable materials as outlined above. Filled sections
shall be compacted and extend to a minimum of two feet (2') outside the form
lines.
         d.   Gravel Base Course: A gravel base course consisting of three-
fourths inch (3/4") maximum crushed road base gravel six inches (6") thick
shall be placed under all curbs, gutters, driveways, waterways and sidewalks.
Where the foundation material is found to be unstable, the contractor shall
furnish and place sufficient extra gravel fill as directed by the LaVerkin City
representative to firm up the soil upon which the curb, gutter and sidewalk is
to be placed. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection B1f of this section.
2 1. See also subsection B1c of this section.
7-3-18: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND EQUIPMENT:
The methods employed in performing the work, all equipment, tools and
machinery, and other appliances used in handling the materials and executing
the work shall be the responsibility of the contractor. The contractor shall
make such changes in the methods employed and in the equipment used as are
necessary whenever the concrete being installed does not meet the
specifications herein established. These methods shall include, but are not
limited to, the following:
   A.   General Concrete Placement: Generally concrete shall be installed as
follows:
      1.   Forms: Forms shall be substantially built and adequately braced to
withstand the liquid weight of concrete. All linings, studding, walling and
bracing shall be such as to prevent bulging, spreading, or loss of true
alignment while pouring and displacement of concrete while setting.
      2.   Preparations:
         a.   Before batching and placing concrete, all equipment for mixing
and transporting the concrete shall be cleaned. All debris and ice shall be
removed from the places to be occupied by the concrete. Forms shall be oiled
with a form-release agent and masonry filler units that will be in contact with
concrete shall be well drenched with water except in freezing weather. The
reinforcement shall be thoroughly cleaned of ice or other coatings. Water shall
be removed from spaces to receive concrete.
         b.   When placing concrete on earth surfaces, the surfaces shall be
free from frost, ice, mud and water. When the subgrade is dry soil or pervious
material, it shall be sprayed with water prior to the placing of concrete or
shall be covered with waterproof sheathing paper or a plastic membrane. No
concrete shall be placed until the surfaces have been inspected and approved.
      3.   Concrete Mixing:
         a.   The concrete shall be mixed until there is a uniform distribution
of the materials. Sufficient water shall be used in concrete in which
reinforcement is to be embedded, to produce a mixture which will flow
sluggishly when worked and which, at the same time, can be conveyed from the
mixer to the forms without separation of the coarse aggregate from the mortar.
In no case shall the quantity of water used be sufficient to cause the
collection of a surplus in the forms.
         b.   Ready mixed concrete shall be mixed and delivered in accordance
with the requirements set forth in specifications for ready mixed concrete ASTM
C 94. Concrete shall be delivered and deposited in its final position within
sixty (60) minutes after adding the cement and water to the mixture.
      4.   Depositing:
         a.   Concrete shall be deposited as nearly as practical in its final
position to avoid segregation due to rehandling or flowing. The concrete
placing shall be carried on at such a rate that the concrete is at all times
plastic and flows readily into the corners of forms and reinforcing bars. No
concrete that has partially hardened or been contaminated by foreign material
shall be deposited in the work, nor shall retempered concrete be used.
         b.   All concrete in structures shall be compacted by means of high
frequency internal vibrators of approved type and design during the operation
of placing, and shall be thoroughly worked around reinforcement and embedded
fixtures and into the corners of the forms to prevent "honeycombing". Care must
be taken not to overuse vibrators causing separation of cement and aggregates.
      5.   Finishing: After the concrete for slabs has been brought to the
established grade and screeded, it shall be worked with a magnesium float and
then given a light "broom" finish. In no case shall dry cement or a mixture of
dry cement and sand be sprinkled on the surface to absorb moisture or hasten
hardening. Surface edges of all slabs shall be rounded to a radius of one-
fourth inch (1/4") to one-half inch (1/2") with standard concrete finishing
tools.
      6.   Curing And Protection:
         a.   As soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to prevent
damage, the finished surface shall be kept moist for seven (7) days, or a
chemical curing agent may be used to prevent the concrete from premature
drying.
         b.   The freshly finished surface shall be protected from hot sun and
drying winds until it can be sprinkled or covered as herein specified. The
concrete surface must not be damaged or pitted by rain. The contractor shall
provide and use, when necessary, sufficient tarpaulins to cover completely all
sections that have been placed within the preceding twelve (12) hours. The
contractor shall erect and maintain suitable barriers to protect the finished
surface. Any section damaged from traffic, weather or other causes occurring
prior to its official acceptance by the city shall be repaired or replaced by
the contractor.
      7.   Weather Limitations: No concrete shall be poured where the air
temperature is lower than thirty five degrees Fahrenheit (35°F) unless approved
by the LaVerkin City representative. When there is likelihood of freezing
during the curing period, the concrete shall be protected by means of an
insulating covering to prevent freezing of the concrete for a period of not
less than seven (7) days after placing. Equipment for protecting the concrete
from freezing shall be available at the job site prior to placing concrete.
Particular care shall be exercised to protect edges and exposed corners from
freezing.
   B.   Concrete Reinforcement Installation: Concrete reinforcement shall be
installed as follows:
      1.   Bending: Reinforcing bars shall be accurately formed to the
dimensions indicated on the plans. Bends for stirrups and ties shall be made
around a pin having a diameter not less than two (2) times the minimum
thickness of the bar. Bends for other bars shall be made around a pin having a
diameter not less than six (6) times the minimum thickness of the bar, except
that for bars larger than one inch (1"), the pin shall be not less than eight
(8) times the minimum thickness of the bar.
      2.   Splicing: Splicing of bars at points other than as shown on the
plans will be permitted only by permission of the LaVerkin City representative.
Splices of reinforcement at points of maximum stress shall be avoided wherever
possible, and shall be staggered when used. The minimum overlap for a lapped
splice shall be as shown on the approved structural drawings, or twenty four
(24) bar diameter if not called out, but not less than eighteen inches (18").
      3.   Placing: All reinforcing bars shall be placed accurately in the
position shown on the plans, and shall be securely held in position by annealed
iron wire ties of not less than 16-gauge or suitable clips at intersection and
supported by metal supports, spacers, chairs or hangers, in such a manner that
there will not be any displacement while placing concrete.
      4.   Embedment And Protection: All reinforcing steel shall be protected
by concrete embedment and protective cover as shown in the following table,
such cover in each case being the shortest distance between the face of the
form or concrete surface, and the nearest edge or face of the reinforcement.
   REINFORCING BAR CLEARANCE
 
   Location Of Reinforcement                            Cover
Bottom bars, where concrete is deposited against ground Not less than 3 inches
without use of forms
Main bars, where concrete is exposed to the weather, or Not less than 2 inches
exposed to the ground but placed in forms
Bars in slabs and walls not exposed to the ground or    Not less than 1 inch
weather
 
   C.   Curb And Gutter And Sidewalk Concrete Placement: The concrete shall be
placed either by an approved slip form/extrusion machine, by the formed method,
or by a combination of those methods. Curb and gutter shall be placed as
follows:
      1.   Machine Placement: The slip form/extrusion machine approved shall be
so designed as to place, spread, consolidate, screed, and finish the concrete
in one complete pass in such a manner that a minimum of hand finishing will be
necessary to provide a dense and homogeneous concrete section. The machine
shall shape, vibrate, and/or extrude the concrete for the full width and depth
of the concrete section being placed. It shall be operated with as nearly a
continuous forward movement as possible. All operations of mixing, delivery,
and spreading concrete shall be so coordinated as to provide uniform progress,
with stopping and starting of the machine held to a minimum.
      2.   Formed Method:
         a.   The forms shall be of wood, metal, or other suitable material
that is straight and free from warp, having sufficient strength to resist the
pressure of the concrete without displacement and sufficient tightness to
prevent the leakage of mortar. Flexible or rigid forms of proper curvature may
be used for curves having a radius of one hundred feet (100'), or less.
Division plates shall be metal.
         b.   The front and back forms shall extend for the full depth of the
concrete. All forms shall be braced and staked so that they remain in both
horizontal and vertical alignment until their removal. They shall be cleaned
and coated with an approved form-release agent before concrete is placed
against them.
         c.   The concrete shall be deposited into the forms without
segregation and then tamped and spaded or mechanically vibrated for thorough
consolidation. Front and back forms shall be removed without damage to the
concrete after it has set.
      3.   Finishing:
         a.   The plastic concrete shall be finished smooth, if necessary, by
means of a wood or magnesium float and then given a final surface texture using
a light broom or burlap drag. Concrete that is adjacent to forms and formed
joints shall be edged with a standard jointer or edging tool to the dimensions
shown on the plans. The top, face, and flow line of the curb, and the top of
the apron on driveway aprons, shall be finished true to line and grade and
without any irregularities of surface noticeable to the eye.
         b.   The gutter shall not pond water when tested by water flow and no
portion of the surface of the curb and gutter shall depart more than one-fourth
inch (1/4") from a straight edge, ten feet (10') in length, placed on the curb
parallel to the centerline of the street, nor shall any part of the exposed
surface present a wavy appearance.
      4.   Jointing:
         a.   Contraction Joints:
            (1)   Transverse weakened plane contraction joints shall be
constructed at right angles to the curb line at intervals not exceeding twelve
feet (12') for curb and gutter, and not to exceed five feet (5') for sidewalks.
Joint depth shall at least be one-half (1/2) of the cross section of the
concrete. Generally, surface areas shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet
without contraction joints unless otherwise approved by LaVerkin City's
representative.
            (2)   Contraction joints may be sawed, hand formed, or made by
placing one-half inch (1/2") thick division plates in the form work. Sawing
shall be done within twenty four (24) hours after the concrete has set to
prevent the formation of uncontrolled cracking. The joints may be hand formed
either by using a narrow or triangular jointing tool, or a thin metal blade to
impress a plane of weakness into the plastic concrete, or by inserting one-
eighth inch (1/8") thick steel strips into the plastic concrete temporarily.
Steel strips shall be withdrawn before final finishing of the concrete. Where
division plates are used to make contraction joints, the plates shall be
removed after the concrete has set while the forms are still in place.
            (3)   Expansion joints in a slip formed curb and gutter shall be
constructed with an appropriate hand tool by raking or sawing through partially
set concrete for the full depth and width of the section. The cut shall be only
wide enough to permit a snug fit for the joint filler. After the filler is
placed, open areas adjacent to the filler shall be filled with concrete and
then troweled and edged.
            (4)   Alternately, an expansion joint may be installed by removing
a short section of freshly extruded curb and gutter, immediately installing
temporary holding forms, placing the expansion joint filler, and replacing and
reconsolidating the concrete that was removed. Contaminated concrete shall be
discarded.
         b.   Expansion Joints: Expansion joints for curb and gutter shall be
constructed at right angles to the curb line at no greater than one hundred
fifty foot (150') intervals for curb and gutter, at immovable structures and at
points of curvature for short radius curves. Spacing for sidewalk jointing
shall not exceed twenty feet (20'). Filler material for expansion joints shall
conform to requirements of ASTM D 994, D 1751, or D 1752 and shall be furnished
in a single one-half inch (1/2") thick piece for the full depth and width of
the joint.
         c.   Other Jointing:
            (1)   Construction joints may be either butt or expansion type
joints. Curbs and gutters constructed adjacent to existing concrete shall have
the same type of joints as in the existing concrete with similar spacing;
however, contraction joint spacing shall not exceed twelve feet (12').
            (2)   A silicone joint sealer as defined in ASTM C 962 shall be
applied to all form plate expansion joints. The silicone joint sealer shall be
applied under pressure to a depth of not less than two inches (2") from the
outside surface of the curb and gutter.
      5.   Protection:
         a.   At all times during the construction of the project, the
contractor shall have materials available at the site to protect the surface of
the plastic concrete against rain. These materials shall consist of waterproof
paper or plastic sheeting. For slip form construction, materials such as wood
planks or forms to protect the edges shall also be required.
         b.   When concrete is being placed in cold weather and the temperature
may be expected to drop below thirty five degrees Fahrenheit (35°F), suitable
protection shall be provided to keep the concrete from freezing until it is at
least seven (7) days old. Concrete injured by frost action shall be removed and
replaced at the contractor's expense.
      6.   Curing: Concrete shall be cured for at least three (3) days after
placement to protect it against loss of moisture, rapid temperature change, and
mechanical injury. Moist burlap, waterproof paper, polyethylene sheeting,
liquid membrane curing compound, or a combination thereof may be used as the
curing material. Membrane curing shall not be permitted in frost affected areas
when the concrete will be exposed to deicing chemicals within thirty (30) days
after completion of the curing period.
      7.   Backfilling: After at least three (3) days after placement and the
forms have been removed from the concrete, the contractor shall backfill to the
line and elevation as shown on the drawings or as required by the LaVerkin City
representative. This time may be shortened if it can be demonstrated that the
placement has reached design strength.
      8.   Concrete Repair: In lieu of removing and replacing concrete with
minor cracks, the LaVerkin City representative may direct the contractor to
repair the affected sections by sawing, cleaning, and sealing the cracks. All
cracks repaired shall be sealed with a polyurethane TTS-230 type II crack
filler. Where modifications are to be made to existing concrete, the edges to
be poured against shall be sawed and the new concrete shall be edged with a
standard edging tool.
      9.   Weather Limitations: No concrete shall be poured when there is
likelihood of freezing. During the curing period, the concrete shall be
protected by means of an insulating covering to prevent freezing of the
concrete for a period of not less than seven (7) days after placing. Equipment
for protecting the concrete from freezing shall be available at the job site
prior to placing concrete. Particular care shall be exercised to protect edges
and exposed corners from freezing. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-19: QUALITY CONTROL:
The placement of concrete base materials under curb, gutter, and sidewalk shall
conform to these standards. All concrete and base materials shall be placed in
accordance with these standards and tested as follows. These are minimum
requirements and additional testing may be required.
   A.   Concrete Testing: Minimum testing of the concrete shall be as follows:
      1.   Mix design certification: One per job. Testing shall be according to
the latest ASTM standards.
      2.   Compressive strength tests: One set of four (4) cylinders for each
fifty (50) cubic yards of concrete placed. Tests shall be according to ASTM C
39.
      3.   Air entrainment: Tested at beginning of load placement until two (2)
consecutive tests pass. Others shall be taken as required. Tests shall be
according to ASTM C 231.
      4.   Slump tests: Tested at beginning of load placement until two (2)
consecutive tests pass. Others shall be taken as required. Tests shall be
according to ASTM C 143.
   B.   Concrete Base Material Testing: Minimum testing of the curb, gutter and
sidewalk base materials (both pit run and road base materials) shall be as
follows:
      1.   Gradation tests: One test per one thousand (1,000) linear feet of
curb and gutter and one test per four thousand (4,000) square feet of a
combination of sidewalk and driveway, or fraction thereof. The sieve analysis
shall be according to ASTM C 136, C 117.
      2.   Soil proctor: One determination of each source of base course as
necessary to provide required compaction testing. Test shall be according to
ASTM D 1557, method A or D (modified proctor).
      3.   Moisture density tests: One test per three hundred (300) linear feet
of curb and gutter and one test per three hundred (300) linear feet of sidewalk
or fraction thereof. Moisture content shall be at plus or minus two percent
(±2%) for tests to pass and shall be maintained until the concrete is poured.
Tests shall be according to ASTM D 1556 or D 2922 and D 3017.
      4.   Thickness:
         a.   One random boring or test hole per two hundred (200) linear feet
of curb and gutter and one random boring or test hole per two hundred (200)
linear feet of sidewalk or fraction thereof. If sufficient inspection has been
made by a LaVerkin City representative to verify required thickness. The
representative may waive thickness testing.
         b.   No single measured thickness shall be less than the required
thickness.
         c.   Testing documentation shall fully address the requirements of
these standards.
   C.   Acceptance:
      1.   A total of four (4) concrete test cylinders shall be taken at time
of pouring. One "early warning" cylinder shall be broken at seven (7) days. Two
(2) cylinders shall be broken at twenty eight (28) days. If the average of the
two (2) 28-day breaks is below specification, the concrete may be rejected
unless retests prove otherwise. At the contractor's option, the fourth cylinder
may be broken at twenty eight (28) days, if additional test results are needed
to meet the specification. Or, it can be held and broken at fifty six (56) days
for the same reason.
      2.   Concrete with a compressive strength below the required strength
shall be evaluated for capabilities necessary to the integrity of the
structure. At this point, the "hold" cylinder may be broken or other
specialized tests, such as a spectrum analysis, may be required. The LaVerkin
City representative shall make the final decision. If additional tests are
required to determine if strength tests are representative they shall be
performed by coring in accordance with ASTM C 42 method or other acceptable
nondestructive methods. The retested strength shall be the average of three (3)
cores or other means. All costs incurred in resampling and retesting shall be
paid by the contractor.
      3.   Any curb, gutter, or sidewalk base material determined not to comply
with these standards, shall either be removed and replaced or reworked until
compliance is obtained. Any costs for testing rework shall be paid for by the
contractor. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-20: DEFINITIONS OF ABBREVIATIONS:
AASHTO: American association of state highway and transportation officials.
ADA: Americans with disabilities act.
ADT: Average daily traffic.
ANSI: American national standards institute.
ASTM: American society for testing and materials.
CALTRANS: California transportation department.
DUs: Dwelling units.
FEMA: Federal emergency management act.
FESWMS: Federal emergency storm water management service.
FHWA: Federal highway administration.
HEC: Hydraulic engineer circular.
ITE: Institute of transportation engineers.
MUTCD: Manual on uniform traffic control devices.
PC: Point of curve.
PI: Point of intersection.
PT: Point of tangent.
PUD: Planned unit development.
TIS: Traffic impact study.
UDOT: Utah department of transportation. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3-21: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
ARTICLE A. TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDIES
SECTION:
7-3A-1: Purpose
7-3A-2: Definitions
7-3A-3: When Required
7-3A-4: Qualifications For Preparing Traffic Impact Study Documents
7-3A-5: Analysis Approach And Methods
7-3A-6: Study And Report Format
7-3A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish uniform guidelines to determine
when a traffic impact study (TIS) is required and how the study is to be
conducted. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3A-2: DEFINITIONS:
A "TIS" is a specialized study of the impacts that a certain type and size of
development will have on the surrounding transportation system. It is
specifically concerned with the generation, distribution, and assignment of
traffic to and from the "new development". The term "new development" also
includes properties that are being redeveloped. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3A-3: WHEN REQUIRED:
A TIS shall be required for all new developments, or additions to existing
developments, which generate one hundred (100) or more trips total in and out
vehicular movements, during the morning or afternoon peak hour. The specific
analysis requirements, and level of detail, are determined by the following
requirements:
   A.   Category I:
      1.   Developments which generate one hundred (100) or more peak hour
trips, but fewer than five hundred (500) trips, during the morning or afternoon
peak hour. In addition to the above threshold requirement, a category I TIS may
also be required for any of the following reasons:
         a.   The existence of any current traffic situations or concerns in
the local area such as, but not limited to, an offset intersection or a high
number of traffic accidents.
         b.   The sensitivity of the adjacent neighborhoods or other areas
where the public may perceive an adverse impact.
         c.   The proximity of site driveways to other driveways or
intersections.
         d.   Other specific problems or concerns that may be aggravated by the
proposed development.
      2.   The study horizon shall be limited to the opening year of the
development.
      3.   The minimum study area shall include site access drives and adjacent
signalized intersections and/or major unsignalized street intersections.
   B.   Category II: Developments that generate from five hundred (500) to one
thousand (1,000) peak hour trips during the morning or afternoon peak hour. The
study horizon shall include both the opening year of the development and five
(5) years after opening. The minimum study area shall include the site access
drives and all signalized intersections and/or major unsignalized street
intersections within one-half (1/2) mile of the development.
   C.   Category III: Developments that generate above one thousand (1,000)
peak hour trips during the morning or afternoon peak hour. The study horizon
shall include the opening year of the development, five (5) years after opening
and ten (10) years after opening. The minimum study area shall include the site
access drives and all signalized intersections and/or major unsignalized street
intersections within one-half (1/2) mile of the development.
   D.   Initial Work Activity: The LaVerkin City representative makes the final
decision on requiring a TIS and determining whether the study falls within
category I, II, or III. In addition to the above requirement thresholds, a TIS
may be required for:
      1.   Proposed property rezones; or
      2.   When the original TIS is more than two (2) years old; or
      3.   Where the proposed traffic volumes increase by more than ten percent
(10%).
   E.   Vehicular Trips: A developer, or their agent, shall first estimate the
number of vehicular trips to be generated by the proposed development to
determine if a TIS may be required and the applicable category. LaVerkin City's
representative must give concurrence on the number of trips to be generated by
the proposed development. The developer may, if desired, request LaVerkin
City's representative to assist in estimating the number of trips for
determining whether a TIS is required for the proposed development.
   F.   TIS Required: LaVerkin City's representative shall next make a ruling
whether a TIS is required and what the study category shall be. As previously
outlined, LaVerkin City's representative may make an independent finding that a
TIS is required. If a study is required, the developer shall have a draft table
of contents for the TIS prepared for review and approval by LaVerkin City's
representative. The table of contents will be sufficiently detailed to explain
the proposed area of influence for the study, intersections and roadways to be
analyzed, and level of detail for gathering of traffic volume information and
preparing the level of service analyses. There shall also be included in the
draft a proposed trip distribution for site traffic. After approval of the
draft table of contents and trip distribution by LaVerkin City's
representative, the actual TIS work activities may begin.
   G.   TIS Scope Of Work: The traffic impact study scope of work agreement
between engineer and developer shall conform to the preapproved draft table of
contents. The findings, conclusions, and recommendations contained within the
TIS document shall be prepared in accordance with appropriate professional
civil engineering canons. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3A-4: QUALIFICATIONS FOR PREPARING TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY DOCUMENTS:
The TIS shall be conducted and prepared under the direction of a professional
civil engineer licensed to practice in the state of Utah. The subject engineer
shall have special training and experience in traffic engineering and be a
member of the institute of transportation engineers (ITE). (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-
2006)
7-3A-5: ANALYSIS APPROACH AND METHODS:
The traffic study approach and methods shall be guided by the following
criteria:
   A.   Study Area: The minimum study area shall be determined by project type
and size in accordance with the criteria previously outlined. The extent of the
study area may be either enlarged, or decreased, depending on special
conditions as determined by LaVerkin City.
   B.   Study Horizon Years: The study horizon years shall be determined by
project type and size, in accordance with the criteria previously outlined.
   C.   Analysis Time Period:
      1.   Both the morning and afternoon weekday peak hours shall be analyzed,
unless the proposed project is expected to generate no trips, or a very low
number of trips, during either the morning or evening peak periods. If this is
the case, the requirement to analyze one or both of these periods may be waived
by LaVerkin City.
      2.   Where the peak traffic hour in the study area occurs during a
different time period than the normal morning or afternoon peak travel periods
(for example midday), or occurs on a weekend, or if the proposed project has
unusual peaking characteristics, these additional peak hours shall also be
analyzed.
   D.   Seasonal Adjustments: When directed by LaVerkin City's representative,
the traffic volumes for the analysis hours shall be adjusted for the peak
season, in cases where seasonal traffic data is available.
   E.   Data Collection Requirements: All data shall be collected in accordance
with the latest edition of the "ITE Manual Of Traffic Engineering Studies", or
as directed by LaVerkin City's representative.
      1.   Turning Movement Counts: Manual turning movement counts shall be
obtained for all existing cross street intersections to be analyzed during the
morning and afternoon peak periods. Turning movement counts may be required
during other periods as directed by LaVerkin City. Available turning movement
counts may be extrapolated a maximum of two (2) years with the concurrence of
LaVerkin City's representative.
      2.   Daily Traffic Volumes: The current and projected daily traffic
volumes shall be presented in the report. If available, daily count data from
the local agencies may be extrapolated a maximum of two (2) years with the
concurrence of LaVerkin City's representative. Where daily count data is not
available, mechanical counts will be required at locations agreed upon.
      3.   Accident Data: Traffic accident data shall be obtained for the most
current three (3) year period available.
      4.   Roadway And Intersection Geometrics: Roadway geometric information
shall be obtained. This includes, but is not limited to, roadway width, number
of lanes, turning lanes, vertical grade, location of nearby driveways, and lane
configuration at intersections.
      5.   Traffic Control Devices: The location and type of traffic controls
shall be identified.
   F.   Trip Generation: The latest edition of ITE's trip generation shall be
used for selecting trip generation rates. Other rates may be used with the
approval of the LaVerkin City representative in cases where trip generation
does not include trip rates for a specific land use category, or includes only
limited data, or where local trip rates have been shown to differ from the ITE
rates.
      1.   Site traffic shall be generated for daily, A.M. and P.M. peak hour
periods. Adjustments made for "passer by" and "mixed use" traffic volumes shall
follow the methodology outlined in the latest edition of the "ITE Trip
Generation Manual". A "passer by" traffic volume discount for commercial
centers shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) unless approved by LaVerkin
City's representative.
      2.   A trip generation table shall be prepared showing proposed land use,
trip rates, and vehicle trips for daily and peak hour periods and appropriate
traffic volume adjustments, if applicable.
   G.   Trip Distribution And Assignment: Projected trips shall be distributed
and added to the projected nonsite traffic on the roadways and intersection
under study. The specific assumptions and data sources used in deriving trip
distribution and assignment shall be documented in the report. Future traffic
volumes shall be estimated using information from transportation models, or
applying an annual growth rate to the baseline traffic volumes. The future
traffic volumes shall be representative of the horizon year for project
development.
      1.   In addition, any nearby proposed "on-line" development projects
shall be taken into consideration when forecasting future traffic volumes. The
increase in traffic from proposed "on-line" projects shall be compared to the
increase in traffic by applying an annual growth rate.
      2.   If modeling information is unavailable, the greatest traffic
increase from either the "on-line" developments, the application of an annual
growth rate, or a combination of an annual growth rate and "on-line"
developments, shall be used to forecast the future traffic volumes.
      3.   The site generated traffic shall be assigned to the street network
in the study area based on the approved trip distribution percentages. The site
traffic shall be combined with the forecasted traffic volumes to show the total
traffic conditions estimated at development completion. A "figure" will be
required showing daily and peak period turning movement volumes for each
traffic study intersection. In addition, a "figure" shall be prepared showing
the baseline volumes with site generated traffic added to the street network.
This "figure" shall be prepared showing the baseline volumes with site
generated traffic added to the street network. This "figure" will represent
site specific traffic impacts to existing conditions.
   H.   Capacity Analysis:
      1.   Level of service (LOS) shall be computed for signalized and
unsignalized intersections in accordance with the latest edition of the
"Highway Capacity Manual". The intersection LOS shall be calculated for each of
the following conditions (if applicable):
         a.   Existing peak hour traffic volumes ("figure" required).
         b.   Existing peak hour traffic volumes including site generated
traffic ("figure" required).
         c.   Future traffic volumes not including site traffic ("figure"
required).
         d.   Future traffic volumes including site traffic ("figure"
required).
         e.   LOS results for each traffic volume scenario ("table" required).
      2.   The LOS table shall include LOS results for A.M. and P.M. peak
periods if applicable. The table shall show LOS conditions with corresponding
vehicle delays for signalized intersections, and LOS conditions for the
critical movements at unsignalized intersections. For signalized intersections,
the LOS conditions and average vehicle delay shall be provided for each
approach and the intersection as a whole.
      3.   Unless otherwise directed by the LaVerkin City representative, the
capacity analysis for existing signalized intersections shall be conducted
using the "Highway Capacity Manual" planning method for each study horizon
year. When directed by the LaVerkin City representative, the capacity analysis
shall be conducted using the operational analysis method.
      4.   If an operational capacity analysis method is used for existing
signalized intersections, it shall include existing phasing, timing, splits,
and cycle lengths as observed and measured during the peak hour traffic
periods.
      5.   The "Highway Capacity Manual" methodology shall be used for
unsignalized intersections.
      6.   If the new development is scheduled to be completed in phases, the
TIS will, if directed by LaVerkin City's representative, include an LOS
analysis for each separate development phase in addition to the TIS for each
horizon year. The incremental increases in site traffic from each phase shall
be included in the LOS analysis for each preceding year of development
completion. A "figure" will be required for each horizon year of phased
development.
   I.   Traffic Signal Needs: A traffic signal needs study shall be conducted
for all new proposed signals for the base year. If the warrants are not met for
the base year, they should be evaluated for each year in the five (5) year
horizon.
   J.   Accident Analysis: An analysis of three (3) year accident data shall be
conducted to determine if the level of safety will deteriorate due to the
addition of site traffic.
   K.   Speed Considerations: Vehicle speed is used to estimate safe stopping
and cross corner sight distances. In general, the posted speed limit is
representative of the 85th percentile speed and may be used to calculate safe
stopping and cross corner sight distances.
   L.   Improvement Analysis: The roadways and intersections within the study
area shall be analyzed, with and without the proposed development to identify
any projected impacts concerning level of service and safety.
   M.   Certification: The TIS shall be prepared under the supervision of a
professional civil engineer registered in the state of Utah. The report shall
be sealed and signed. (Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
7-3A-6: STUDY AND REPORT FORMAT:
This section provides the format requirements for the general text arrangement
of a TIS. Deviations from this format must receive prior approval of LaVerkin
City. For category I, many of the items may be documented within the text. For
other categories, the items shall be included in figures and/or tables which
are legible.
A. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY:
1. Purpose of Report and Study Objective
2. Executive Summary
a. Site Location and Study Area
b. Development Description
c. Principal Findings
d. Conclusions
e. Recommendations
B. Proposed Development:
1. Site Location (vicinity map)
2. Land Use and Intensity
3. Proposed Development Details
4. Site Plan (readable version must be provided)
5. Access Geometrics
6. Development Phasing and Timing
C. STUDY AREA CONDITIONS:
1. Study Area
a. Area of Significant Traffic Impact
b. Influence Area
2. Land Use
a. Existing Land Use
b. Anticipated Future Development
3. Site Accessibility: Existing and Future Area Roadway System
D. ANALYSIS OF EXISTING CONDITIONS:
1. Physical Characteristics
a. Roadway Characteristics
b. Traffic Control Devices
c. Pedestrian/Bicycle Facilities
2. Traffic Volumes: Daily, Morning, and Afternoon Peak Periods (two (2) hours
minimum, and others as required)
3. Level of Service: Morning Peak Hour, Afternoon Peak Hour (and others as
required)
4. Safety
5. Data Sources
E. PROJECTED TRAFFIC:
1. Site Traffic Forecasts (each horizon year)
a. Trip Generation
b. Mode Split
c. Pass-by Traffic (if applicable)
d. Trip Distribution
e. Trip Assignment
2. Non-Site Traffic Forecasting (each horizon year): Projections of Non-site
Traffic (Methodology for the projections shall receive prior approval of
Owner's Representative)
3. Total Traffic (each horizon year)
F. TRAFFIC AND IMPROVEMENT ANALYSIS:
1. Site Access
2. Level of Service Analysis
a. Without Project (for each horizon year, including any programmed
improvements)
b. With Project (for each horizon year, including any programmed improvements)
3. Roadway Improvements
a. Improvements Programmed to Accommodate Non-site Traffic
b. Additional Alternative Improvements to Accommodate Site Traffic
4. Traffic Safety
a. Sight Distance
b. Acceleration/Deceleration Lanes, Left-Turn Lanes
c. Adequacy of Location and Design of Access
5. Pedestrian Considerations
6. Speed Considerations
7. Traffic Control Needs
8. Traffic Signal Needs (base plus each year in five-year horizon)
G. CONCLUSIONS:
H. RECOMMENDATIONS:
1. Site Access
2. Roadway Improvements
3. Phasing
I. APPENDICES:
1. Traffic Volume Counts
2. Capacity Analysis Worksheets
3. Traffic Signal Needs Studies
4. Accident Data and Summaries
J. FIGURES AND TABLES: (The following items shall be documented in the text or
Appendices)
1. Site Location
2. Site Plan
3. Existing Transportation System
4. Existing Peak Hour Turning Volumes
5. Collision Diagram(s)
6. Estimated Site Traffic Generation
7. Directional Distribution of Site Traffic
8. Site Traffic
9. Non-Site Traffic
10. Total Future Traffic
11. Projected Levels of Service
12. Recommended Improvements
K. DESIGN STANDARD REFERENCE: Design shall be in accordance with current Design
and Construction standards. Conduct capacity analysis shall be in accordance
with the latest edition of the Highway Capacity Manual.
(Ord. 2006-23, 7-5-2006)
CHAPTER 4
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Scope
7-4-2: Permit Requirements
7-4-3: Bond Required
7-4-4: Protection Of Public
7-4-5: Protection And Restoration Of Property And Landscape
7-4-6: Relocation And Protection Of Utilities
7-4-7: Definitions
7-4-8: Standards
7-4-9: Survey Methods
7-4-10: Excavation Standards
7-4-11: Control Of Ground Water
7-4-12: Hazardous Materials Discoveries
7-4-13: Construction Methods
7-4-14: Earthwork
7-4-15: Excavation For Pipelines
7-4-16: Pipe Bedding
7-4-17: Backfill Material
7-4-18: Backfilling And Compaction
7-4-19: Initial Backfill Procedure
7-4-20: Mechanical Compaction Of Backfill
7-4-21: Final Backfill Procedure
7-4-22: Excavation And Restoration Of Surface Improvements
7-4-23: Quality Control
7-4-24: Special Requirements
7-4-25: Blasting; Use Of Explosives
7-4-26: Penalty
7-4-1: SCOPE:
This chapter sets forth the requirements for excavations and backfill for
installation or repair of water lines, sewer lines, gas lines, electrical cable
and conduits, telephone cable and conduits, pipeline construction, concrete
work, restoration of surface improvements and all other excavations for any
other purpose within the street rights of way of the city or in other public
places. Excavation projects designed, contracted for and inspected by the city
engineer or other authorized personnel of the city do not come within the scope
of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Excavation Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to
break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner affect the surface or base
of any street, land, sidewalk or alley; or remove any pavement or other
material from any street or improvement thereon, unless such person shall first
have obtained an excavation permit from the public works director or other
authorized representative of the city.
   B.   Street/Sidewalk Obstruction Permit: No person shall place, deposit, or
leave upon any street any earth or any other excavated material obstructing or
tending to interfere with the free use of the street or sidewalk, unless such
person shall first have obtained a permit from the public works director or
other authorized representative of the city.
   C.   Trenches On Highways And Streets: Wherever trenches will be in, or must
cross state highways or streets, the contractor shall obtain such excavation
permits as are required for these crossings and shall become familiar with and
abide by the rules and directions of the Utah department of transportation
while working in these streets.
   D.   Franchise; Public Utility:
      1.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to waive the
franchise required for any person by city ordinances or laws of Utah.
      2.   Any public utility regulated by the state or holding a franchise
from the city which, in the pursuit of its calling, has frequent occasion to
open or make excavations in streets, may, upon application, receive a general
permit from the city to cover all excavations such utilities may make within
the streets of the city.
   E.   Exception In Emergency: Excavation permits will not be required prior
to excavation in case of emergency endangering life or property, providing the
city is notified as soon as practicable and a permit is applied for upon the
next regular working day following the emergency.
   F.   Revocation Or Refusal Of Permit: All permits shall be subject to
revocation and the city may refuse to issue a permit for failure of the
permittee or applicant to abide by the terms and conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-3: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   Term: In order to ensure proper backfill and restoration of surface,
the permittee shall deposit a surety bond with the city clerk/recorder, payable
to the city. Such bond will be held by the city for a period of twelve (12)
months.
   B.   Utility Exemptions: A public utility operating or using any of the
streets under a franchise from the city will not be required to furnish such
bond, providing such franchise obligates the holder thereof to restore the
streets and to hold the city harmless in the event of any injury to any person
or damage to any property due to negligence of such holder in conducting
excavation and restoration operations under such franchise.
   C.   Requirements: The required surety bond must be:
      1.   With good and sufficient surety;
      2.   By a surety company authorized to transact business in the state;
      3.   Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance;
      4.   Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this chapter in
order to secure and hold the city and its officers harmless against any and all
claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation and other work
covered by the excavation permit for which the city, the city council or any
city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to any
person or property through the fault of the permittee arising out of failure to
properly guard the excavation or for any other negligence of the permittee;
      5.   Conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe
condition, as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction
of the city, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any
street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of twelve
(12) months after the work shall be done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it
was before the work shall have been done.
   D.   Amount: The amount of the surety bond shall be established by
resolution and may be changed from time to time. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-4: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC:
   A.   Protection: Excavation operations shall be conducted in such a manner
that a minimum amount of interference or interruption of street traffic will
result. Inconvenience to residents and businesses fronting on public streets
shall be minimized. Suitable, adequate, and sufficient barricades shall be
available and used where necessary to prevent accidents involving property or
persons. Barricades must be in place until all of the excavator's equipment is
removed from site and excavation has been backfilled and proper temporary
gravel surface is in place. From sunset to sunrise, all barricades and
excisions must be clearly outlined by acceptable warning lights, lanterns,
flares and other devices. Police and fire departments shall be notified at
least twenty four (24) hours in advance of any planned excavation requiring
street closures or detour.
   B.   Notification: Prior to any construction in front of driveways, the
contractor shall notify the property owner twenty four (24) hours in advance.
Inconvenience caused by construction across driveways and sidewalks shall be
kept to a minimum by restoring the serviceability within twenty four (24)
hours, or as otherwise approved by the LaVerkin City representative. If it is
necessary to leave open excavation for a long period of time the contractor
shall provide structurally adequate steel plates to bridge the excavation.
(Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-5: PROTECTION AND RESTORATION OF PROPERTY AND LANDSCAPE:
   A.   Preservation: The contractor shall be responsible for the preservation
of all public and private property and shall protect carefully from disturbance
or damage all land monuments and property marks until the LaVerkin City
representative has witnessed or otherwise referenced their location and shall
not move them until directed.
   B.   Restoration: Public or private property damaged on account of a
contractor through direct or indirect injury, including any act, omission,
neglect, defective work or materials, misconduct in his manner or method of
executing the work, or in consequence of the nonexecution thereof by the
contractor, shall be restored, at no cost to LaVerkin City. Such restoration
shall be to a condition similar or equal to that existing before such damage or
injury was done, by repairing, rebuilding, or otherwise restoring as may be
directed, or he shall make good such damage or injury in an acceptable manner.
Said responsibility shall not be released until the project shall have been
completed and accepted.
   C.   Dumping: The contractor shall not dump spoil or waste material on
private property without first obtaining from the owner written permission for
such dumping. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-6: RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES:
   A.   Relocation: An excavator shall not interfere with any existing utility
without the written consent of the city council and without advance notice to
the owner of the utility. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing
utility, it shall be done by its owner unless the owner otherwise directs. No
utility, whether owned by the city or by a private enterprise, shall be moved
to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the
permittee or an expressly written agreement is made whereby the utility owner
and the excavator make other arrangements relating to such cost.
   B.   Protection: The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or
otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in
any way affected by the excavation work, and shall do everything necessary to
support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across the work.
   C.   Liability: In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires or
apparatus should be damaged they shall be repaired by the agency or person
owning them, but the utility owner shall be reimbursed for the expense of such
repairs by the permittee, and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement
or devices are to be considered as part of a substructure. It is the intent of
this chapter that the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to
substructures, and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such
substructure damage and such assumption of liability shall be deemed a
contractual obligation, which the permittee accepts upon acceptance of an
excavation permit. The city need not be made a party to any action because of
this chapter.
   D.   Permittee Responsibility: The permittee shall inform itself as to the
existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same
against damage. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-7: DEFINITIONS:
BACKFILL: Any earth that has been excavated from a trench or other excavation
and then replaced and compacted as specified after the structure has been
installed.
EMBANKMENT: Any raised area of compacted earth to support a roadway, structure,
parking lot, etc. The material used for embankment shall be specified and tests
shall be performed to determine the fill material's adequacy for the specific
project.
FILL: Any material used to fill a depression. It is any material which can be
compacted enough to prevent settlement such as earth, broken up concrete, old
building blocks, crushed stone or material from a riverbank, etc. Embankment is
a type of fill.
MAXIMUM DRY DENSITY: As determined by ASTM D 1557.
SUBGRADE: The native, prepared original soil or engineered fill under any
roadway, fill, embankment, structure, etc. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-8: STANDARDS:
   A.   Safety: During the entire trenching, backfilling and patching
operations, the contractor will be required to observe all safety and traffic
control procedures as outlined in chapter 3 of this title.
   B.   Maintenance: The contractor shall be responsible for maintenance of the
trench and patch for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the
completion of the patching operation.
   C.   Limitations: Unless otherwise approved by the LaVerkin City
representative, not more than four hundred feet (400') of trench shall be left
unfilled at any time in one continuous run. Up to one-half (1/2) the width of
any street or road shall be temporarily restored for use before excavation is
commenced on the remaining portion of the street or road. All excavation,
backfilling, and temporary resurfacing on any portion of any street or road
shall be planned for completion in one working day so that no trenches are left
open overnight.
   D.   Dust: All streets and roads trenched shall be kept free from dust and
open to through traffic unless permission to close the street is obtained by
the contractor from the LaVerkin City representative.
   E.   Right Of Way: All requirements governing work within a right of way
shall be addressed in general traffic regulations and road closures as outlined
in chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-9: SURVEY METHODS:
All construction shall have appropriate construction staking in place before
work begins. The staking shall have all necessary information, including, but
not limited to, stationing, cut or fill data, offset distance and invert
elevations. The information shall be placed on the face of stakes in a legible
manner using weatherproof marking materials. When a water main design has a
profile with grades, the water department will require a grade line be set at
the designed grades prior to installation of any pipe. A laser may be used in
lieu of a grade line if approved by the water department. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-
2006)
7-4-10: EXCAVATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Preparation: The pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surface shall be
cut vertically along the lines forming the trench in such a manner as to not
damage the adjoining pavement or hard surfacing. An undercut bevel at the rate
of one inch (1") per foot of thickness will be provided at the proposed
junction between the old and new surfaces. The portion to be removed shall be
broken up in a manner that will not cause damage to the pavement outside the
limits of the trench. However, any pavement damaged by operations outside the
limits of the trench shall be replaced. All waste material resulting from the
excavation shall be removed immediately from the site of the work.
   B.   Cutting: All asphalt cuts shall be made with a diamond or carbide
tipped masonry or asphalt cutting saw or with a steel asphalt cutting wheel
attached to a grader or backhoe. No scarifier tooth cuts, backhoe or bucket
rips will be allowed.
   C.   Sheeting, Bracing, And Shoring Of Excavations: All excavations shall be
sheeted, braced, and shored as required to protect the workers and existing
utilities and improvements from sliding, sloughing, or settling of the trench
walls while the work is in progress. All such sheeting, bracing and shoring
shall comply with the requirements of the Utah state industrial commission. All
damage resulting from lack of adequate sheeting, bracing and shoring shall be
the responsibility of the contractor, and the contractor shall make all
necessary repairs or reconstruction resulting from such damage.
   D.   Restoration: All concrete or asphalt surfaces damaged or cut in
trenching operations shall be restored to an "as good or better condition" than
prior to excavation. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-11: CONTROL OF GROUND WATER:
All trenches shall be kept free from water during excavation, fine grading,
pipe laying, jointing, and embedment operations. Where the trench bottom is
mucky or otherwise unstable because of the presence of ground water, and in
cases where the static ground water elevation is above the bottom of any trench
or bell hole excavation, such ground water shall be lowered to the extent
necessary to keep the trench free from water and the trench bottom stable when
the work within the trench is in progress. Surface water shall be prevented
from entering the trenches. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-12: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCOVERIES:
   A.   Discovery: If suspected hazardous materials including chemicals,
petroleum products, etc., are encountered, construction operations shall be
immediately stopped in the vicinity of the discovery and the LaVerkin City
representative shall be verbally notified of the nature and exact location of
the findings. The contractor shall secure the site of the discovery and shall
provide written confirmation of the discovery to the LaVerkin City
representative within twenty four (24) hours. The written confirmation shall
include a statement regarding the responsibility of the LaVerkin City
representative to report the discovery to the local health district and the
Utah department of environmental response and remediation within twenty four
(24) hours as required by federal statute (40 CFR 280.50) as adopted by the
state of Utah.
   B.   Abatement: After operations in the vicinity of the discovery have been
restricted, the LaVerkin City representative shall keep the contractor informed
concerning the status of the restriction. The time necessary for the contractor
and appropriate regulatory agency to arrange for an acceptable solution to the
discovered hazardous material situation is variable and dependent upon the
nature and extent of the discovered materials. After clearance is received from
the appropriate regulatory agency, the LaVerkin City representative shall
inform the contractor when work may be continued in the vicinity of the
discovery. Written confirmation shall be provided within two (2) calendar days.
(Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-13: CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
The methods employed in performing the work shall be the responsibility of the
developer. The developer shall make such changes in the methods employed as are
necessary to install an acceptable finished product. These methods shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
   A.   Construction Of Embankments: Unsuitable materials that occur in the
foundations for embankments shall be removed by clearing, stripping and/or
grubbing. Soils used as roadway embankment material shall be approved by a
geotechnical engineer licensed in the state of Utah. All materials in
embankments shall be placed, moistened, and compacted as provided in the
following subsections.
      1.   When the embankment exceeds the amount of excavation, sufficient
additional material shall be obtained from borrow pits provided by the
contractor. All material proposed to be imported shall be subject to the review
and approval of LaVerkin City prior to starting of hauling operations. The
materials used for embankment construction shall be free from sod, grass,
trash, rocks larger than three inches (3") in diameter and all other material
unsuitable for construction of embankments. Rocks larger than three inches (3")
may be proposed by the geotechnical engineer, to be revised by the city
engineer.
      2.   Grading of completed embankments and backfills shall bring the
surfaces to a smooth, uniform condition with final grades being within 0.1 foot
of the design grade. Cut and fill slopes shall be two (2) horizontal/one
vertical maximum. Construction of slopes steeper than two (2) horizontal/one
vertical or fills in excess of five feet (5') shall be approved by the LaVerkin
City engineer.
   B.   Compaction Of Earth Materials:
      1.   The fill material shall be deposited in horizontal layers having a
thickness of not more than six inches (6") and then compacted to the specified
density as herein specified. Moisture content during compaction operations
shall be within two percent (2%) optimum for granular soils and at two (2) to
five percent (5%) above optimum for fine grained soils. The moisture content
shall be uniform throughout the layers.
      2.   If the moisture content is greater than specified for compaction,
the compaction operations shall be delayed until the material has dried to the
specified moisture content or material is blended/replaced. When the material
has been conditioned as specified, the backfill or embankment shall be
compacted as directed below.
      3.   Under roadways, curb and gutter, sidewalks, and driveways, in
accordance with AASHTO standards, the embankment material shall be compacted to
a density equal to not less than ninety five percent (95%) for granular soils
and ninety percent (90%) for fine grain soils as classified by AASHTO M-145
soil classification system. Other fills and embankments not listed above shall
be compacted to ninety percent (90%) maximum dry density. Any variance shall be
approved by the LaVerkin City engineer.
      4.   Exposed natural soils within building areas, beneath walkways,
slabs, and pavement shall be scarified to a depth of six inches (6"), moisture
conditioned, and compacted to the specified density.
      5.   Foundations for structures shall not be placed partially on
undisturbed soil or compacted fill and partially on cemented deposits or rock.
      6.   Foundation soils shall not be allowed to become saturated during
construction.
   C.   Subgrade Preparation:
      1.   As a minimum, the original soils under roadways, curb and gutter,
sidewalks, and driveways shall be scarified to a depth of six inches (6") prior
to compaction operations. All scarified soils shall be compacted to the
equivalent of ninety five percent (95%) of maximum dry density for granular
soils or ninety percent (90%) of maximum dry density for fine grain soils as
classified by AASHTO M-145 soil classification system. Additional over
excavation and recompaction of original soils due to poor subgrade conditions
may be required by the geotechnical report. Subgrades shall be shaped and
graded to within a tolerance of 0.10 foot of design grade and drainage shall be
maintained at all times. Subgrades shall be stabilized and compacted as
directed by the LaVerkin City representative. Any springs or underground water
encountered in the construction of the streets shall be properly disposed of in
accordance with instructions of LaVerkin City.
      2.   When required to demonstrate the stability and compaction of the
subgrade, the contractor shall proof roll the subgrade prior to laying any base
gravel. The subgrade shall be proof rolled with at least one pass coverage with
a pneumatic tired roller of at least ten (10) ton capacity. All proof rolling
shall be accomplished in the presence of the LaVerkin City representative.
Ground contact pressure for all tires shall be eighty five (85) to ninety (90)
psi.
      3.   When the proof rolling shows an area to be unstable, it shall be
brought to satisfactory stability by additional compaction, reworking, or
removal of unsuitable material and replacement with acceptable material.
      4.   The subgrade preparation requirements listed above are the minimum
requirements. When the soils report requires, a certain amount of over
excavation of the native material may be required. In such cases, importing and
placement of select borrow material may be required, as directed by the
LaVerkin City representative. The material shall be placed and compacted in
accordance with the requirements of LaVerkin City.
   D.   Construction Of Nonstructural Fills: Nonstructural fills shall be
placed to the lines shown on the drawings and shall be any areas not
specifically designated for support of structures or utilities such as
landscape areas, and open space areas. Fill material shall have no specific
compaction requirements but shall consist of material that can be compacted to
prevent settlement such as rocks, old building blocks, crushed stone, broken up
concrete, gravel, cobbles, etc., with a maximum diameter of six inches (6").
Fill material shall not include broken up asphalt, toxic or hazardous materials
or waste sludge, organic or deleterious materials such as muck, ash, sod,
grass, trash, tree stumps, lumber, dead animals, etc. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-14: EARTHWORK:
This section defines the requirements for excavation and backfill for
structures, preparation of embankments and fills and subgrade preparation for
pavements and other surface improvements. Earthwork shall conform to the
following:
   A.   Excavation: All structures shall be founded on prepared original soil
or engineered fill. All unauthorized excavation below the specified structure
subgrade shall be replaced with concrete, untreated base course, and/or
approved engineered fill thoroughly compacted to a minimum of ninety five
percent (95%) of maximum dry density. Subgrade soil for all concrete
structures, regardless of type or location, shall be firm and thoroughly
compacted to a minimum of ninety five percent (95%) of maximum dry density for
granular soils or ninety percent (90%) of maximum dry density for silty/clay
soils as classified by AASHTO M-145 soil classification system.
   B.   Subsoil Reinforcement: Coarse gravel, crushed stone, or a geotextile
fabric may be used for subsoil reinforcement when approved by LaVerkin City.
Coarse gravel or crushed stone shall be applied in six inch (6") layers, each
layer being embedded in the subsoil by thorough tamping. All excess soil shall
be removed to compensate for the displacement of the gravel or crushed stone,
and the finished evaluation of any subsoil reinforced in this manner shall not
be above the specified subgrade.
   C.   Backfills:
      1.   Backfill shall be placed to the lines shown on the approved
drawings, or as directed by LaVerkin City.
      2.   Materials for backfill shall consist of approved excavated material
or clean borrow sand, gravel, or other suitable material. All broken concrete,
peat, decomposed vegetable matter and similar materials obtained from
excavation will be removed from the site prior to beginning of backfilling.
      3.   Material for backfilling will have optimum moisture to ensure
compaction to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which
the trench was dug.
      4.   All backfill will be placed in layers not over six inches' (6")
loose measure in thickness. Compaction will be obtained by mechanical rollers,
mechanical tampers, or similar means. It shall be placed in layers compatible
with the equipment and not exceeding six inches (6") in compacted thickness.
      5.   Each layer shall be compacted to a minimum density of ninety five
percent (95%) of maximum dry density for granular soils or ninety percent (90%)
of maximum dry density for silty/clay soils as classified by AASHTO M-145 soil
classification system.
      6.   After completion of construction below the elevation of the final
grades, and prior to backfilling, the excavation shall be cleaned and all
forms, trash, and debris shall be removed.
      7.   The density (dry) of the backfill under pavements, sidewalks, curbs
or other structures will be not less than that existing prior to excavation.
The fill shall be restored and placed in a good condition, which will prevent
settling. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-15: EXCAVATION FOR PIPELINES:
   A.   Trenches: Trench excavation shall include all operations necessary for
excavation of all materials of whatever nature within the designated lines of
the trenches. All excavation, including the manner of supporting excavation and
provisions for access to trenches, shall comply with all current regulations as
determined by OSHA.
   B.   Specifications: Trenches shall be excavated to the lines shown on the
approved drawings or otherwise established by LaVerkin City, and to a depth to
provide a minimum burial of three feet (3') over the pipe unless otherwise
specified.
   C.   Trench Bottoms: The bottom two feet (2') of the trench walls shall be
vertical. All finish grade excavation necessary for preparation of the trench
bottom shall be shaped as specified and the maximum width of the trench,
measured at the top of the pipe, shall be as narrow as possible, but not wider
than fifteen inches (15") on each side of the pipe. All trench work shall be
according to current OSHA standards.
   D.   Over Excavation: No over excavating shall be allowed without
recompaction of backfill in accordance with these standards.
   E.   Trenches In Rock: Excavation for trenches in ledge rock, cobble rock,
or stones shall extend to a depth of at least four inches (4") below the invert
of the pipe.
   F.   Unsuitable Materials: Where unstable earth, mud or muck is encountered
in the excavation at the grade of the pipe, the unsuitable material shall be
removed to a minimum of twelve inches (12") below grade and the subsequent hole
shall be backfilled with crushed rock or gravel as called out in section
7-4-17 of this chapter under "foundation material" to provide a stable
subgrade.
   G.   Compaction: The gravel material shall be deposited over the entire
trench width in a maximum of six inch (6") thick layers. Each layer shall be
compacted by tamping, rolling, vibrating, spading, slicing, rodding or by a
combination of one or more of these methods. In addition, the material shall be
graded to produce a uniform and continuous support for the entire length of the
installed pipe.
   H.   Tunneling: Should the contractor elect to tunnel or jack any portion of
the project, approval must first be obtained from the LaVerkin City water
department. The contractor shall furnish, place, and maintain all supports and
shoring that may be required for the sides of the excavation, and all pumping,
ditching, or other approved measures for the removal or exclusion of water,
including storm water and wastewater reaching the site of the work from any
source so as to prevent damage to the work or adjoining property.
   I.   Open Trenches: The maximum amount of open trench permitted in any one
location shall be four hundred feet (400'), or the length necessary to
accommodate the amount of pipe installed in a single day, whichever is greater,
unless otherwise approved by the LaVerkin City water department. (Ord. 2006-24,
7-5-2006)
7-4-16: PIPE BEDDING:
   A.   Protection Of Pipe: Pipe shall be protected from lateral displacement
and possible damage resulting from impact or unbalanced loading during
backfilling operations by being adequately bedded in accordance with the
bedding details in the standard drawings.
   B.   Bedding Materials: Bedding material as outlined in section
7-4-17 of this chapter shall be placed and compacted to ninety five percent
(95%) of maximum dry density with pneumatic or vibratory tampers in eight (8)
to twelve inch (12") lifts to provide a smooth, well compacted and stable
foundation for the pipe or appurtenant works.
   C.   Compaction: Pipe bedding materials shall be deposited and compacted in
layers not to exceed six inches (6") in compacted thickness. Deposition and
compaction of bedding materials shall be done simultaneously and uniformly on
both sides of the pipe. Compaction shall be accomplished with hand or
mechanical compactors to the satisfaction of LaVerkin City. All bedding
materials shall be placed in the trench with hand tools, or other approved
methods in such a manner that the bedding materials will be scattered alongside
the pipe and not dropped into the trench in compact masses. Bedding materials
shall conform to the requirements of section
7-4-17 of this chapter and shall be free from roots, sod, or other vegetation.
   D.   Imported Bedding: In the event trench materials are not satisfactory
for pipe bedding, imported bedding will be required. Imported bedding shall
consist of placing compacted granular material on each side of and to the level
of twelve inches (12") above the top of the pipe. Imported bedding material
shall be graded in accordance with section
7-4-17 of this chapter, under "bedding material". Compaction shall be to
satisfaction of the LaVerkin City representative.
   E.   Replacement Of Over Excavated Material: In the event "foundation
material" is used in backfill, or replacement of over excavated material, the
contractor shall at his expense, construct dams within the drain rock bedding
material at maximum intervals of six hundred feet (600'). The dams shall be
constructed to the top of the pipe or the level of groundwater, whichever is
greater, with class "B" Portland cement concrete and shall have a minimum
thickness of six inches (6"). (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-17: BACKFILL MATERIAL:
           Foundation Bedding/Pipe Zone Two Feet Above Pipe
Sieve Size Material   Material1         Zone                Final Backfill
              Percentage Passing                         Material2
           Foundation  Bedding/Pipe Zone Two Feet Above
Sieve Size Material    Material1         Pipe Zone      Final Backfill
              Percentage Passing                     Material2

12 inch       --       --             100
6 inch        --       --             100      Native material
3 inch        100      --             85 - 100 which contains no
2 inch        90 - 1   --             70 - 100 sod, vegetation,
1 inch        70 - 9   100            50 - 100 rocks larger than 6
1/2 inch      51 - 7   90 - 100       30 - 100 inch diameter,
No. 4         31 - 6   50 - 80        25 - 80  asphalt or concrete
No. 16        16 - 3   30 - 42        16 - 50  chunks, etc.
No. 200       0 - 5    0 - 15         5 - 30
 
Notes:
      1.   3/4 inch or 1 inch clean crushed sound gravel may be used in lieu of
the above table without compaction.
      2.   Placement of any rocks larger than 6 inches shall be observed by the
geotechnical engineer, and have prior written permission by LaVerkin City.
(Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-18: BACKFILLING AND COMPACTION:
   A.   Protection Of Pipe: Backfill shall be carefully placed around and over
pipes and shall not be permitted to fall directly on a pipe from such a height
or in such a manner as to cause damage.
   B.   Backfill Material: Backfill material shall be as required by section
7-4-17 of this chapter or as approved by the LaVerkin City representative and
shall not contain any organic or deleterious materials such as wood, grass,
roots, broken concrete, frozen soil, asphalt chunks, trash or debris of any
kind that may cause unequal settlement or improper consolidation.
   C.   Compaction: The backfill in all utility trenches under proposed or
existing roadways, curb and gutter, sidewalks and driveways shall be compacted
to the equivalent of ninety five percent (95%) of maximum dry density for
granular soils or ninety percent (90%) of maximum dry density for silty/clay
soils as classified by AASHTO M-145 soil classification system. In shoulders
and other street right of way areas, the in-place density shall be a minimum of
ninety percent (90%) of the maximum dry density. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-19: INITIAL BACKFILL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Specifications: Backfill of selected material, which shall conform to
the requirements of section
7-4-17 of this chapter, shall be placed carefully in eight inch (8")
noncompacted horizontal layers and tamped to a depth of twelve inches (12")
over the top of the pipe. During compaction of the initial backfill, special
care shall be taken not to move the pipe, either vertically or horizontally.
   B.   Protection Of Pipes: All backfill operations shall be performed in such
a manner to avoid any damage to the pipe, valves, laterals, etc.
   C.   Pipe Displacement: In the event such damage or displacement occurs,
such damaged or displaced pipe shall be removed and replaced with undamaged
pipe on proper grade and alignment. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-20: MECHANICAL COMPACTION OF BACKFILL:
   A.   Compaction: The backfill shall be thoroughly compacted by consolidation
or mechanical compaction. Structural and trench backfill shall be deposited in
horizontal layers and compacted by the following method in such manner that the
compacted material will be homogeneous and free from lenses, pockets, streaks,
and other imperfections:
      1.   The materials shall be deposited in horizontal layers across the
length or width of the excavation of not more than six inches' (6") compacted
thickness.
      2.   The excavation and placing operations shall be such that the
materials when compacted will be blended sufficiently to secure the best
practicable degree of compaction, impermeability, and stability.
      3.   Prior to and during compaction operations, all backfill material
shall have the optimum practicable moisture content within two percent (2%) and
shall be uniform throughout each layer.
   B.   Moisturizing Materials: Moisturizing of the materials shall be
performed at the site of excavation. If the moisture content is not optimum
within two percent (2%) for compaction, the compaction operations shall be
delayed until such time that the material has been brought to the optimum
moisture content. When the material has been properly conditioned, it shall be
compacted by using appropriate mechanical compaction equipment as indicated
below:
      1.   Vibrating rollers shall consist of a self-propelled roller with a
vibrating steel drum of at least one ton capacity. The roller shall have an
effective rolling width of at least twenty four inches (24") and shall deliver
a compaction force of at least seven hundred (700) pounds per square inch when
vibrating.
      2.   Pneumatic rollers shall consist of a self-propelled roller with
pneumatic tires arranged in a manner to provide a satisfactory compacting unit.
The roller shall have an effective rolling width of at least thirty inches
(30") and shall give a compaction force of at least five hundred (500) pounds
per inch of width of tread when fully loaded. The tires shall be uniformly
inflated.
      3.   Vibrating plates shall consist of a pneumatic vibrating plate
attached to the boom of a backhoe and capable of compacting an area of at least
three (3) square feet. The plate and backhoe combination shall together be
capable of exerting a compactive force of at least one thousand (1,000) pounds
per square inch.
      4.   Hand compactors shall be used when hand compacted methods are
specified or required because the location of the area to be compacted does not
permit the use of self-propelled mechanical compactors. Vibrating plates, "pogo
stick" tampers, or other approved hand compacting equipment shall be used.
(Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-21: FINAL BACKFILL PROCEDURE:
The backfill above a point twelve inches (12") above the top of the pipe shall
be backfilled in horizontal layers twelve inches (12") thick or less with
materials containing no brush, perishable or objectionable material, or rocks,
stones or boulders larger than six inches (6") in the greatest dimension. The
material shall be mechanically compacted with appropriate vibrating compaction
equipment. Wherever, in the opinion of the LaVerkin City representative surface
settlement is not critical, consolidation or compaction may be omitted and the
backfill shall be neatly rounded over the trench to a sufficient height to
allow for settlement to grade after consolidation. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-22: EXCAVATION AND RESTORATION OF SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   General: All street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways or
other hard surfaces falling in the line of the excavation which must be removed
in performance of the work shall be restored in kind by the excavator, unless
otherwise directed by the city council, in accordance with the specifications
contained herein governing the various types of surfaces involved.
   B.   Protection Of Paved Surfaces: In order to avoid unnecessary damage to
paved surfaces, track equipment shall use pavement pads when operating on or
crossing paved surfaces.
   C.   Road Base: Where trenches are excavated through gravel surfaced areas
such as roads and driveways, the gravel surface shall be restored and
maintained as follows:
      1.   The gravel shall be placed deep enough to provide a minimum of six
inches (6") of material, or to match thickness of existing material, or these
specifications, whichever is greater.
      2.   The gravel shall be placed in the trench at the time it is
backfilled. The surface shall be maintained by blading, sprinkling, rolling, or
adding gravel in order to maintain a safe uniform surface satisfactory to the
LaVerkin City representative. Excess material shall be removed from the
premises immediately.
      3.   Material for use on gravel surfaces shall conform to the
requirements contained in chapter 3 of this title.
   D.   Time: In traffic lanes of paved streets, the excavator shall provide
temporary gravel surfaces or cold mulch in good condition immediately after
backfill has been placed, and shall complete permanent repairs on the street,
sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway and other surfaces, within five (5) days from
the date of completion of the backfill, except for periods:
      1.   When permanent paving material is not available;
      2.   When weather conditions prevent permanent replacement;
      3.   When an extension of time is granted by the public works director.
   E.   Temporary Repair: If temporary repair has been made on the paved street
with gravel and a permanent repair cannot be made within the time specified
above due to any of the above mentioned conditions, then the excavator shall be
required to replace the gravel with cold mulch as soon as possible.
   F.   Temporary Grade Surface: Where excavations are made in paved areas, the
surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface. The gravel shall be
placed deep enough to provide a minimum of six inches (6") below the bottom of
the bituminous or concrete surface. Normally, this will require nine inches
(9") of gravel for bituminous surfaces, twelve inches (12") of gravel for
concrete and concrete base for asphalt wearing surfaces. The gravel shall be
placed in the trench at the time it is backfilled. The temporary gravel surface
shall be maintained by blading, sprinkling, rolling, adding gravel, to maintain
a safe, uniform surface satisfactory to the public works director until the
final surface is laid. Excess material shall be removed from the premises
immediately. Material for use on temporary gravel surfaces shall be obtained
from sound, tough, durable gravel or rock meeting the following requirements
for gradings:
      1.   Passing 1 inch sieve: 100 percent.
      2.   Passing 3/4 inch sieve: 85-100 percent.
      3.   Passing no. 4 sieve: 45-65 percent.
      4.   Passing no. 10 sieve: 30-50 percent.
      5.   Passing no. 200 sieve: 5-10 percent.
   G.   Bituminous Surfaces: The exposed edges of existing pavement shall be
primed with type MC-1 bituminous material. The type, grade, and mixture of the
asphalt to be used for street surface replacement shall be approved by the
public works director. Bituminous surfaces shall be restored by standard paving
practices to a thickness equal to the original pavement but not less than three
inches (3"). The finished repaired surface shall not deviate more than one-half
inch (1/2") vertically from the existing road surface. Any deviations greater
than specified shall be immediately removed and replaced to the proper
standards. Where trenches are excavated through bituminous surfaced roads,
driveways or parking areas, the surface shall be restored within five (5) days
as follows:
      1.   Mud or other soft or spongy material shall be removed from the
trench and the space filled with granular backfill to within twelve inches
(12") of finished grade. The pit run gravel shall be rolled and tamped to a
minimum of ninety five percent (95%) of maximum dry density in layers not
exceeding six inches (6") in compacted thickness. Base gravel shall then be
placed to a depth equal to the original gravel base, but not less than six
inches (6") thick and compacted to a minimum of ninety five percent (95%) of
maximum dry density.
      2.   Prior to permanent resurfacing, the contractor shall saw cut the
existing paving to vertical, clean, straight lines as nearly parallel to the
centerline of the trench as practical. The existing bituminous paving shall be
cut back beyond the limits of any excavation so that the edges of the new
paving will rest on at least six inches (6") of undisturbed soil.
      3.   Pavement restoration shall include tacking of pavement edges with
type SS-1H bituminous material, and placing and rolling plant mix asphalt to
the level of the adjacent pavement surfaces.
      4.   All backfilled trenches in roadways shall be patched with hot mix
asphalt within five (5) days of initial excavation unless otherwise directed by
the LaVerkin City representative. The backfill section shall be according to
the typical road sections of these standards. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-23: QUALITY CONTROL:
All earthwork shall be performed in accordance with these standards and shall
be tested and accepted as herein outlined. These are minimum requirements and
additional testing may be required.
   A.   Soil Testing: Minimum testing of earthwork shall be as follows:
      1.   Soil classification: One per material source. The sieve analysis
shall be according to ASTM C136, C117.
      2.   Soil proctor: One determination for each significant change in soil
type as necessary to provide required compaction testing. Tests shall be ASTM
D1557 method A or D (modified proctor).
      3.   Earth fill moisture/density determination: One test per five hundred
(500) cubic yards of fill placed in an embankment, or every other lift not to
exceed two feet (2'). Tests shall be ASTM D1556 or D2922 and D3017.
      4.   Subgrade moisture/density determination: One test per one thousand
(1,000) square yards of surface area. Moisture density determinations shall be
made in accordance with requirements of LaVerkin City. Tests shall be ASTM
D1557 or D2922 and D3017.
   B.   Acceptance: Any earthwork determined not to comply with these standards
shall be removed and replaced or reworked until compliance is obtained. Any
costs for the rework or testing the rework shall be paid for by the developer.
   C.   Trench Backfill Moisture/Density Testing: All utility installations,
i.e., gas, power, phone, cable TV and associated utilities, shall conform to
the applicable test requirements contained within these standards for
earthwork, compaction, base course, bituminous surface course, concrete and
other materials. Minimum testing of trench backfill shall be as follows:
      1.   Soil proctor: One determination for each significant change in soil
type as necessary to provide required compaction testing. Tests shall be ASTM
D1557 method A or D (modified proctor).
      2.   Trench backfill moisture/density determination: Tests are required
for trench backfill for every two hundred (200) linear feet of trunk line
trenching including twenty five percent (25%) of service laterals, fifty
percent (50%) of valve locations and all manholes. Tests shall be run at the
following trench elevations:
         a.   One test per two feet (2') of depth measured from the bottom of
the subgrade to the top of the pipe zone.
         b.   Tests shall be evenly spaced vertically through the trench with
one test at top of trench (bottom of subgrade).
      3.   Additional testing may be required by the LaVerkin City
representative or soils testing lab to verify compaction. Tests shall be
according to ASTM D1556 or D2922 and D3017.
      4.   Moisture/density determinations shall be made in accordance with
these standards. Proctors for all trench backfill compaction shall be
determined using ASTM D1557 modified proctor method. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-24: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Geotechnical Investigation And Report: In areas where a geotechnical
investigation is required before development, the recommendations of the
geotechnical report shall be followed and verified. The requirements outlined
previously in this chapter are only a minimum. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
   B.   Final Soils Submissions: All subdivisions and planned unit development
projects shall submit a final soils engineering and engineering geology report
in accordance with the applicable building related code(s). (Ord. 2007-24, 8-
15-2007)
   C.   No Cut Policy: When a street has been newly improved, there will be a
"no cut" policy in force that will not allow the new asphalt to be cut to
install utilities or for other reasons for a period of two (2) years. After the
two (2) year period all cuts must meet the following standards:
      1.   Flowable backfill (1 bag mix) in trench (at city's discretion);
      2.   Ten foot (10') minimum patch width (2 foot minimum each side of
trench);
      3.   Saw cut edges of patch;
      4.   Patch must be machine laid hot mix (cold mix may be used temporarily
if hot mix cannot be obtained then removed and replaced with hot mix when it is
available);
      5.   Patch shall be three inches' (3") asphalt over nine inches' (9")
granular base meeting city standards;
      6.   Seal the saw cut edges with a rubberized crack fill material.
   D.   No Cut Exceptions: Exceptions to the "no cut" policy during the first
two (2) years may be made on a case by case basis. The following standards will
apply where exceptions are granted:
      1.   Flowable backfill (1 bag mix) in trench (at city's discretion);
      2.   Twelve foot (12') minimum patch width (3 foot minimum each side of
trench);
      3.   Saw cut edges of patch;
      4.   Patch must be machine laid hot mix, cold mix may be used temporarily
if hot mix cannot be obtained then removed and replaced with hot mix when it is
available, or at the discretion of the LaVerkin City street department;
      5.   Patch shall be three inches' (3") asphalt over twelve inches' (12")
granular base meeting city standards;
      6.   Fill the saw cut edges with a rubberized crack fill material.
   E.   Flowable Backfill Installation Exceptions: In lieu of backfilling all
trenches cut into new city streets with flowable backfill as set forth above,
contractors, utility companies or any other entity working on new city streets
may backfill any trench according to the specifications and standards set forth
in section
7-4-14 of this chapter provided that such contractor, utility company or other
entity working on new city streets provides the following:
      1.   A written warranty in a form approved by the city providing that if
such trench compaction subsides, sinks or otherwise fails for any reason, or
the pavement over the compacted trench cracks, during the life of said trench,
that the contractor, utility company or other entity will repair and recompact
said trench. Such repair shall be completed at no cost to the city according to
the standards set forth in section
7-4-14 of this chapter. Repairs shall be completed within thirty (30) days
after receiving written notice that such trench has failed. However, in an
"emergency", which is defined as the failure of any trench due to a natural or
artificial condition and which poses an eminent risk to persons or property,
such contractor, utility company or entity whose trench failed will undertake
all reasonable steps to protect persons or property from further damage, within
twenty four (24) hours after receiving notice from the city. Such steps shall
include, but are not limited to, erecting barricades, warning lights, lanterns,
flares, or other devices to alert the public to the potential hazard.
Thereafter, such contractor, utility company or entity shall commence repairs
to the affected trench as soon as practicable according to the standards set
forth herein; and
      2.   Any contractor, utility company, or entity incapable of providing
evidence of a net worth in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) must
in lieu thereof, also post a cash bond for the estimated and reasonable cost to
repair said trench as established by the city engineer. The city will retain
said cash bond for two (2) years following completion of the trench work. If,
upon inspection by the city engineer or inspector after the expiration of two
(2) years, it is discovered that the trench is still intact and has not
subsided, sunk or otherwise failed for any reason, the city will release such
bond.
   F.   Conflicts: Where the provisions of this section conflict with the
provisions of other sections, the provisions of this section shall take
precedence.
   G.   Concrete Surfaces: The subbase for concrete surfaces shall be sprinkled
just before placing the concrete. Joints and surfaces shall be made to match
the original surfaces. The thickness of concrete shall be equal to the adjacent
concrete but in no case less than six inches (6") thick. The mixing, cement,
water content, proportion, placement, and curing of the concrete will be
approved by the public works director. In no case shall the concrete have less
compressive strength than three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch at the
end of twenty eight (28) days.
   H.   Concrete Base, Bituminous Wearing Surfaces: This type of surfacing
shall be constructed as outlined in chapter 3 of this title.
   I.   Gravel Surfaces: Trenches excavated through gravel surfaced area, such
as gravel roads and shoulders and unpaved driveways, shall have the gravel
restored and maintained as described in this chapter, except that the gravel
shall be a minimum of one inch (1") more than the thickness of the existing
gravel. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
7-4-25: BLASTING; USE OF EXPLOSIVES:
   A.   Blasting Permit Required: Blasting will not be allowed except by
written permit from the LaVerkin fire authority. If the permit is granted, the
contractor shall comply with all laws, ordinances, and applicable safety code
requirements and regulations relative to the handling, storage, and use of
explosives and protection of life and property. Any conflict with these
regulations and permit issued by fire authority, the fire authority
requirements shall take precedence. The blasting permit shall be site specific
and expire thirty (30) days from issuance, unless otherwise extended by the
issuing agency.
   B.   Additions: All requirements contained in this section shall be
followed: (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
      1.   The use of explosives or blasting agents is controlled by the
applicable building related code(s); (Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
      2.   The contractor shall obtain a special permit from the LaVerkin City
fire department for the use of explosives;
      3.   A copy of this permit shall be delivered to the LaVerkin City
representative prior to the use of explosives;
      4.   The approval by the LaVerkin City representative for the use of
explosives shall not relieve the contractor from his responsibilities for
proper use and handling of the explosives or for any damages resulting from
their use.
   C.   Handling: Explosives shall be transported, stored, handled, and used in
accordance with the provisions and requirements of all applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations.
   D.   Command, Control And Permits: When any blasting is to occur within the
limits of LaVerkin City, a permit for such activity shall be applied for at
least three (3) working days prior to the desired blasting day. A detailed
blast plan shall be submitted for review at the time of application for a
permit. The blast plan shall contain the following information:
      1.   Number of holes per blast;
      2.   Blast pattern;
      3.   Depth of holes;
      4.   Maximum holes per delay;
      5.   Numbers of the delays used;
      6.   Type of explosives used;
      7.   Total pounds of explosives;
      8.   Maximum pounds per delay;
      9.   Method of detonation;
      10.   Proximity to nearest structure;
      11.   Expected duration of blasting activity;
      12.   Name of independent monitoring company;
      13.   Whether or not preblast survey is required and the name of the
company doing such a survey;
      14.   Plan outline for notification of fire marshal, fire chief or
governing agency one hour prior to detonation of each blast and approximate
time of each blast.
   E.   Blasting Criteria: In accordance with United States bureau of mines
(USBM) report 8705, two inches (2") per second (IPS) when the frequencies are
greater than fifty (50) hertz (Hz) in any of the three (3) spatial components
in which the data is being collected:
      1.   The blaster shall submit with his permit application the projected
equative scale distance to be represented by each blast in relationship to the
nearest structure. This scale distance shall not be less than fifty (50). If
the scale distance results in a number less than fifty (50) the blaster will be
required to modify the blasting plan in order to produce a safe blast within
the above parameters.
      2.   Blasting activity that is to occur within one thousand feet (1,000')
of any school, public or private, university, daycare center, church, library,
medical facility, or any public building shall be conducted during off hours
where possible and shall require seismic monitoring of each blast to ensure the
integrity of the building as well as the safety of the occupants of said
buildings. Since there is a wide variety in the type density, specific gravity,
velocity, and general characteristics within the graphical area of southern
Utah, there are varied methods that can be employed to attain the desired
results. These methods, if used and however varied, shall adhere to the above
limit criteria.
      3.   Any blasting that is intended within five hundred feet (500') of any
structure, building, tunnel, underground utilities, gas lines, overhead
transmission lines, pump station, piping, radio tower, or any other structure
of any kind, requires that the blast be monitored with a seismograph capable of
measuring peak particle velocities in three (3) spatial components of
horizontal, vertical and transverse and be capable of printing this data into a
permanent digital record as well as wave form and air blast over pressure in
terms of millibar, psi or decibel (dB) recording of each event. Any structure
such as residential homes, commercial buildings, public buildings, storage
facilities, or any other permanent structure that is within five hundred feet
(500') of blasting activity shall be required to have a preblast survey
performed at the expense of the contractor and/or the blaster by an independent
company whose primary nature of business is to conduct and perform these types
of services. The said company shall furnish to the authorizing agency a copy of
the preblast survey report prior to issuance of the blasting permit. A
certificate of insurance issued by an underwriter legally doing business within
the state of Utah showing contractor and/or blaster to be properly insured for
the express purpose of blasting and showing the issuing agency as additional
insured, shall be submitted with the application of the blasting permit. The
amount of insurance shown on the certificate of insurance shall be in the
amount required by the LaVerkin City fire authority or the LaVerkin City
representative.
      4.   Furnish and erect special signs to warn the public of his blasting
operations. They shall be located and maintained to be evident to the public
during all critical periods of blasting operations.
      5.   Notify each public utility company, having structures or facilities
adjacent to the work, of his intention to use explosives. Such notice shall be
given sufficiently in advance to enable the companies to advise the contractor
of any precautions that should be taken to protect their structures from
damage.
      6.   Make a survey of adjacent properties, before commencing blasting
operations, locating on drawings and by photographs all existing cracks and
damages to structures. A copy shall be filed with the LaVerkin City
representative, including a report of any property owners who refused to permit
entry and inspection.
      7.   Blasting shall be accomplished in such a manner that nearby
buildings, structures, railways, highways, etc., will be safe from rocks and
other projectiles. Adequate blasting mats or other means of protection shall be
employed when blasting in congested area or close proximity to any of the above
improvements. Steel mats shall not be allowed within two thousand feet (2,000')
of power lines.
      8.   At the time of firing, the contractor shall station certified
flaggers along the road at sufficient distance from the blasting operation to
flag down any vehicles.
      9.   LaVerkin City reserves the right to order the discontinuance of
blasting operations at any time.
   F.   Electric Detonation Method: Electric detonators, if employed, shall be
manufactured by a company currently in business. Such detonators shall be used
in series and be of twenty five (25), fifty (50), or one hundred (100)
milliseconds' delay. Millisecond series delay devices for multi-linking larger
events may also be used provided they have been included in the approved blast
plan.
   G.   Nonelectric Detonation: Several methods of detonation utilizing other
than electric detonators or blasting caps are used by the blasting industry.
Since, under certain conditions, use of nonelectric detonators instead of
standard electric caps can be advantageous, they may be used provided they
possess delay capability and have been described in the approved blast plan.
   H.   Explosives And Accelerants:
      1.   Limits: Based on utilization of forty/sixty percent (40/60%) nitro
based explosives and the utilization of ammonium nitrate based accelerants the
following limits shall be adhered to:
         a.   One thousand feet (1,000') or greater from any structure, a
charge no greater than twenty two and one-half (221/2) pounds of accelerants
and/or explosives per delay.
         b.   Between five hundred (500) and one thousand feet (1,000') from
any structure, a charge no greater than fifteen (15) pounds of accelerants and/
or explosives per delay.
         c.   Between two hundred fifty (250) and five hundred feet (500') from
any structure, a charge no greater than eight and one-half (81/2) pounds of
accelerants and/or explosives per delay.
         d.   Between one hundred (100) and two hundred fifty feet (250') from
any structure, a charge no greater than four and three- tenths (43/10) pounds
of accelerants and/or explosives per delay.
         e.   Under one hundred feet (100') from any structure, a charge no
greater than two and one-half (21/2) pounds of accelerants and/or explosives
per delay. No ammonium nitrate based accelerants may be used within this area.
      2.   Notes: Since the purpose of blasting is the breakup and removal of
rock, utilizing shock waves generated by explosives, it should be understood
that these same shock waves travel through the formation resulting in potential
damage to any structure that may be in contact with the same formation. Most of
the formations in the geographical area of southern Utah fall into three (3)
general categories. Each, generally speaking, has its own specific gravity and
resonant velocities with some minor variations. Most of these resonant
velocities occur at greater than twelve thousand (12,000) IPS and at
frequencies of greater than fifty (50) hertz. It is therefore necessary to meet
or exceed these resonant velocities and frequencies in order to accomplish the
desired breakage of the rock.
      3.   Ammonium Nitrate Accelerants: Although ammonium nitrate based
accelerants provide an inexpensive enhancement to the nitro based explosives,
their velocities are generally well below twelve thousand (12,000) IPS and
produce frequencies under fifty (50) hertz. Therefore, the use of ammonium
nitrate based accelerants within close proximity to existing structures shall
not be permitted. As per USBM report 8707, the greatest potential for
structural damage to occur is when the peak particle velocity (PPV) exceeds two
(2) IPS with frequencies of less than fifty (50) hertz. In addition, the use of
these accelerants has a tendency to increase the air blast over pressures and
lower frequencies within close proximity to the blast.
   I.   Storage And Transportation: Explosives shall be stored in a magazine
with separate storage compartments and/or a separate magazine for the storage
and transportation of detonators as per NFSC specifications.
   J.   Stemming: Stemming shall consist of three-eighths inch (3/8") gravel
with a minimum vertical fill dimension of no less than three feet (3') covering
each charge. Cuttings, sand, gravel, or any other on site material will not be
accepted when blasting is to occur within five hundred feet (500') of any
structure.
   K.   Flyrock:
      1.   Within five hundred feet (500') of any structure the use of
certified blasting mats to cover each charge shall be required. The number of
holes per blast shall be limited to the blaster's ability to adequately cover
and protect each charge hole. However, no more than fifty two (52) holes shall
be loaded and detonated at any one time when within five hundred feet (500') of
any structure.
      2.   When within five hundred (500) to one thousand feet (1,000') of any
structure, the blaster shall continue to utilize blasting mats. However,
utilization of sand, or other suitable on site material having an aggregate
containing material four inches (4") in diameter or less can be used as cover
for a height of three feet (3') or greater over the top of the existing charge
holes. No more than one hundred eighteen (118) holes shall be loaded and
detonated at any one time with the five hundred (500) to one thousand foot
(1,000') range of any structure.
   L.   Logs: Each blaster shall keep a detailed record of each blasting event.
Such record shall contain the following information:
      1.   Depths of holes;
      2.   The hole pattern or spacing, confined or free face;
      3.   The total number of holes detonated per event;
      4.   Number and series of delays used;
      5.   Method of detonation;
      6.   Maximum pounds of explosives;
      7.   Maximum pounds per delay;
      8.   Maximum pounds of accelerants;
      9.   Total pounds for the blast;
      10.   Vertical spacing of decks;
      11.   Manufacturer and type of blasting agent, accelerants if applicable,
and detonation device or devices;
      12.   The material and depth of stemming;
      13.   Distance and direction of the blast from nearest structure and
location within the construction site of blast, i.e., station marker, lot
corner, survey marker and so on;
      14.   The time of the blast;
      15.   Name of the blaster and assistants, including address and phone
number;
      16.   Name of seismograph company, if applicable, and resultant
seismograph reading with regard to peak particle velocity (PPV), decibel (dB)
and frequency (FWHz).
   M.   Surrender Logs Upon Request: The blaster shall at the request of any
authorizing agency, surrender logs, or a copy thereof, for review by said
agency within twenty four (24) hours of receiving such request. Failure to keep
current and/or surrender the logs to said authority will result in the
immediate cancellation of any permits issued within the scope of the
jurisdiction of these authorizing agencies. No further permits will then be
issued within thirty (30) days of submission of said records. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-
5-2006)
7-4-26: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2006-24, 7-5-2006)
CHAPTER 5
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY, USE AND CONTROL
SECTION:
7-5-1: Unlawful Use
7-5-2: Repair After Unlawful Use
7-5-3: Franchise; Easement
7-5-4: Acts Exempted
7-5-5: Penalty
7-5-1: UNLAWFUL USE:
Unless authorized by permit or other written authorization issued by the city
or unless authority is granted by provisions of this code or other ordinance of
the city now or hereafter enacted, it shall be a class B misdemeanor for any
person to:
   A.   Property Controlled By City: Construct, lay, excavate, erect, operate
or maintain over, under, across, in or through any property owned or controlled
by the city, any utility, canal, ditch, construction or building.
   B.   Restricted Areas: Enter upon any property of the city contrary to any
posting or marking restricting or prohibiting use of the area.
   C.   Damage To Property: Intentionally use or perform acts upon property of
the city which materially impairs, alters or damages the property. (1982 Code §
8-111)
7-5-2: REPAIR AFTER UNLAWFUL USE:
The city council, in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, may
order any person who has damaged, altered or changed any property of the city
to repair or restore the property to its original condition prior to the
damage, alteration or change. (1982 Code § 8-112)
7-5-3: FRANCHISE; EASEMENT:
   A.   Provisions: The city council may grant to any person a franchise or
easement on such terms and conditions as it deems reasonable, for the purpose
of entering upon, constructing, building, operating and maintaining any
business or for other use of the property of the city and the provisions of
sections
7-5-1 and
7-5-2 of this chapter shall not apply to the extent such provisions are waived,
qualified or made inapplicable to the rights or privileges granted in the
franchise ordinance or easement.
   B.   In Writing: Any franchise or easement granted by the city shall be in
writing and any franchise or easement not in writing shall be void. (1982 Code
§ 8-113)
7-5-4: ACTS EXEMPTED:
It shall not be a violation of this chapter where any person uses the public
property of the city in the manner or for the purpose for which such property
has been made available for public use. (1982 Code § 8-114)
7-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
ARTICLE A. PARKS AND MUNICIPAL LAND USE
SECTION:
7-5A-1: Rules, Regulations, And Requirements
7-5A-2: Rental Of Public Facilities
7-5A-3: Possession Of Permit
7-5A-4: Enforcement
7-5A-5: Penalty
7-5A-1: RULES, REGULATIONS, AND REQUIREMENTS:
Controlled property shall include any property over which the City has been
granted temporary or perpetual use and control (either by easement or permit)
by another governmental entity or agency (local, state, or federal).
Unless authorized by resolution, order, decision, permit or other written
authorization issued by the City (in accordance and in full compliance with the
provisions of any implementing resolution or policy of the City, herewith or
hereafter adopted, setting forth circumstances, criteria, considerations,
restrictions, and/or conditions justifying the exception(s) requested and
provided by such resolution, order, decision, permit or authorization), or
unless otherwise permitted by provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the
City, now or hereafter enacted, it shall be an infraction for any person to do
any act hereinafter prohibited or otherwise restricted:
   A.   Destruction; Littering; and/or Dumping: On any Municipally owned (or
controlled) property, excluding public streets and sidewalks, or property
operated by the City, it shall be unlawful to cut, break, move, take or
otherwise injure, destroy or deface any trees, shrubs, plants, turf, rock or
any building, fence, bridge, sign or other structure, or foul any spring or
stream or leave waste items or rubbish of any kind. No person shall dump any
earth, rubbish or other substance or material in or upon any park without
written permission of the Parks Director. The prohibitions and regulations
regarding Litter shall be as set forth in Section
4-6-3, and shall include Municipally controlled property.
   B.   Alcoholic Beverages, Drugs, Or Gambling: The sale, consumption, or
possession of intoxicating liquors or beverages and dangerous or narcotic
drugs, or gambling of any kind, is prohibited on any Municipally owned or
controlled property including all parks and recreation facilities and areas.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the sale, possession, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may be permitted at public recreation facilities and areas
where permitted by a valid beer and/or alcohol license issued by the City
Council and state agency.
   C.   Open Fires: No person shall make or kindle any open fire on any
Municipally owned or controlled property, except in fireplaces and grills
provided or authorized by the City for this purpose or in private portable
commercially manufactured grills or grills approved safe by the Parks Director.
Grills provided for public use shall be on a first come, first served basis.
   D.   Fireworks And Explosives: No person shall discharge or set off on any
Municipally owned or controlled property, any firecrackers, rockets or any
other fireworks or explosives without advance written consent of the Parks
Director.
   E.   Trapping Or Injuring Animals: No unauthorized person shall, on any
Municipally owned or controlled property, set a trap or snare, or shoot,
injure, annoy, disturb or poison any wild animal or bird, or injure or destroy
any nest.
   F.   Nuisances: It shall be unlawful for any person to use threatening,
abusive, insulting, or indecent language; to commit any obscene or indecent
act; to fight; or to create a public disturbance or nuisance on any Municipally
owned or controlled property. Any person who loiters on any Municipally owned
or controlled property under the influence of alcohol or drugs or who otherwise
disturbs the peace of park users by begging, soliciting, making undue noise or
engaging in disruptive activities shall be deemed to create a nuisance.
   G.   Motor Vehicles; Speed Limit: No person shall ride in or drive any motor
vehicle, which is self-propelled upon any Municipally owned or controlled
property except upon the roads. It is prohibited for any person to commit any
act, by use or operation of any motor vehicle on any Municipally owned or
controlled property, which if committed upon a public highway or street in the
State, would be prohibited and unlawful. Speed limits within all Municipally
owned or controlled property shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour unless
otherwise posted. No one shall test or repair any vehicle or mechanical device
in any Municipally owned or controlled property. There shall be no parking at
any time except in areas designated for such purposes. Abandoned vehicles shall
be towed at owner's expense.
   H.   Signs And Advertising: No person shall, without written permission of
the Parks Director, erect, paint, paste, or otherwise affix or distribute any
signs, advertisements, or circulars on any Municipally owned or controlled
property. The sale of anything or the solicitation of funds or donations within
any Municipally owned or controlled property is forbidden, except upon written
permission of the Parks Director.
   I.   Animal Control: Horses, cattle, livestock and domestic animals of any
kind (including dogs) are prohibited, on any Municipally owned or controlled
property, except to access a public trailhead (which access must be in a
reasonably direct route, and without delay on, standing upon, or non-travel use
of the controlled property). Parks designated by the City as wilderness parks
are exempted from application of this subsection. This subsection shall not
apply to persons using service animals for assistance with legitimate visual
and auditory impairments.
   J.   Golf And Archery: Practicing, playing or using park areas for golf and
archery is prohibited on Municipally owned or controlled property.
   K.   Weapons: While on Municipally owned or controlled property (except the
shooting range located at the top of the switchbacks, off SR-9), no person
except: 1) authorized law enforcement officers, and 2) those justified under
part 4 of chapter 2 of title 76, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended) in the
defense of self, others, and/or certain property may discharge a dangerous
weapon (as that term is defined in section 76-10-501, Utah Code Annotated
(1953, as amended)).
   L.   Personal Profit Or Financial Gain: No person or group may utilize any
Municipally owned or controlled property for the purpose of teaching an
individual or group any recreational skill for personal profit or financial
gain without written permission of the Parks Department.
   M.   Nighttime Use: No persons are permitted on any Municipally owned or
controlled property during the hours of darkness, except in those areas
designated for extended use activities, or unless written permission is
obtained from the Parks Director for after dark programs. The City shall
reserve the right to lock any gate, chain any door offering access to any park,
facility, or building in order to restrict nighttime usage thereof.
   N.   Temporary Closure: The Mayor or City Administrator or designee thereof
may temporarily close or curtail activities upon any lands or waters, or any
portions thereof, when it has been deemed to be in the best interest of public
safety, conduct, health, or order.
   O.   Entertainment And Similar Activities: No entertainment, demonstration,
exhibition, meeting, concert or tournament, whether public or private, shall be
given on any Municipally owned or controlled property without having obtained
the written permission of the City Administrator or Parks Director no less than
fourteen (14) days prior to usage.
   P.   Camping Or Sleeping Overnight: Camping or sleeping overnight on any
Municipally owned or controlled property is prohibited without advance written
permission from the City Administrator or Parks Director.
   Q.   Encroachment: No person or persons shall willingly encroach upon lands
administered by the city. (Ord. 2006-13, 4-19-2006; amd. Ord. 2015-01, 2-4-
2015; Ord. 2019-05, 5-15-2019; Ord. 2020-02, 8-19-2020)
7-5A-2: RENTAL OF PUBLIC FACILITIES:
   A.   The following City facilities are or may be made available for
reservation and private rental on a temporary, infrequent, and limited basis:
      1.   The gymnasium and kitchen facilities located in the City building
located at 111 South Main Street.
      2.   Available rooms located within the City building located at 111
South Main Street, as determined available for use, from time to time, by the
Mayor or City Administrator.
      3.   The pavilion located in Wanlass Park, and such other pavilions as
may be constructed and situated within Wanlass Park and/or other City parks
within the jurisdictional boundaries of LaVerkin.
      4.   The amphitheater and basketball court area located behind the City
building at 111 South Main Street.
      5.   Such other City-owned facilities as may be determined, from time to
time, to be available on a temporary basis by the City Administrator.
   B.   The reservation and/or private use of such facilities shall be
reasonable, infrequent, limited in duration, and not result in injury, damage,
or unreasonable wear and tear on such facilities; and shall be subject to: 1)
the payment of any rental fees, deposits, and/or other costs as may be imposed
as established by resolution of the City Council for such reservation and/or
private use, and 2) such rules and regulations governing such reservation as
may be established by ordinance, resolution, and/or policies established by the
City Administrator and posted, published, or otherwise made available to such
users. (Ord. 2018-06, 9-19-2018)
7-5A-3: POSSESSION OF PERMIT:
All of the rules set forth in section
7-5A-1 of this article requiring written permission contemplate that such
permits must be carried and produced upon demand. (Ord. 2018-06, 9-19-2018)
7-5A-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The City police and the employees of the Parks Department are authorized to
enforce these rules and regulations and to prosecute violators thereof. (Ord.
2006-13, 4-19-2006; amd. Ord. 2018-06, 9-19-2018)
7-5A-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of these rules and regulations shall be guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each violation shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 2006-13,
4-19-2006; amd. Ord. 2018-06, 9-19-2018)
CHAPTER 6
CEMETERIES
SECTION:
7-6-1: City Cemetery
7-6-2: Definitions
7-6-3: Applicability
7-6-4: Cemetery Sexton
7-6-5: Burials
7-6-6: Fees And Charges
7-6-7: Lot Sales
7-6-8: Perpetual Care Lots
7-6-9: Indigents
7-6-10: Rules And Regulations
7-6-11: Care And Maintenance; Right To Enter
7-6-12: Unlawful Acts
7-6-13: Penalty
7-6-1: CITY CEMETERY:
The burial ground of the city shall be known and designated by the name of
LaVerkin cemetery. (1982 Code § 8-202)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the
context otherwise clearly requires:
LOT: The partial lots or single graves in the city cemetery.
LOT OWNER OR PURCHASER AND GRAVE OWNER OR PURCHASER: The owner or purchaser of
burial privileges or the collateral right of use of any burial lot evidenced by
a deed or burial right for a described lot or by proved and recognized descent
or devise from the original owner. (1982 Code § 8-202)
7-6-3: APPLICABILITY:
All cemeteries owned and/or maintained by the city or which may hereafter be
acquired by the city wherever situated are hereby declared subject to the
provisions of this chapter. (1982 Code § 8-203)
7-6-4: CEMETERY SEXTON:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created the position of cemetery sexton. (1982
Code § 8-211; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Duties: The cemetery sexton shall have the general supervision and
administration of the city cemetery, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Recommending to the city council such additional rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the operation, maintenance, use and
protection of the cemetery.
      2.   Subdividing the cemetery into lots and grave sites.
      3.   Maintaining a record of the location of the graves and preventing
any lot from being used beyond its capacity.
      4.   Keeping a duplicate plat of the cemetery and, at the request of any
person wishing to purchase any of the lots or parts of lots, pointing out any
of the lots or parts of lots for sale; and upon disposal of any lots or part
thereof, notifying the city clerk/recorder of such fact. The city clerk/
recorder shall, after payment of the lot price has been received in the
treasury, issue a certificate of burial rights which shall describe the lot or
grave to which the right to burial is granted. The certificate shall be signed
by the mayor and the city clerk/recorder. (1982 Code § 8-212; amd. 1998 Code)
7-6-5: BURIALS:
   A.   Certificate Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the
body of a deceased person in the city cemetery without first obtaining a
certificate of burial right for the lot used or producing satisfactory evidence
of a right to burial based on a properly acquired certificate of burial right.
(1982 Code § 8-222)
   B.   Registration: Before any deceased person may be buried in the city
cemetery, the relatives or person having charge of the deceased shall provide
the city clerk/recorder with a written statement which shall be filed by the
city clerk/recorder, which statement shall contain, if known, information about
the deceased regarding his or her name, when and where born, the date and cause
of death, the name of the attending physician, date of burial, name of cemetery
and the description of the location of the grave. (1982 Code § 8-223)
   C.   Vaults:
      1.   Unless in writing waived by the cemetery sexton, it shall be
unlawful for any person to be buried in the cemetery unless the casket shall be
placed in a vault made of concrete, fiberglass, steel or brick lined, or of
such other material approved by the city council, substantially constructed and
covered with a similar durable material.
      2.   No wood shall be used as a permanent part of the construction of any
part of the vault. (1982 Code § 8-225; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Disinter any body buried in any cemetery, except under the direction
of the cemetery sexton who shall, before disinterment, require written
permission from both the Southwestern district health officer and the owner of
the lot or his or her heirs, which written authorization shall be filed and
preserved in a record kept for such purposes.
      2.   Disinter or remove the body of a person who has died from a
contagious disease within two (2) years after the date of burial, unless the
body was buried in a hermetically sealed casket or vault and is found to be so
incased at the time of disinterment.
      3.   Inter anything other than the remains of human bodies in cemeteries.
      4.   Bury the body of any person within the city, except in the city
cemetery or a private cemetery, unless by special permission of the city
council under such rules and regulations that it may prescribe. (1982 Code § 8-
224; amd. 1998 Code)
7-6-6: FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Established; Authority: The city council shall, from time to time by
resolution, fix the size of lots, the price at which burial rights shall be
sold and the fees which shall be charged for the various cemetery services to
be provided. (1982 Code § 8-243)
   B.   Collection: The city clerk/recorder, and such other persons as the city
council may designate, are hereby authorized and required to collect in
advance, prices and fees for the opening and closing of graves or other
services which shall include, but not be limited to, properly disinterring
bodies and properly restoring the earth and grounds, recording each burial,
disinterment or removal and raised monument privileges. The fees shall be such
amounts as are determined by the city council from time to time by resolution.
(1982 Code § 8-241)
   C.   Opening Graves:
      1.   No grave shall be opened in the city cemetery until payment of a fee
for the labor and expense in so opening the grave shall be paid.
      2.   The presentation of a receipt from the city clerk/recorder or person
designated by the city council when presented to the cemetery sexton, shall be
authority to open a grave for the burial of a deceased person. However, upon a
contract being entered into between any mortician and the city wherein the
mortician agrees to be responsible and liable for fees for the opening of a
grave, and wherein that mortician will be personally liable for such fees and
for perpetual care payments, the city clerk/recorder or authorized person may
give the cemetery sexton authority to open graves without the presentation of a
receipt from the city clerk/recorder or authorized person. (1982 Code § 8-242;
amd. 1998 Code)
7-6-7: LOT SALES:
   A.   Authority; Records: The city clerk/recorder, and such other person as
the city council may designate, are hereby authorized to sell the use of lots
in the city cemetery for burial purposes only and to collect all sums arising
from the sale. The city clerk/recorder shall keep a complete record of all
sales, which record shall describe the location of the lot purchased and the
price paid therefor. The city clerk/recorder or designated person shall deliver
to each purchaser a certificate of burial rights for each lot purchased, which
certificate shall, among other things, describe the location of the lot and the
purchase price.
   B.   Purchase Price, Scope Of: A certificate and rights to burial shall be
exempt from execution, taxation or assessment for care and maintenance from and
after full payment of the purchase price. Payments made pursuant to this
section shall not be construed to be in payment for cemetery services other
than perpetual care.
   C.   Services Included: Perpetual care shall be deemed to include the
filling of the grave, the placing of topsoil upon the grave, seeding the grave
with grass and watering and cutting the grass. No other services are included.
   D.   Improvements, Changes And Services: No other improvements, changes or
service, except perpetual care, shall be made on any lot without the
certificate holder or his heirs first submitting to and receiving from the
cemetery sexton written approval for such improvements, changes or services,
which improvements, changes or services shall be subject to the rules and
regulations promulgated by the city council. (1982 Code § 8-251; amd. 1998
Code)
   E.   Resale Restrictions:
      1.   From and after March 15, 1982, the lots sold by the city shall not
be further sold, transferred, conveyed or assigned to any person except the
city. The city hereby agrees to buy back any city cemetery grave lot which it
may hereafter sell. The repurchase of such lots shall be for the original price
paid by the purchaser or the current selling price of the lot, whichever is
less.
      2.   Whenever a certificate to burial rights or lots reverts to the city,
as provided for in this subsection, or becomes vested in the city for any
reason, before new certificates are issued, the original certificate shall be
canceled or an assignment given and the record shall be so changed. (1982 Code
§ 8-252)
      3.   The certificates shall be issued and signed and attested by the city
clerk/recorder. All lots or parts of lots, as provided in this subsection,
together with all improvements, shall be exempt from execution and from
taxation and assessment for care and maintenance charges from and after said
payment. (1982 Code § 8-252; amd. 1998 Code)
7-6-8: PERPETUAL CARE LOTS:
   A.   Scope Of Care: The essential perpetual care that the city agrees to
give shall consist of care of the cemetery generally, and shall include, but is
not limited to, mowing of all lots and graves at reasonable intervals,
resodding, seeding and filling in sunken graves, sodding the surface of the
graves to lot level, removing dead flowers and trimming trees and shrubbery
when necessary, raking and cleaning the lots and straightening of tilting
stones or markers, but shall not include repairing or replacing markers or
memorial structures of any nature, except when the need for repair or
replacement is directly caused by the city. (1982 Code § 8-262)
   B.   Contracting For Care:
      1.   No grave shall be hereafter opened in the cemetery of this city
until perpetual care upon the lot where the grave is to be opened shall have
been contracted for with the city, or perpetual care thereon paid. Should it be
the desire of any person to have a grave opened and the body interred therein
and perpetual care shall not have been previously contracted for or paid in
full for the lot therein, the person may either pay the full purchase price for
perpetual care or enter into a contract wherein payment shall be agreed. (1982
Code § 8-261)
      2.   The installment contract for perpetual care of, or purchase of a lot
with perpetual care, shall provide for collection by the city in event of a
default and such collection shall be by civil action, and the defendant therein
shall pay cost of collection, together with reasonable attorney fees to the
city, and shall also pay interest at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum
upon the past due installments. All installments shall immediately become due
upon the default of any of the installments; provided however, that when
perpetual care for any lot in the city cemetery or portion thereof, has not
been paid for a period of ten (10) years, then, and in such an event, the
unused portion of the lot shall thereafter escheat to the city, and the title
thereof shall revert to the city, which shall thereafter have the right, option
and privilege to sell and dispose of unused cemetery property, as is in this
chapter provided, upon condition that the city shall thereafter maintain
perpetually without cost of fee the portion of the lot occupied by a grave or
graves prior to the date when the remaining property escheated to the city.
(1982 Code § 8-261; amd. Ord. 2005-12, 4-6-2005)
      3.   The city shall have the power to fix, by resolution, a fee from any
person now owning a cemetery lot or portion thereof for the annual maintenance
and care thereof. (Ord. 2005-12, 4-6-2005)
   C.   Fund Created; Use:
      1.   There hereby is established a perpetual care fund according to the
laws of the state and this chapter. All funds received from the sale of
perpetual care services shall be placed in a special perpetual care fund,
invested in compliance with the laws of the state and used for the purposes
herein provided.
      2.   The income from the perpetual care fund shall be used to pay the
upkeep and development of the cemetery. (1982 Code § 8-271; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Duties Of Treasurer: It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to keep
an accurate record of the perpetual care trust fund account, including
investments, to see that the principal portion thereof is properly invested in
accordance with resolutions of the city council and the laws of the state.
(1982 Code § 8-272; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Investment Income: All income from investments held in the perpetual
care fund shall be quarterly credited to the cemetery maintenance fund for use
in providing the perpetual care as required herein. (1982 Code § 8-274)
7-6-9: INDIGENTS:
The city council may by resolution designate a portion of the city cemetery to
the burial of indigents. Whenever it is made to appear to the mayor and city
council by proof submitted to them by the city clerk/recorder that any person
who has died does not have an estate sufficient to pay the purchase price of a
lot in the cemetery, and that the nearest relative or representative of such
deceased person desires to have the body of such deceased interred in the
cemetery, the mayor and city council may grant burial space for such deceased
person at the request made to him by the city clerk/recorder. (1982 Code § 8-
291; amd. 1998 Code)
7-6-10: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Authority To Regulate; Procedure:
      1.   The city council may promulgate by resolution such additional rules
and regulations concerning the care, use, operation and maintenance of the
cemetery as it shall deem necessary.
      2.   The mayor may, from time to time as the city council deems
necessary, direct and publish a booklet of rules and regulations for the
convenience of the purchasers of lots in the city cemetery. Such rules and
regulations shall constitute a part of the terms and conditions under which
owners and users may utilize the cemetery and shall form a supplement to this
chapter after they have been adopted as official by resolution of the city
council.
      3.   Any changes in the rules and regulations shall be adopted by the
city council before such changes shall be official. (1982 Code § 8-237)
   B.   Lots Sold: Every lot or single grave sold is subject to rules and
regulations that have been or may be adopted. The rules and regulations shall
be subject to such changes as are found necessary for the protection of lot
owners, the remains of the dead and the preservation of the cemetery. (1982
Code § 8-227)
   C.   Traffic Control:
      1.   The provisions of the city traffic ordinances relative to the
operation of vehicles and conduct of pedestrians shall be in effect in the
cemetery, except as herein otherwise modified by this chapter.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive within the city
cemetery at a speed greater than five (5) miles per hour. (1982 Code § 8-230)
   D.   Children: Children under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not be
allowed in cemeteries unless accompanied by their parents or other adults,
except for the purposes of attending authorized funerals or, in the company of
adults, placing flowers on the grave of a deceased relative or friend, or
performing any other customary evidence of respect in accordance with their
religious principles. (1982 Code § 8-231)
   E.   Animals: No animal shall be allowed in any cemetery, except in the
confines of a vehicle and must be at all times retained within the confines of
said vehicle while the vehicle remains in the cemetery. (1982 Code § 8-232)
   F.   Decorum: Cemetery grounds are sacredly devoted to the interment and
repose of the dead. Strict observance of decorum due such a place shall be
required of all persons. (1982 Code § 8-233)
   G.   Errors In Opening Graves: Under no circumstances will the city assume
responsibilities for errors in opening graves when orders are given by
telephone. (1982 Code § 8-229)
   H.   Religious And Fraternal Organizations: The city may contract with
religious and fraternal organizations to designate a reasonable portion of the
cemetery in which burials may be restricted to members of such religious and
fraternal organizations and their families. (1982 Code § 8-226)
   I.   Placement Of Flowers, Plants And Other Items Of Decoration: The city
reserves the right to remove all flowers, plants or other items of decoration
from the city cemetery grounds after seven (7) calendar days following any
holiday or at such earlier time and/or other date if said flowers, plants or
other items of decoration have died or become broken. The owner of all such
flowers, plants or other items of decoration shall be responsible to remove the
same within the above time periods if the owner desires to preserve such items;
otherwise, all such items will be removed and disposed of by cemetery
personnel. The city shall post notice of the date following each holiday on
which it shall remove all flowers, plants and other items of decoration. (Ord.
2002-14, 12-18-2002)
7-6-11: CARE AND MAINTENANCE; RIGHT TO ENTER:
The city reserves the right to enter upon any grave and to perform all work
necessary for the care and upkeep of all lots and graves in its cemeteries.
(1982 Code § 8-228)
7-6-12: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   A.   Injury To Property: It shall be unlawful:
      1.   For any person to tie or attempt to tie any horse, animal or motor
vehicle to any monument, gravestone, tablet, marker, tree, shrub, fence or
enclosure on the premises of the cemetery for the purpose of injuring, defacing
or attempting the removal of same.
      2.   For any person to injure, deface, break, destroy or remove any
headstone, tombstone, monument, tree, shrub or any other property in the
cemetery. (1982 Code § 8-234; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Landscaping By Private Persons:
      1.   Except as provided by the rules and regulations of the city council,
it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any fence, corner
post, coping or boundary of any kind, to plant any vegetation upon any lot or
lots, street, alley or walk in the cemetery, except as set forth in subsection
B2 of this section, or to grade the ground or land thereof. The cemetery sexton
shall, whenever required, furnish the true lines of any lots according to
official survey, shall prevent and prohibit any markings of the same except by
official landmarks, and shall prevent and prohibit any grading thereof that
might destroy or interfere with the general slope of the land.
      2.   It shall be permitted to plant hard stem plants within the actual
headstone area with a maximum of two (2) plants per headstone. Plants shall be
planted no more than six inches (6") away from the headstone. If the plants
remain unkempt for one year or grow too large, they may be removed by cemetery
personnel. The city retains the right to determine when plants have grown too
large. (1982 Code § 8-235; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2002-14, 12-18-2002)
   C.   Placement Of Markers: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
place or cause to be placed any marker or monument on any lot in the cemetery
in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the city council
regarding the placement, construction and design of all such markers. (1982
Code § 8-236)
7-6-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 7
CITY TREES
SECTION:
7-7-1: Definitions
7-7-2: Creation And Establishment Of A City Tree Board
7-7-3: Term Of Office
7-7-4: Compensation
7-7-5: Duties And Responsibilities
7-7-6: Operation
7-7-7: Recommended Street Tree And Park Tree Species To Be Planted
7-7-8: Undesirable Trees
7-7-9: Distance From Street Corners And Fire Plugs
7-7-10: Utilities
7-7-11: Public Tree Care
7-7-12: Tree Topping
7-7-13: Pruning, Corner Clearance
7-7-14: Removal Of Stumps
7-7-15: Interference With City Tree Board
7-7-16: Review By City Council
7-7-17: Grandfathering Of Existing Trees
7-7-18: Penalty
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
PARK TREES: Trees in public parks, and all areas owned by the city, or to which
the public has free access as a park.
STREET TREES: Trees on land lying ten feet (10') from the back of all street
curbs, or, where there is no physical curb in place, from the curb line as
designated on the city survey. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-2: CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF A CITY TREE BOARD:
There is hereby created and established a city tree board for LaVerkin City
which shall consist of five (5) members, citizens and residents of this city,
who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. (Ord.
2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of the five (5) persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be three
(3) years except that the term of two (2) of the members appointed to the first
board shall be for only one year and the term of two (2) members of the first
board shall be for two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur
during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed by the mayor
with the approval of the council for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord.
2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-4: COMPENSATION:
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-
2002)
7-7-5: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel and
develop and or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets on city property and in other public areas.
Such plan will be presented periodically as needed to the city council and upon
its acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city
tree plan for LaVerkin City.
The board, when requested by the council, shall consider, investigate, make
findings, reports and recommendations upon any special matter or question
coming within the scope of its work. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-6: OPERATION:
The board shall choose its own officers, draft its own bylaws and keep a
journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-7: RECOMMENDED STREET TREE AND PARK TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED:
The board shall draw up a list of official street tree and park tree
recommended species, organized into three (3) size species classes, small,
medium and large, for LaVerkin City. This list may also contain information
deemed important for the public, such as trees that grow well in the area, low
water consumption trees, etc. This list shall be updated periodically by the
tree board. A current copy of this list shall be available to any citizen upon
request at the LaVerkin City office. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-8: UNDESIRABLE TREES:
The board shall draw up a list of trees deemed to be undesirable, and noxious.
A current copy of this list shall be available to any citizen upon request at
the LaVerkin City office. The list may be updated periodically by the tree
board. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-9: DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE PLUGS:
No street tree or park tree shall be planted closer than twenty feet (20') from
any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or
curb lines. No street tree or park tree shall be planted closer than ten feet
(10') from any fireplug. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-10: UTILITIES:
No park tree other than those species listed as small trees on the recommended
list, as determined in section
7-7-7 of this chapter may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of
any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. (Ord.
2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-11: PUBLIC TREE CARE:
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove any park
trees, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance
the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any park tree,
or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its
nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or
other public improvements. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-12: TREE TOPPING:
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any park tree. "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting
back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the
tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure
the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted from this section of this chapter at the
determination of the city tree board. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-13: PRUNING, CORNER CLEARANCE:
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way within the city
shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light
from any traffic signal, or obstruct the view of any street intersection, also,
there shall be a clear space of eight feet (8') above public sidewalks and a
clear space of thirteen feet (13') above city streets.
The city shall notify in writing the owners of trees that are not in compliance
with these pruning requirements. The owner shall have thirty (30) days after
such notification to complete the pruning at which time the city will have the
right to complete the pruning and then charge the cost of pruning to the
owner's property tax notice. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-14: REMOVAL OF STUMPS:
All stumps of park trees shall be removed by the city to below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-15: INTERFERENCE WITH CITY TREE BOARD:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning or removing of any park trees, as
authorized in this chapter. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-16: REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions
of the city tree board. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the city
tree board to the city council which may hear the matter and make a final
decision. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-17: GRANDFATHERING OF EXISTING TREES:
Sections
7-7-9 and
7-7-10 of this chapter shall not apply to trees that were planted prior to
October 2, 2002. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
7-7-18: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction. (Ord. 2002-12, 10-2-2002)
TITLE 8
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND SERVICE
SECTION:
8-1-1: Water Department
8-1-2: Applications For Connection, Service
8-1-3: Fees
8-1-4: Statement Of Charges; Delinquency
8-1-5: Discontinuance Of Service
8-1-6: Use Without Payment Prohibited
8-1-7: Use Without Authority; Restrictions
8-1-8: Installation Of Water Lines
8-1-9: Pipe Requirements
8-1-10: Water Mains Extended
8-1-11: Sprinkling Vehicles
8-1-12: Access By Department
8-1-13: Motors And Certain Machinery Restricted
8-1-14: Fire Hydrants
8-1-15: Scarcity Of Water
8-1-16: Excessive Use Of Sprinklers
8-1-17: Waste Of Water
8-1-18: Water Meters
8-1-19: Service Outside City
8-1-20: Nonliability For Damages
8-1-21: Penalty
8-1-1: WATER DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Creation: The water department of the city is hereby created. It shall
administer the operations and maintenance of the water system of the city.
   B.   Director: There is hereby created the position of public works director
of the water department.
   C.   Duties: Under the direction of the city manager and chief operations
officer of the city, the public works director shall manage and supervise the
city water system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the
resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the city council, from time to
time, which prescribe his or her powers and duties and which direct the manner
and frequency with which he or she shall make reports to the city manager and
chief operating officer relating to the water system. (Ord. 2007-33, 12-19-
2007)
8-1-2: APPLICATIONS FOR CONNECTION, SERVICE:
   A.   Connection: Any person, other than a subdivider or developer seeking
multiple connections, who desires or is required to secure a new connection to
the city water system, shall file with the water department for each such
connection a written and signed connection application, which is on file in the
office of the water department.
   B.   Connection By Subdividers: Whenever a subdivider or developer desires
or is required to install water connections and extensions for a subdivision or
development, the subdivider or developer shall enter into a written extension
agreement, which shall constitute an application for permission to make the
extensions and connections, and an agreement specifying the terms and
conditions under which the water extensions and connections shall be made and
the payments that shall be required. (Ord. 2007-33, 12-19-2007)
   C.   Service: Except as otherwise provided by resolution, any business or
person who desires or is required to secure water service when such service is
available from the city water system, shall: (Ord. 2010-08, 10-6-2010)
      1.   File with the water department a written application and agreement
for utility services (including, but not limited to, water service), a copy of
which shall be on file in the office of the water department.
      2.   If said business or person is a tenant of the owner of the premises
for which service is sought, file with said application and agreement, an
agreement signed by the owner of the premises (or the owner's duly authorized
agent) guaranteeing payment of tenant's utility services. A copy of such
agreement shall be on file in the office of the water department.
      3.   Provide a refundable cash deposit of three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00) as security for the full and timely payment of utility services
(including, but not limited to, water, sewer and garbage disposal service).
         a.   The city shall not be obligated to apply the deposit on or
towards: 1) any delinquent utility charges or 2) any delinquency related fees
related thereto (as defined in subsection 8-1-3A of this chapter). The
applicant shall be expected to timely pay, in full, his, her, or its utility
charges each month, regardless of whether such deposit monies remain on deposit
with the city.
         b.   Application of the deposit sum, or any portion thereof, towards
any arrears of utility charges and/or associated delinquency related fees shall
be at the option of the city; and the right of the city to terminate water
service for nonpayment of utility charges and/or any associated delinquency
related fees shall not be restricted or otherwise affected by the city's
receipt and maintenance of such cash deposit.
         c.   Any and all interest earned on the deposit sum shall be and
remain the property of the city to help defray the city's costs of monitoring,
maintaining, and administering such deposit.
         d.   At applicant's request, the deposit may be returned to applicant
(or applicant's duly authorized agent) or applied to applicant's utility
billing account as a credit, without interest, at any time after two (2) years
from the later of: 1) the date that such monies are placed on deposit with the
city or 2) the most recent date that any delinquent payment of utilities and
associated delinquency related fees have been paid in full.
         e.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C3d of this section,
a deposit may be returned to the applicant at any time that the water service
account is terminated, even if two (2) years have not elapsed since the date of
deposit or most recent late payment, provided, that all outstanding utility
charges (including any and all arrears and associated delinquency related
charges) are paid in full.
         f.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the
security deposit provided for herein may be waived for an applicant with a
record of timely payments of utility services to the city. For purposes of this
subsection, "timely payments" shall mean that the applicant has previously
received utility service(s) from the city for a period of not less than two (2)
years and that, during at least the last two (2) years of said period, the
applicant was not late in the payment of utility charges to the city. (Ord.
2007-33, 12-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-12, 4-3-2024)
8-1-3: FEES:
   A.   Service Rates And Connection Fees:
      1.   For purposes of this title, "delinquency related fees" shall
include, but not be limited to, any and all utility service late fees, notice
processing fees, reconnection fees, and/or collection fees and costs assessed
against a user of utility services for late payment and nonpayment of utility
charges.
      2.   Culinary water rates, delinquency related fees, connection fees,
reservoir fees, inspection fees, and other charges incidental to connection to
and service from the city's culinary water system shall be fixed from time to
time by resolution of the city council. The city council may, from time to
time, promulgate rules for levying, billing, guaranteeing and collecting
charges for culinary water service, and may establish other rules necessary for
the management and control of the culinary water system. Rates for services
furnished shall be uniform with respect to each class or classes of service
established or that may hereafter be established. (Ord. 2007-33, 12-19-2007)
   B.   Special Rates: The city council may, from time to time and upon such
terms and conditions as it may deem proper under the circumstances, fix special
rates and conditions for users:
      1.   Temporarily connecting to and using culinary water from the city's
water system, pursuant to the terms of a resolution adopted by the city
pursuant to the provisions of subsection 8-1-2C of this chapter, provided that
at no time may such connection be allowed to exist for a period of sufficient
length as to result in a violation of the city's contracts or agreements with
other entities providing utility service to the city and its residents and
businesses (including, but not limited to, the Washington County water
conservancy district, the Washington County solid waste district, and Ash Creek
special service district, and their successors) or an assessment thereby for
services for the period of such temporary connection/disconnection; or
      2.   Using exceptionally large amounts of water service and/or making use
of the water system under exceptional circumstances, as provided by applicable
agreement with or resolution of the city. (Ord. 2010-08, 10-6-2010)
   C.   Complaints; Corrections:
      1.   City Manager: Any person or business having a complaint regarding
the assessment and/or collection of a culinary water charge, or any deficiency
related fee associated therewith, may submit a written request for relief to
the city manager, who shall review the request within ten (10) business days
and grant such relief as he deems necessary and proper, and in accordance with
applicable state and local law.
      2.   City Council:
         a.   Any person or business aggrieved by a decision of the city
manager under subsection C1 of this section may make application to appear
before the city council to request relief.
         b.   The city council is hereby constituted a board of equalization of
culinary water rates; to hear appeals from the decisions of the city manager
and to correct any assessments deemed by the city council to be illegal,
unequal or unjust.
         c.   In addition to any other relief provided by state law or local
ordinance, the city council may, if and to the extent that it deems necessary
and proper under the circumstances, rebate all or any part of the culinary
water bill of any indigent person.
   D.   Water Availability Charge:
      1.   A water availability charge shall be assessed on all property for
which city approval of plans (to develop a lot, plat or unit within any new
development) is obtained.
      2.   The water availability charge shall be imposed for and during the
period between the time of such approval and the time a building permit is
issued or a connection is made to the city's water system.
      3.   The assessment shall be established by resolution, from time to
time, for each proposed residential and commercial connection. Said fee will be
assessed and billed by the city: a) on a monthly basis b) to the property owner
who obtains such development approval.
      4.   The fee shall be subject to the delinquency and collection related
fees (including a late fee) described in section
8-1-4 of this chapter and set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2007-33,
12-19-2007)
8-1-4: STATEMENT OF CHARGES; DELINQUENCY:
   A.   Statement: On or before the first day of the month in which payment for
utility charges are assessed, due and payable, the city manager or his or her
designee shall cause to be prepared and furnished to each user in person, by
mail, and/or by delivery at the user's place of residence or usual place of
business, a statement of charges (sometimes referred to herein as the "utility
bill"). The utility bill shall: 1) issue each month; 2) specify the amount of
utility (including water) service charges assessed against the user, as well as
any outstanding delinquency related fee(s); and 3) identify the place of
payment and the date due.
   B.   Failure To Pay:
      1.   Date Of Delinquency And Late Fee:
         a.   A utility bill is due and payable upon receipt, and shall be paid
not later than the twenty fifth calendar day of the month in which the user is
billed for utility services.
         b.   Payments not received by twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of the
twenty fifth shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to the immediate
assessment and imposition of a utility services late fee, as set by resolution
of the city council.
         c.   From and after the date of delinquency (i.e., the twenty sixth
day of the month in which payment was due), and until all charges and
associated delinquency related fees are paid in full, the user's utility
account shall be considered a delinquent account.
      2.   Notification Of Delinquency And Possible Termination Of Service:
         a.   Utility accounts which remain delinquent as of eight o'clock (8:
00) A.M. on the fifth day of the month following the imposition of the utility
services late fee shall be subject to the immediate assessment and imposition
of a notice processing fee set forth by resolution of the city council.
            (1)   The city manager or his or her designee shall forthwith cause
that a delinquency/termination notice (known herein as the "shutoff notice") be
mailed to utility users whose utility accounts remain delinquent and unpaid.
            (2)   The shutoff notice shall state the amount of the delinquency
(including any unpaid utility services late fee and notice processing fee) and
the anticipated date of termination of water service by the city ("shutoff
date").
         b.   Additionally, at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the
shutoff date, the city manager or his or her designee shall cause that a
shutoff notice be delivered and placed at the residence or usual place of
business of the user whose account is delinquent.
      3.   Shutoff Date; Involuntary Termination Of Water Service:
         a.   The shutoff date shall be the third Tuesday of the month
following the date wherein the account first became delinquent and subject to a
late fee.
         b.   Users whose utility accounts remain delinquent on the shutoff
date shall be subject to immediate termination of water service.
      4.   Intervention Of Nonprofit Charitable Organizations:
         a.   For purposes of this section, a "nonprofit charitable
organization" shall mean and include all charitable organizations or entities
which have been classified as tax exempt under state law of the state of Utah
or under the federal law of the United States of America, and only while
carrying out an act which is within the scope of such tax exempt status and
where no profit is directly or indirectly derived by any person, including, but
not limited to, religious, charitable assistance, and emergency relief
organizations, and includes a chapter, branch, office, congregation, or similar
affiliate, and any authorized representative thereof.
         b.   If, at any time prior to termination of a user's water service, a
nonprofit organization should contact the city manager or his or her authorized
designee(s) and request the opportunity to pay the amount of the user's
delinquency (including all charges and delinquency related fees) on the user's
behalf, action to terminate the user's water service shall be stayed for a
period of not less than ten (10) days following the shutoff date provided in
subsection B3 of this section.
            (1)   If the user's delinquent utility charges and delinquency
related fees are paid in full prior to the end of such stay, then the water
service will not be terminated for such delinquency.
            (2)   If the user's delinquent utility charges and delinquency
related fees are not paid in full within the period of such stay, service to
said user shall be subject to immediate termination at the expiration of such
period of stay.
      5.   Reconnection: After water service has been terminated to a user
pursuant to the terms of this section, it may only be restored to the user
after all delinquent utility charges and associated delinquency related fees
have been paid (including a reconnection fee, as provided by resolution). (Ord.
2007-33, 12-19-2007)
8-1-5: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   A.   Permanent Discontinuance Of Service: Any user desiring to permanently
discontinue city utility services to said user's property shall notify the city
in writing of such fact (by completing and signing a disconnection/termination
of service request). Upon giving such written notice, the user shall not be
responsible for water bills incurred after the date specified in the notice.
Any credit balance in favor of the user as a result of an advance payment of
bills or a deposit made will be refunded upon discontinuation of service.
   B.   Temporary Discontinuance Of Service; Damage:
      1.   In the event that a user's home, business or other structure
receiving water service is damaged by natural and/or unnatural forces to such
an extent that it is rendered uninhabitable or unusable for the purpose for
which it was constructed and/or occupied, and the owner of the structure
intends to repair/rebuild and reoccupy (or have reoccupied) the structure
within three (3) years (1 year, if a nonconforming use or structure), the user
may contact the city and request that all city services to said home, business
or other structure be discontinued for a temporary period of time and that any
billing therefor immediately cease.
      2.   The request for such discontinuance of service shall: a) be in
writing; b) describe the nature and extent of the damage suffered; c) state the
period of time that service should or is anticipated to remain discontinued,
not exceeding three (3) years (except for nonconforming uses or structures, in
which case the period is 1 year); d) indicate that the home, business or
structure is not being occupied or used for the purpose for which it was
constructed and/or used by user; e) state an intent to reoccupy such structure
when it is repaired/rebuilt; and f) affirm, under penalty of perjury, the
truthfulness of the statements and the representations of fact contained in
said request.
      3.   Unless such statements and/or representations are known to be false,
or they are insufficient to reasonably support a determination by the city that
such service should be terminated, the city shall forthwith discontinue all
service; and all city services shall be withheld until the user requests that
such services resume.
      4.   In situations for which this subsection applies, no disconnection
fee or reinstatement fee shall be assessed by the city so long as the user
requests that services resume before the expiration of the applicable period of
time, as set forth hereinabove.
   C.   Temporary Discontinuance Of Service; Voluntary:
      1.   A user of city utility services to a home, business or other
structure may contact the city and request that such services be temporarily
discontinued, resulting from a period of nonoccupancy.
      2.   The request for such discontinuance of service shall: a) be in
writing (by completing and signing a disconnection/termination of service
request); b) briefly state the reason for the anticipated vacancy; c) state the
period of time that service should be, or is anticipated to remain,
discontinued; and d) indicate that the home, business or structure will not be
occupied for the purpose for which it was constructed and/or used by the user
until such time as city services have been reinstated.
      3.   The city shall thereafter, but not sooner than such date of
requested discontinuance, discontinue all city services to said home, business
or other structure; and all city services shall be withheld until the user
requests that such services resume.
      4.   The written request in subsection C2 of this section shall be
accompanied by a disconnection fee in the amount provided by resolution.
      5.   Reinstatement of services shall commence upon receipt by the city of
a written notice to reinstate services and the payment by (or on behalf of) the
user of a reinstatement fee in the amount provided by resolution. (Ord. 2008-
06, 3-19-2008)
   D.   Temporary Connections And Disconnections: The provisions of this
section, unless specifically provided for in the applicable resolution, shall
have no effect on or application to the temporary connections and
disconnections provided by resolution, pursuant to subsections 8-1-2C and 8-1-
3B1 of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-08, 10-6-2010)
8-1-6: USE WITHOUT PAYMENT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person by himself, family, servants or agents to
utilize the city water or sewage system without paying therefor, as herein
provided or, without authority, to open any fire hydrant, stopcock, valve or
other fixtures attached to the system of water supply unless it is done
pursuant to proper application, agreement or resolution. It shall be unlawful
to injure, deface or impair any part or appurtenance of the water or sewer
system, or to cast anything into any reservoir or tank belonging to the water
system. (1982 Code § 14-120)
8-1-7: USE WITHOUT AUTHORITY; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Turning On After Being Turned Off Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any person, after the water has been turned off from the premises for
nonpayment of water charges or other violation of the ordinances, rules,
regulations or resolutions pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or allow
the water to be turned on or used without authority from the public works
director or city clerk/recorder. (1982 Code § 14-122; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Separate Connections: It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more families
or service users to be supplied from the same service pipe, connection or water
meter unless special permission for such combination usage has been granted by
the city and the premises served are owned by the same owner. In all such
cases, a failure on the part of any one of the users to comply with this
subsection shall warrant a withholding of a supply of water through the service
connections until compliance or payment has been made, and in any event, the
property owner shall be primarily liable to the city for all water services
utilized on all such premises. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the
power of the city to require separate pipes, connections or meters at a
subsequent time. (1982 Code § 14-123; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Unauthorized Users: It shall be unlawful for any water service user to
permit any person from other premises or any unauthorized person to use or
obtain water services regularly from his premises or water facilities, either
outside or inside his premises. (1982 Code § 14-124)
   D.   Adjoining Premises: No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water
pipes across lots or buildings to adjoining premises without permission from
the public works director and subject to such requirements relating to controls
as may be imposed by him. (1982 Code § 14-127B; amd. 1998 Code)
   E.   Visitors: Individuals visiting the premises of an authorized user in a
recreational vehicle, not including a mobile home, and continuing to live
therein during the period of visitation may receive water service from the
service pipes or facilities of the host during the visitation period which
shall not exceed one month. Continued use thereafter shall be deemed
unauthorized and violative of the provisions of this chapter relating to
separate connections and unauthorized use. (1982 Code § 14-125)
8-1-8: INSTALLATION OF WATER LINES:
   A.   Approval Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, repair,
alter or connect any water line to the city culinary water system without first
having received approval from the public works director. (1982 Code § 14-137;
amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Application: Applications for approval to make water connections or
other alteration or for laying or repairing lines connected directly or
indirectly to the city water system must be made in writing by a licensed
plumber, his authorized agent, or by the owner of the premises who shall
describe the nature of the work to be done for which the application is made.
(1982 Code § 14-138; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Determination Of Approval: The application for approval shall be
granted if the public works director determines that:
      1.   The connection, repair, alteration or installation will cause no
damage to the street in which the water main is laid, or that it will not be
prejudicial to the interests of persons whose property has been or may
thereafter be connected to the water main.
      2.   The connection conforms to the ordinances, regulations,
specifications and standards of materials required by the city as outlined in
this title. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
   D.   Line And Grade Designation: All connections, alterations or
installations shall be to the line and grade designated by the public works
director. (1982 Code § 14-138)
   E.   Fees: Fees for approval or for inspection services shall be of such
amounts as the city council shall from time to time determine by resolution.
(1982 Code § 14-138; amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Moving Or Replacement Of Water Lines: In the event that the city in its
sole discretion determines that any water line of the city must be moved or
replaced, the city shall bear that portion of the cost of such move or
replacement which applies to main lines up to the property line of the
customer. The cost of reconnecting such new line or lines from the house of the
customer to his property line shall be borne by the customer. (1982 Code § 14-
139)
   G.   Plumbing Requirements: Permission to connect with the city water system
shall not be given unless the plumbing in the house or building to be connected
meets the provisions of the building and plumbing codes of the city. (1982 Code
§ 14-140)
8-1-9: PIPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Good Repair: All users of water services shall keep their service pipes
and connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at
their own expense. No person, except under the direction of the public works
director, shall be allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of laying,
removing or repairing any service pipe. (1982 Code § 14-126; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Quality Of Service Pipe: All service and other pipe used in conjunction
with the water services of the city shall be of such material, quality and
specifications as the city council may from time to time provide, and shall be
installed at such distances belowground as may be specified by regulations
relating to the water department. All work, alterations or extensions affecting
water pipes shall be subject to the acceptance of the public works director.
(Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-1-10: WATER MAINS EXTENDED:
   A.   Petition To City Council: Any person, including any subdivider, who
desires to have the water mains extended within the city, and is willing to
advance the whole expense of such extension and receive the return of an agreed
portion thereof, as hereinafter provided, may make application to the city
council by petition. The petition shall contain a description of such proposed
extension accompanied by a map showing the location of the proposed extension
together with an offer to advance the whole expense thereof, which cost shall
be verified by the city engineer. The city council may grant or deny the
petition as in its discretion deems best for the welfare of existing water
users in the city. (1982 Code § 14-143; amd. 1998 Code)
   B.   Cost Determined: Upon the receipt of such petition and map and before
the petition is granted, the city council shall obtain from the city engineer a
certified statement showing the whole cost or expense of making such extension.
(1982 Code § 14-144; amd. 1998 Code)
   C.   Amount Deposited: If the city council grants the petition, the amount
of the cost of making the extension, as certified by the city engineer, shall
be deposited with the city clerk/recorder before any work shall be done on such
extension. The deposit shall be made within thirty (30) days, or such other
time as the city council shall indicate, after the granting thereof. (1982 Code
§ 14-145; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Return Of Deposit: At the time the city council decides whether or not
to grant petition for an extension, it shall also decide whether or not any
portion of the costs is to be refunded and the manner and circumstances under
which such refund shall be made or credited to the applicant, his successors or
representatives. Such determination shall be duly recorded in writing and a
copy thereof furnished to the applicant. (1982 Code § 14-146)
   E.   Forfeiture: In the event any deposit remains unclaimed for a period of
five (5) years after the depositor has discontinued water service, the deposit
may be forfeited and then transferred to the water fund. (1982 Code § 14-146;
amd. 1998 Code)
   F.   Ownership Of Extension: Any such extension shall be deemed the property
of the city. (1982 Code § 14-147)
8-1-11: SPRINKLING VEHICLES:
Vehicles for sprinkling shall be regulated and controlled by the water
department through the public works director. (1982 Code § 14-129; amd. 1998
Code)
8-1-12: ACCESS BY DEPARTMENT:
The public works director and his agents shall at all ordinary hours have free
access to any place supplied with water services from the city system for the
purpose of examining the apparatus and ascertaining the amount of water service
being used and the manner of its use. (1982 Code § 14-130; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-13: MOTORS AND CERTAIN MACHINERY RESTRICTED:
No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the city water system for the
purpose of driving motor, syphon, turbine or other wheels, or any hydraulic
engines or elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind
whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such purpose,
except by special permission of the city council. (1982 Code § 14-132)
8-1-14: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Water from fire hydrants for fighting fires or providing training to
firefighters under the direction of the fire chief will be furnished free of
charge by the city. Installation and repairs on such hydrants shall be at the
expense of the city and shall be made under the direction of the city. All
customers shall grant the city, upon demand, a right of way or easement to
install and maintain such hydrants on their premises if the city concludes that
hydrants shall be so installed for the protection of the residents of the city.
(1982 Code § 14-142; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-15: SCARCITY OF WATER 1 :
In time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in the judgment of the mayor
and the city council be necessary, the mayor shall by proclamation limit the
use of water to such extent as may be necessary. It shall be unlawful for any
person, his family, servants or agents to violate any proclamation made by the
mayor in pursuance of this chapter. (1982 Code § 14-134)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 6 of this title.
8-1-16: EXCESSIVE USE OF SPRINKLERS:
   A.   Effect On City Water System: It shall be unlawful for any person to use
such number of outlets simultaneously or to use such sprinkler or combinations
of sprinkler or outlets as will in the opinion of the city council materially
affect the pressure or supply of water in the city water system or any part
thereof, and the city council may from time to time, by resolution, specify
combinations or numbers of outlets which may have such effect.
   B.   Order To Discontinue: The city council shall, after determining that
such improper use exists, notify the affected water user or the owner of the
premises whereon such use occurs of such determination in writing, order such
use discontinued and advise that such continued usage constitutes a violation
of this chapter. (1982 Code § 14-133)
8-1-17: WASTE OF WATER:
   A.   Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any water user to:
      1.   Waste water.
      2.   Allow it to be wasted by stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes,
or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow.
      3.   Wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets or stops, or through
basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus.
      4.   Use the water for purposes other than for those which he has
applied, or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations for
controlling the water supply. (1982 Code § 14-128)
   B.   Termination Of Service; Meeting: The city may thereupon consider
terminating the right of the individual to use culinary water. If it elects to
consider the matter of termination, it shall give notice to the water user of
the intention to terminate his water connection at least five (5) days prior to
the meeting of the city council at which termination of water service is to be
considered. The notice shall inform him of the time and place of the meeting
and the charges which lead to the consideration of the termination.
   C.   Appearance By Water User: A water user whose right to utilize city
water is being reviewed shall have opportunity to appear with or without
counsel and present the reasons why his water service should not be
discontinued.
   D.   Determination: After due hearing, the city council may arrive at a
determination. If the determination is to discontinue the wasteful water user's
service connection, the city council shall notify him of the decision and of
the period during which the service will remain discontinued. (1982 Code § 14-
135; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-18: WATER METERS:
   A.   Number Of Meters; Dispute: Except as otherwise expressly permitted by
this chapter, all structures, dwelling units, establishments and persons using
water from the city water system must have such number of water meters
connected to their water system as are necessary in the judgment of the public
works director to adequately measure use and determine water charges to the
respective users. Whenever a dispute between the public works director and the
property owner arises as to the appropriate number of meters to be installed on
any premises, the matter shall be heard and determined by the city council
after due notice in writing to the parties involved. (1982 Code § 14-136; amd.
1998 Code)
   B.   Meters Furnished By City: Meters will be furnished by the city upon
application for a connection, and upon payment of such connection fees and
other costs as may be established by the city council from time to time by
resolution. Meters shall be deemed to be and remain the property of the city.
(1982 Code § 14-136)
   C.   Meter Readings: The public works director shall cause meter readings to
be taken regularly and shall advise the city clerk/recorder thereof for the
purpose of recording the necessary billings for water service. (1982 Code § 14-
136; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Tampering: Meters may be checked, inspected or adjusted at the
discretion of the city, and they shall not be adjusted or tampered with by the
customer. Meter boxes shall not be opened for the purpose of turning on or off
the water, except by an authorized representative of the city, unless special
permission is given by the city through its representatives to the customer to
do so. (1982 Code § 14-136)
   E.   Meter Testing: If a customer submits a written request to the public
works director to test his water meter, the city may, if under the
circumstances it deems it advisable and in its discretion, order a test of the
meter measuring the water delivered to such customer. If the meter is found in
such test to record from ninety seven percent (97%) to one hundred three
percent (103%) of accuracy under methods of testing satisfactory to the city
council, the meter shall be deemed to accurately measure the use of water. The
customer may be required to pay the cost of such test. (1982 Code §
   F.   Estimation In Case Of Failure: If the city's meters fail to register at
any time, the water delivered during the period of failure shall be estimated
on the basis of previous consumption during a period which is not questioned.
In the event a meter is found to be recording less than ninety seven percent
(97%) or more than one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy, the city shall
make such adjustments in the customer's previous bills as are just and fair
under the circumstances.
   G.   Damage By Customer: All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other
materials of the city on or near the customer's premises caused by any act or
neglect of the customer shall, in the discretion of the city, be repaired by
and at the expense of the customer, and the customer shall pay all costs and
expenses, including a reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or accrue to the
city through its efforts to repair the damage to the lines, meters or to other
equipment of the department or collect such costs from the customer. (1982 Code
§ 14-136)
8-1-19: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   Scope: The city may furnish water service from its water system to
persons outside the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1982 Code § 14-151)
   B.   Petition For Service: Any person located outside the city limits who
desires to be supplied with water services from the city water system and is
willing to pay in advance the whole expense of extending the water system to
his property, including the cost of extending any water main beyond its present
location, may make application to the city council by petition containing:
      1.   A description of the proposed extension.
      2.   A map showing the location thereof. (1982 Code § 14-152)
      3.   An offer to pay the whole expense incurred by the city in providing
such extension and to advance such expense as shall be verified to by the city
engineer. The city council and the person seeking such extension may enter into
an agreement providing in detail the terms under which the extension may be
utilized by others in the future and the terms under which all or any portion
of the cost of installing such extension may be refunded. (1982 Code § 14-152;
amd. 1998 Code)
      4.   An acknowledgement that the city in granting the petition need
supply only such water to the petitioner which from time to time the city
council deems beyond the requirements of water users within the city limits,
and that such extension shall be the property of and subject to the control of
the city. (1982 Code § 14-152)
   C.   Costs Determined: Upon receipt of such petition and map and before the
petition is granted, the city council shall determine what portion, if any, of
the extension of the city water mains to the city limits the city shall
construct, and shall obtain from the public works director a verified statement
showing the whole cost and expense of making such extension. Such costs and
expenses shall include administrative and supervisory expenditures of the water
department, which shall in no event be deemed to be less than ten percent (10%)
of the cost of materials and labor. (1982 Code § 14-154; amd. 1998 Code)
   D.   Extensions May Be Master Metered: When an extension supplying more than
one house or user outside the city limits is connected to city water mains, the
public works director may require a master meter to be installed near the point
where the connection is to be made to the city main. This installation will be
at the expense of the persons served by such extension according to the regular
rates for meter installation. Responsible parties must agree to pay all bills
for water served through the meter at the applicable water rates. (1982 Code §
14-153; amd. 1998 Code)
8-1-20: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The city shall not be held liable for any damage to a water service user by
reason of stoppage or interruption of his or her water supply service caused by
fires, scarcity of water, accidents to the water system or its mains, or which
occurs as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any other
unavoidable cause. This section shall not be construed to extend the liability
of the city beyond that provided in the governmental immunity act 1 . (1982
Code § 14-131)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 63-30-1.
8-1-21: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 2
IRRIGATION WATER
SECTION:
8-2-1: Irrigation Water Department
8-2-2: Definitions
8-2-3: Water Meters
8-2-4: Seasonal Service
8-2-5: Applications For Connection, Service
8-2-6: Fees, Rates And Charges
8-2-7: Statement Of Charges; Delinquency
8-2-8: Connection Standards
8-2-9: Installation Of Water Lines
8-2-10: Extension Of Mains
8-2-11: Rules, Regulations And Pipe Requirements
8-2-12: Prohibited Acts And Activities; Notification Of Violations; Appeals
8-2-13: Liability For Damaged Equipment
8-2-14: Nonliability For Damages
8-2-15: Penalty
8-2-1: IRRIGATION WATER DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Created: The LaVerkin City irrigation water department is hereby
created.
   B.   Operation And Maintenance: Operation and maintenance of the irrigation
system shall be performed by the irrigation water department. The city will
annually budget for the operations of the irrigation water department. The same
personnel and systems now used for the operation of the culinary water system
shall be utilized for this purpose. (Ord. 2007-14, 3-21-2007)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COLLECTOR STREETS: The existing collector streets as of January 1, 2007, are
300 West, State Street (SR-9 and SR-17), Main Street, 100 East, 300 South, 170
South, 100 South, Center, 200 North, 300 North, and 500 North. Other collector
streets may be added as outlined by resolution of the city council.
CONTRACT HOLDER: Any user of the irrigation system that maintains ownership of
a contract for service to provide said water.
IRRIGATION DISTRICT: The boundaries of the service area for the irrigation
system, which correspond with the municipal boundaries of the city as they
existed on January 1, 2007. The boundaries of the irrigation district may be
amended by resolution of the city council.
IRRIGATION WATER: Water furnished by the irrigation system, except where the
context indicates to the contrary.
LAVERKIN CITY WATER BOARD; BOARD: The body charged with making recommendations
to the city council regarding the maintenance, extensions, repairs and other
operations of the culinary and irrigation water systems within the city. The
composition, duties, meetings, and other details of the board are set forth in
chapter 5 of this title.
LEASE USER: Any user of the irrigation system that does not maintain ownership
of a contract for service.
LOT: A parcel of real property owned by one person or a group of persons. If
contiguous parcels of real property have common ownership, they shall be
considered as one lot.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
READILY CONNECTABLE: The city utility service delivery system is reasonably
accessible to the property in question, and connection thereto is reasonable
and feasible to the property owner and the city from an engineering, legal, and
cost perspective. For example, service lines front on or run through the
subject property, and access and connection thereto can be achieved without
substantial costs, the use of pumps and/or lift stations, large or premature
cuts in road asphalt, etc. (Ord. 2008-15, 9-17-2008)
8-2-3: WATER METERS:
Water meters shall not be installed at each irrigation connection; provided,
however, that the city council may determine, after review and recommendation
by the board, that it is necessary to monitor water use through any irrigation
water connection or combination of irrigation water connections, and may
require installation of water meters and establish rates based upon water
usage. (Ord. 2007-14, 3-21-2007)
8-2-4: SEASONAL SERVICE:
The irrigation water system is deemed a seasonal service and may be closed and
drained during such periods of the year as the city may determine in order to
prevent damage to the system from freezing or other hazards. (Ord. 2007-14, 3-
21-2007)
8-2-5: APPLICATIONS FOR CONNECTION, SERVICE:
   A.   Connection: Any person, other than a subdivider or developer seeking
multiple connections, who desires or is required to secure a new connection to
the irrigation water system, shall file with the city for each connection a
written and signed application in the form as shown on file in the city office.
   B.   Connection By Subdivider: Whenever a subdivider or developer desires or
is required to install irrigation connections and extensions for subdivision or
development, the subdivider or developer shall enter into a written extension
agreement with the city, which shall constitute an application for permission
to make the extensions and connections and shall include the terms and
conditions under which the water extensions and connections shall be made and
the payments that shall be required.
   C.   Nonowner Applicants; Agreement Of Owner: Applicants for irrigation
water connections made by persons other than the owner of the property to which
the connection is to be made shall be accompanied by an agreement signed by the
owner of the premises to pay for such water connection and annual use. (Ord.
2007-14, 3-21-2007)
8-2-6: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Service Rates And Connection Fees:
      1.   For purposes of this title, "delinquency related fees" shall
include, but not be limited to, any and all utility service late fees, notice
processing fees, reconnection fees, and/or collection fees and costs assessed
against a user of utility services for late payment and nonpayment of utility
charges.
      2.   Irrigation water rates, availability and standby fees, delinquency
related fees, connection fees, reservoir fees, inspection fees, and other
charges incidental to connection to and service from the city's irrigation
water system shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the city
council. The city council may, from time to time, promulgate rules for levying,
billing, guaranteeing and collecting charges for irrigation water service, and
may establish other rules necessary for the management and control of the
irrigation water system.
      3.   Rates for services furnished shall be uniform with respect to each
class or classes of service established or that may hereafter be established,
except that contract holders shall be entitled to the class 1 rate structure
provided for in the city's agreement to acquire the irrigation system from the
former LaVerkin Bench Canal Company. All utility customers of the city that
have irrigation water available to their property, and who are not contract
holders, shall be subject to lease user irrigation fees regardless of their
connection or use of the system.
   B.   Complaints; Corrections:
      1.   City Manager: Any person or business having a complaint regarding
the assessment and/or collection of an irrigation water charge, or any
deficiency related fee associated therewith, may submit a written request for
relief to the city manager, who shall review the request within ten (10)
business days and grant such relief as he deems necessary and proper, and in
accordance with applicable state and local law.
      2.   City Council:
         a.   Any person or business aggrieved by a decision of the city
manager under subsection B1 of this section may make application to appear
before the city council to request relief.
         b.   The city council is hereby constituted a board of equalization of
irrigation water rates to hear appeals from the decisions of the city manager
and to correct any assessments deemed by the city council to be illegal,
unequal or unjust.
         c.   In addition to any other relief provided by state law or local
ordinance, the city council may, if and to the extent that it deems necessary
and proper under the circumstances, rebate all or any part of the irrigation
water bill of any indigent person.
   C.   Disposition Of Funds: All fees and charges collected under the
provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in the city irrigation system
fund and used to meet the operation and maintenance cost of the irrigation
system, debt service on obligations appertaining to the acquisition and
construction of such system, and the payment of actual construction cost
associated with the completion of the system.
   D.   Irrigation Water Availability And Standby Fees:
      1.   Water Availability Fee:
         a.   An irrigation water availability fee shall be assessed on all
residentially and agriculturally zoned property for which city approval of
plans (to develop a lot, plat or unit within any new development) is obtained,
where such property is readily connectable to the city's irrigation system.
         b.   The irrigation water availability fee shall be imposed for and
during the period between the time of such approval and the time a building
permit is issued or a connection is made to the city's irrigation water system,
whichever occurs first.
      2.   Standby Fee: An irrigation water standby fee shall be assessed on
all other residentially and agriculturally zoned property which has been
developed or for which a building permit has been issued, which is readily
connectable to the city's irrigation delivery system but is not currently
connected thereto and receiving irrigation water service (including, but not
limited to, properties which have no physical connection to the city's
irrigation system and properties for which physical connection has been made
but service has been or is voluntarily or involuntarily terminated).
      3.   Amount And Frequency Of Fee Assessment: The amounts of the
irrigation water availability and standby fees shall be established by
resolution, from time to time, and shall only be assessable and billed for
those months that users of the city's irrigation system are billed for their
use of said system.
      4.   Delinquency And Collection Fees: The fee shall be subject to the
delinquency and collection related fees (including a late fee) described in
section
8-1-4 of this title and set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2008-15,
9-17-2008)
8-2-7: STATEMENT OF CHARGES; DELINQUENCY:
   A.   Statement: The city shall furnish to each user, or mail to, or leave at
his or her residence or usual place of business, a written or printed statement
setting forth the amount of irrigation water service charges assessed against
each user based upon the contract share size. The statement shall specify the
amount of the bill for the water service and the place of payment and date due.
   B.   Failure To Pay; Contract Holders: An irrigation bill is delinquent if
not paid within thirty (30) days of the billing statement date. Monthly
statements of notification shall be furnished, which shall include delinquent
balance amounts as well as monthly delinquency fees as set forth by resolution.
In the event contract holder defaults in any payment due under this water
delivery contract, and contract holder's default remains uncured for a period
of one hundred eighty (180) days after contract holder's receipt of written
notice of its default, the city at its sole discretion shall be entitled to
withhold delivery of water and terminate this water delivery contract and/or
pursue all other remedies available to the city. In collecting the charges
owed, no action taken by the city under this subsection shall relieve contract
holder of its obligation to pay any sum owed to the city.
   C.   Failure To Pay; Lease Holders: An irrigation account is considered a
utility account and subject to the provisions of section
8-1-4 of this title. It shall be deemed delinquent if not paid by twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight of the twenty fifth day of the month in which the
account is billed, and shall be subject to immediate termination of service if
it has not been paid in full by the shutoff date, as defined in subsection 8-1-
4B3 of this title.
   D.   Discontinuance Of Service:
      1.   Contract Holders: If irrigation water service is thereafter
discontinued for failure of the user to make payment, then, before the
irrigation water service to the premises shall again be provided, all
delinquent irrigation water charges must have been paid to the city in full or
arrangements made for their payment in a manner satisfactory to the city
council.
      2.   Leaseholders: Subsection 8-1-4B5 of this title shall govern the
reconnection of delinquent leaseholders to the city's irrigation system. (Ord.
2007-33, 12-19-2007)
8-2-8: CONNECTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Single Lot Service: No more than one lot shall be served by a single
water connection to the irrigation system. It shall be unlawful for two (2) or
more individual lots to be supplied from the same irrigation system connection.
In the event of a violation of this subsection, the supply of water through the
irrigation system connection may be withheld until compliance has been made,
unless otherwise outlined by contract. (Ord. 2007-14, 3-21-2007)
   B.   Single Lots With Multiple Uses: No more than one water connection shall
be allowed on a single lot; provided, however, multiple connections may be
allowed where a single lot contains more than one 1-family residence, such as
where two (2) separate houses are placed on a single lot. In such case, upon
application, a separate connection shall be allowed for each of the two (2)
residences and their appurtenant yards and each shall be treated thereafter as
a separate lot for purposes of this agreement. (Ord. 2009-06, 4-15-2009)
   C.   Location Of Connection: Each connection to the irrigation system shall
be made at such location on the property line of each lot as the city shall
determine. As a general rule, the location of connection shall be at a point
closest to the nearest irrigation water main. It is the city's desire to run
irrigation in streets with front connections.
   D.   Subdivisions And Planned Community Developments: All developers of
subdivisions or planned community developments will be required to install an
independent irrigation water system within the boundaries of said subdivision
or planned community development. Unless otherwise excepted or additionally
required by the city for good cause shown after submission of engineering and/
or other data demonstrating the benefits for such exception(s), the irrigation
system will include:
      1.   A valve at the end of the main line for flushing the line, or two
(2) separate connecting points to the irrigation main line to circulate the
irrigation system.
      2.   A one-inch (1") setter (70 series copper setter, VB74-10W-44-NL
style) and a one-inch (1") meter idler (IDLER-10/34-NL), or equivalent thereof
acceptable to the city, shall be installed to each lot.
      3.   All irrigation lines will be installed into the LaVerkin City's
street right of way with irrigation connection to be supplied at the front of
the property abutting the city street.
      4.   All irrigation lines installed shall be C-900 DR-18 purple pipe with
tracer wire.
      5.   Each irrigation tap will terminate in a clearly marked irrigation
connection box at the property line. A one-inch (1") setter (70 series copper
setter, VB74-10W-44-NL style) and a one-inch (1") meter idler (IDLER-10/34-NL),
or equivalent thereof acceptable to the city, shall be installed within this
connection box, between the city irrigation system and the private property
owner's system.
      6.   The main irrigation line will be sized adequately to provide water
flow to each lot within the development. To ensure adequate water flow, the
size of the irrigation water line must be engineered by the developer and
approved by the city engineer. The minimum size of an irrigation water main in
any noncollector street is six inches (6"). The minimum size of an irrigation
water main to any collector street is eight inches (8").
      7.   The developer or lot owner will provide easements for all areas
designated for irrigation service lines so the city will have access for repair
and maintenance. All connections to the system must be inspected by the public
works department.
      8.   In some cases where secondary water is not available from the city,
the developer shall be required to obtain secondary water rights prior to the
final approval of the subdivision or planned community development.
      9.   If necessary, developers shall extend irrigation mainlines from
outside the boundaries of their subdivision or development to supply irrigation
water sufficient to support the water requirements of their system.
      10.   Minimum water pressure for newly developed lots shall be thirty
five (35) pounds per square inch (psi). (Ord. 2007-14, 3-21-2007; Ord. 2019-08,
8-21-2019)
8-2-9: INSTALLATION OF WATER LINES:
   A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, repair,
alter or connect any irrigation water line to the irrigation water system
without first having received a permit from the city.
   B.   Application For Permit; Requirements:
      1.   Application Made By Licensed Plumber: Applications for permits to
make irrigation water connections or other alteration or for laying or
repairing lines connected directly or indirectly to the irrigation water
system, must be made in writing by a licensed plumber or his authorized agent
who shall describe the nature of the work to be done for which the application
is made.
      2.   Conditions For Granting Application: The application shall be
granted if the public works director determines that:
         a.   The connection repair, alteration or installation will cause no
damage to the street in which the irrigation water main is laid, or that it
will not be prejudicial to the interests of persons whose property has been or
may thereafter be connected to the irrigation water main;
         b.   The connection conforms to the ordinances, regulations,
specifications and standards of materials required by the city.
      3.   Connections, Alterations Or Installations: All connections,
alterations or installations shall be to the line grade designated by the
public works director.
      4.   Performance Bond Or Equivalent: Every application shall be
accompanied by a performance bond or other sufficient security adequate to
cover the cost for the work contemplated by the connection or repair to the
irrigation system, including the anticipated costs for restoration of city
roads and other infrastructure.
         a.   Type Of Bond Or Guarantee: The bond or guarantee shall be in the
form of cash deposited with the city and held in an interest bearing account,
or a letter of credit from an approved institution or such other cash security
bond as the subdivider may obtain that is approved by the city.
         b.   Amount Of Bond: The bond shall be equal to the cost of the
improvements, plus twenty five percent (25%). The subdivider shall furnish an
estimate of the cost of constructing the required improvements. Said estimate
shall be prepared by an engineer registered to practice in the state. However,
no estimate may be used as the basis for the amount of the bond until it has
been approved by the city engineer.
         c.   Duration: The duration of the bond shall be for one year from the
date of approval of project or such lesser time as is required to complete the
said improvements.
         d.   Final Inspection And Partial Release Of Bond Or Default: The
applicant shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and workmanship
of all improvements. At the completion of the work, or no later than one year
from the date of approval of the application, the city engineer and public
works director shall make a preliminary inspection of the improvements and
shall submit a report to the city manager, setting forth the conditions of such
facilities. If the improvements are completed, all liens are paid, and
conditions thereof are found to be satisfactory, the city manager shall release
all but twenty five percent (25%) of the deposit or bond or security. If the
improvements are not yet completed, or are completed but conditions or
materials or workmanship show unusual depreciation or do not comply with the
standards of the city in effect at the time of final plat approval, or if any
outstanding liens are not paid, the procedures in subsection B4f of this
section shall be followed.
         e.   Final City Acceptance: The applicant shall be responsible for the
irrigation system improvements for a period of one year after said improvements
are completed. In accordance therewith, the twenty five percent (25%) cash
bond, or equivalent as approved, which is retained after completion of the
improvements, shall be preserved in escrow by the city for a period of one year
to assure that if latent defects or other problems with the improvements are
found, whereby the improvements fail to meet city standards, such defects and/
or problems are repaired and made to comply with city standards. Ninety (90)
days prior to the one year anniversary of the date the twenty five percent
(25%) deposit or bond or security is created, the city engineer and public
works director shall again inspect the improvements and shall make a checklist
of any needed repairs and a report of the condition of the facilities, which
shall then be submitted to the city manager. If the improvements are
satisfactory at the time of this inspection, the city manager shall direct that
the twenty five percent (25%) deposit, bond, or security retained in escrow
shall be released to the applicant. If defects or problems are found at this
inspection, the procedures in subsection B4f of this section shall be followed.
Once the needed repairs and improvements have been made and are acceptable to
the city, and after the city has received all required drawings of record
showing any changes to the improvements, the city shall release any remaining
deposit or bond or security amount and shall make final acceptance of and
assume responsibility for the irrigation improvements.
         f.   Default Procedures: If an inspection reveals that the
improvements are deficient, the city shall notify the applicant that he is in
default, and set a reasonable time period, not to exceed ninety (90) days, to
correct the problem. At the end of the specified time, the improvements shall
be reinspected, and if the improvements still fail to meet the required
standards and the applicant has not submitted to the city and obtained approval
of a plan with a deadline to correct the problem, the city council shall notify
the applicant of the date a public hearing shall be held on the issue, at which
the applicant shall be entitled to demonstrate why all or part of his bond
should not be forfeited to be used to remedy the problem. The city council
shall decide the matter and issue written findings on the same no later than
thirty (30) days after the public hearing. If the city council's decision after
the hearing is that the subdivider is still in default and no agreement with a
deadline between the city and the applicant has been made to fix the problem,
the city council may declare his cash deposit or bond or equivalent forfeited,
and the city may use the same to repair or install the required improvements.
In such case, if the bond is found to be insufficient to cover the reasonable
cost of completing or repairing the improvements, the city may enforce the
terms of the irrigation improvement cost overrun agreement described in
subsection B4h of this section. Once the needed repairs and improvements have
been made and are acceptable to the city, and after the city has received all
required drawings of record, the city shall release any remaining bond or
equivalent, less twenty five percent (25%) in the case of a bond for original
improvements, which twenty five percent (25%) bond shall be held pursuant to
subsection B4e of this section.
         g.   Agreement Deadline: In the event the applicant and the city enter
into an agreement with a deadline for the applicant to remedy a problem with
the irrigation improvements, if upon inspection by the city it is found that
the applicant has substantially failed to live up to the terms of said
agreement and/or failed to meet the agreed deadline, the city council may
declare his bond to be forfeited and use the proceeds thereof to correct any
problem that may exist with said improvements, and may also pursue enforcement
of his subdivision improvement cost overrun agreement if required. No extension
of the agreed deadline beyond thirty (30) days shall be allowed.
         h.   Irrigation Improvement Cost Overrun Agreement: Prior to or at the
time of the obtaining of any bond under this section, the applicant shall also
sign a subdivision improvement cost overrun agreement, on a form approved by
the city. This agreement shall provide that if the city council declares a bond
forfeited under this section, and the bond is found to be insufficient to cover
the cost of installing or repairing the improvements, the city may bring legal
action pursuant to said agreement against the subdivider or his properly
acknowledged successor, for the difference between the amount of the bond and
the cost of installing or repairing the improvements. Said agreement shall
provide that the applicant shall be responsible for all legal fees and costs of
such an action.
   C.   Fee: Fees for permits or for inspection services shall be of such
amounts as the city council shall from time to time determine by resolution.
(Ord. 2007-14, 3-21-2007)
8-2-10: EXTENSION OF MAINS:
   A.   Application: Any person who desires to have the irrigation water
extended within the city, and is willing to advance the whole expense of such
extension and receive the return of the agreed portion, thereof, as hereinafter
provided, may make application to the board by petition. The petition shall
contain a description of such proposed extension, together with an offer to
advance the whole expense thereof, which cost shall be verified by the city
engineer. The board shall then make a recommendation regarding the extension
and the city council may grant or deny the petition as in its discretion deems
best for the welfare of existing irrigation users of the city.
   B.   Cost Of Extension Determined: Upon the receipt of such petition and map
and before the petition is granted, the board shall obtain from the city
engineer a certified statement showing the whole cost of making such extension.
   C.   Performance Bond Or Equivalent: If the city council grants the
petition, a performance bond or equivalent amount of the cost of making the
extension, as certified by the city engineer, shall be deposited with the city
treasurer before any work is done on such extension. The deposit shall be made
within thirty (30) days, or such time as the city council shall indicate, after
the granting thereof. All bond provisions, as set forth in subsection 8-2-9B4
of this chapter shall apply.
   D.   Ownership Of Extension: Any extension shall be deemed the property of
the city. (Ord. 2007-14, 3-21-2007)
8-2-11: RULES, REGULATIONS AND PIPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Access By Department: The city shall at all ordinary hours have free
access to any place supplied with water service from the irrigation system for
the purpose of examining the apparatus and ascertaining the amount of water
service being used and the manner of its use.
   B.   Facilities In Good Repair: All users of water service shall keep their
service pipes, connections, risers and other apparatus in good repair and
protected from frost at their own expense. No person, except under the
direction of the city, shall be allowed to dig into the street for the purpose
of laying, removing or repairing any service pipe.
   C.   Connection Line Size: All water connections shall be by three-fourths
inch (3/4") lines for lots of one-fourth (1/4) acre or less in size. Lots
greater than one-fourth (1/4) acre up to one acre may have a connection of one
inch (1") in size. Lots greater than one acre in size may have a larger
connection as approved by the city engineer. Irrigation water connection and
impact fees shall be allocated based on the size of the connection line as
identified in the capital facilities plan and established by resolution of the
city council.
   D.   Quality Of Service Pipe: All service and other pipe used in conjunction
with the irrigation water services of the city shall be of such material,
quality and specifications as the city council may from time to time by
resolution provide, and shall be installed at such distances belowground as may
be specified by regulations relating to the water department. All work,
alterations or extensions affecting irrigation water pipes shall be subject to
the acceptance of the public works director, and no connections with any
irrigation water mains shall be made without first obtaining a permit from the
city.
   E.   Scarcity Of Water: In time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in
the judgment of the public works director be necessary, the public works
director shall by notice limit the use of irrigation water to the extent as may
be necessary. The public works director shall have this authority without
concurrence of the board or city council in the event of an emergency. In this
event, the notice shall be reviewed at the next available regular meeting of
the board and city council. It shall be unlawful for any person, his family,
servants or agents to violate any notice to limit the use of irrigation water
made by the chairman in pursuance of this section.
   F.   Relocation Of Water Connections: As the city moves irrigation lines to
the streets; irrigation users shall relocate their irrigation connections to
the front of their property. This relocation shall be completed at the
irrigation user's expense within a twelve (12) month period after notification
of the availability from the city street.
   G.   Schedule Of Use: The public works director may prohibit the use of the
irrigation water system during any period of time, by individual users or by
all users, if he determines that watering is resulting in a waste of water, or
that use needs to be scheduled in order to meet the demands of the system.
   H.   Excessive Use Of Sprinklers: It shall be unlawful for any person to use
such numbers of outlets simultaneously or to use such sprinkler or combinations
of sprinklers or outlets as will in the opinion of the board materially affect
the pressure or supply of water in the irrigation water system or any part
thereof, and the city council may from time to time, by resolution, specify
combinations of numbers of outlets which may have such effect, after
recommendation by the board. (Ord. 2007-14, 3-21-2007)
8-2-12: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES; NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATIONS; APPEALS:
   A.   Turning On After Being Turned Off: It shall be unlawful for any person,
after the irrigation water has been turned off from the premises for nonpayment
of irrigation water charges or other violations of the ordinances, rules,
regulations or resolutions pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or to
allow the water to be turned on or used without authority from the public works
director.
   B.   Use Without Payment: It shall be unlawful for any person by himself,
family, servants or agents to utilize the irrigation system without paying
therefor, as herein provided, or without authority, to open any pipe, line,
connection, stopcock, valve or other fixtures attached to the irrigation system
unless it is done pursuant to proper application, agreement or resolution. It
shall be unlawful to injure, deface or impair any part or appurtenance of the
irrigation system or to cast anything into any reservoir or facilities
appurtenant or contributing to the irrigation system.
   C.   Separate Connections: It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more
dwellings or service users to be supplied from the same service pipe or
connection unless special permission for such combination usage has been
granted by the city and the premises served are owned by the same person. In
all such cases, a failure on the part of any one of the users to comply with
this subsection shall warrant a withholding of a supply of water through the
service connections until compliance or payment has been made, and in any
event, the property owner shall be primarily liable to the city for all
irrigation water services utilized on all such premises. Nothing herein shall
be deemed to preclude the power of the city to require separate pipes,
connections or meters at a subsequent time.
   D.   Adjoining Premises: No consumer shall be permitted to conduct
irrigation water pipes across lots or buildings to adjoining premises without
permission from the city.
   E.   Open Discharge:
      1.   General Rule: Except as provided in subsection E.2 below, there
shall be no open discharge of water from the irrigation system.
         a.   No flood irrigation shall be permitted from the irrigation
system.
         b.   All water shall be discharged using a sprinkler, bubbler, drip
system or other similar restrictive device.
      2.   Special Exception for Certain Serviced Properties: Property or
properties owned or managed by one or more federal, state, or local governments
or governmental entities or agencies, situated at the foot of the hillside and/
or within the valley and/or flood plain located along and/or within the
vicinity of the Virgin River, LaVerkin Creek, and Ash Creek (from the Pah Tempe
property on the southeast to Riverwood Estates on the north, and to the extent
such property or properties lie(s) within the delivery area of the City's
irrigation system and is/are entitled to the delivery of water from said
system), may-for a period not to exceed five (5) years-be flood irrigated,
using water from the city's irrigation system; provided that:
         a.   An adequate pressure sustaining valve (preserving the upstream
water pressure) and a magmeter of adequate size (to provide water usage
information), acceptable to the city, is:
            (1)   Acquired, paid for, maintained, and replaced as needed (for
the period of use) at the expense of the owner of said serviced property or
properties; and
            (2)   Installed, meeting City requirements and standards:
               i.   At or near the property's connection to the City's
irrigation system (as directed by the City); and
               ii.   At or before the time the property is (or properties are)
connected to the City's irrigation system.
         b.   At or before the end of said five-year period of time:
            (1)   Flood irrigation on the property or properties shall cease,
and irrigation water shall be discharged onto the property or properties as
provided in subsection E.1.b above, or
            (2)   The property shall be disconnected from the City's irrigation
system, and the property or properties may continue to be flood irrigated,
using irrigation water not owned by the City or connected with the City's
irrigation system (e.g., Ash Creek Special Service District water re-use water,
Washington County Water Conservancy District water, LaVerkin Creek water
rights, etc.).
         c.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections E.2.a above, title
to the pressure sustaining valve shall pass to the City at the time of
installation and inspection, and shall remain the City's property after any
disconnection of the property or properties from the City's irrigation system.
   F.   Unauthorized Users: It shall be unlawful for any water service user to
permit any person from other premises or any unauthorized person to use or
obtain water service from his premises or water facilities, either outside or
inside his premises.
   G.   Cross Connection Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to make any
connection to the irrigation water system that could cause the mingling of
irrigation water with culinary water of the city as outlined in section
8-3-1 of this title.
   H.   Closing Of Main Line Valves: It shall be unlawful to close any main
line valve without the permission of the public works director, unless the
closing of such valve protects the public health and safety of the citizens of
LaVerkin City.
   I.   Waste:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any water user to waste water. Wasting
water includes, but is not limited to, the following:
         a.   Allowing water to be wasted by leaky stops, taps, valves, joints
or pipe;
         b.   Wastefully running water from faucets, sprinklers or stops or
through basins, sinks or other apparatus;
         c.   Using the water for nonagricultural or nonlandscaping purposes;
or
         d.   Allowing irrigation water to enter into the street due to
overwatering.
      2.   If, in the judgment of the city, a user of irrigation water engages
in practices which result in the needless waste of water, the city shall mail
to the user written notice to discontinue the waste. If the waste is not
terminated within ten (10) days of mailing, the city may terminate the water
service, unless otherwise outlined by contract.
   J.   Water Not Supplied To Motors, Other Machinery: No water shall be
supplied from the pipes of the irrigation system for the purpose of driving
motors, pumping devices, siphons, turbines or any other type of wheels, or any
hydraulic engine or elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any
kind whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such
purpose except by special permission of the city council.
   K.   Discharge Onto Adjacent Properties: It shall be unlawful to irrigate to
the extent that water discharges onto adjacent properties. Any damages
resulting from the unauthorized discharged water shall be the responsibility of
the irrigation user.
   L.   Notification Of Violation; Appeal: The public works director shall,
after determining that a violation or other improper use exists, notify the
affected irrigation water user or the owner of the premises whereon such use
occurs of such determination in writing, order such use discontinued and advise
that such continued usage constitutes a violation of this section. An appeal of
any irrigation decision of the public works director shall be taken to the city
council. All appeals must be submitted to the city council within thirty (30)
days of said decision. After thirty (30) days, all appeal rights shall be
waived. (Ord. 2007-14, 3-21-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-03, 8-19-2020)
8-2-13: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGED EQUIPMENT:
All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other materials of the city on or
near the water user's premises caused by any act or neglect of the water user
or property owner shall in the city's discretion be repaired by and at the
expense of the water user or owner (or both the water user and property owner
if it is deemed appropriate), and they shall pay all costs and expenses,
including a reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or accrue to the city
through its efforts to repair the damage to the lines, meters or to other
equipment of the department or through efforts to collect such costs from the
water user or the property owner or both. (Ord. 2007-14, 3-21-2007)
8-2-14: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The city shall not be liable for any damage to an irrigation water service user
by reason of stoppage, interruption or water pressure fluctuations of his or
her irrigation water service caused by fires, scarcity of water, accidents to
the irrigation system or its mains, caused by entry on the user's property, or
which occurs as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any
other unavoidable cause. This section shall not be construed to extend the
liability of the city beyond that provided in the Utah governmental immunity
act. (Ord. 2007-14, 3-21-2007)
8-2-15: PENALTY:
Without altering or diminishing the effect of any other sanction, penalty or
consequence provided in this chapter, the violation of or failure to observe or
comply with any provision of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day of continued violation shall be a separately
punishable offense with a civil penalty in the amount of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for each and every day such violation continues beyond the
date fixed for compliance. This section shall be in addition to any other
penalty, sanction, consequence or remedy for enforcement of this chapter,
unless otherwise outlined by contract. (Ord. 2007-14, 3-21-2007)
CHAPTER 3
BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: General Purposes
8-3-2: Definitions
8-3-3: Responsibilities
8-3-4: Requirements
8-3-5: Discontinuance Of Service
8-3-6: Penalty
8-3-1: GENERAL PURPOSES:
The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
   A.   Protection Of Water Supply: To protect the Public drinking water supply
of LaVerkin City from the possibility of contamination or pollution by
requiring compliance with the Utah Public Drinking Water Rules (UPDWR) and the
Plumbing Code, as adopted by the State of Utah, require a cross connection
control protection of all public drinking water systems in the State of Utah.
Compliance with these minimum safety codes will be considered reasonable
diligence for the prevention of contaminants or pollutants which could backflow
into the public drinking water system; and,
   B.   Elimination Or Control Of Cross Connections: To promote the reasonable
elimination or control of cross connections in the plumbing fixtures and
industrial piping system(s) of the consumer, as required by the state
regulations and plumbing code to assure water system safety; and,
   C.   Administration Of Backflow Prevention: To provide for the
administration of a continuing program of backflow prevention which will
systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all
drinking water systems. (Ord. 91-01, 2-6-1991; amd. Ord. 2020-06, 12-16-2020)
8-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings specified,
unless a different meaning is clearly evident from the context:
                                      The individual, official, board,
                                      department, or agency established and
                                      authorized by a state, county, city, or
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:             other political subdivision created by
                                      law to administer and enforce the
                                      provisions of the cross connection
                                      control program and/or the plumbing code.
                                      Accepted by the Utah department of
                                      health, bureau of drinking water/
APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY:           sanitation, as meeting an applicable
                                      specification or as suitable for the
                                      proposed use.
                                      Any water supply on or available to the
                                      premises other than the purveyor's public
                                      water supply will be considered as an
                                      auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary
                                      waters may include water from another
                                      purveyor's public potable water supply or
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY:               any natural source such as a well,
                                      spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or
                                      "used waters" or "industrial fluids".
                                      These waters may be contaminated or
                                      polluted or they may be objectionable and
                                      constitute an unacceptable water source
                                      over which the public works director does
                                      not have authority for sanitary control.
                                      The phenomenon that occurs when the
                                      customer's pressure is higher than the
                                      supply pressure. This could be caused by
                                      an unprotected cross connection between a
BACKPRESSURE:                         drinking water supply and a pressurized
                                      irrigation connection, a boiler, a
                                      pressurized industrial process, elevation
                                      differences, air or steam pressure, use
                                      of booster pumps or any other source of
                                      pressure.
                                      The flow of water or other liquids,
                                      mixtures or substances into the
                                      distribution pipes of a potable water
BACK SIPHONAGE:                       supply system from any source other than
                                      the intended source, caused by the
                                      reduction of pressure in the potable
                                      water supply system.
                                      The undesirable reversal of flow of water
                                      or mixtures of water and other liquids,
BACKFLOW:                             gases, or other substances into the
                                      distribution pipes of the potable water
                                      supply from any source.
                                      An individual that has successfully
                                      completed a Division of Drinking Water
                                      approved backflow certification course
CERTIFIED BACKFLOW TECHNICIAN:        with a written and practical examination,
                                      and has maintained this certification in
                                      accordance with R309-305, Certification
                                      Rules for Backflow Technicians.
                                      The owner or operator of a privately or
CONSUMER/                             publicly owned plumbing system(s) having
CUSTOMER:                             a service connection from the public
                                      drinking water system.
                                      The practice of installing approved
                                      backflow prevention assemblies/devices at
CONTAINMENT (METER OR POINT OF        the service connection of consumers in
CONNECTION PROTECTION):               order to protect the public drinking
                                      water system from any backflow from the
                                      consumers plumbing system.
                                      Any substance introduced into the public
                                      drinking water system which creates a
CONTAMINATE:                          threat to the public health such as
                                      poisoning, pathogenic organisms or any
                                      other public health concern.
                                      Any physical connection or arrangement of
                                      piping or fixtures which may allow
                                      nonportable water or industrial fluids or
                                      other material of questionable quality to
                                      come in contact with potable water inside
CROSS CONNECTION:                     a distribution system. This would include
                                      any temporary connections, such as swing
                                      connections, removable sections, four-way
                                      plug valves, spools, dummy sections of
                                      pipe, swivel or changeover devices or
                                      sliding multipart tubes or other plumbing
                                      arrangements.
                                      The installation of an approved backflow
                                      assembly at the water service connection
                                      to any customer's premises where it is
                                      physically and economically infeasible to
                                      find and permanently eliminate or control
                                      all actual or potential cross connections
                                      within the customer's water system; or,
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTAINMENT:        it shall mean the installation of an
                                      approved backflow prevention assembly on
                                      the service line leading to and supplying
                                      a portion of a customer's water system
                                      where there are actual or potential cross
                                      connections which cannot be effectively
                                      eliminated or controlled at the point of
                                      the cross connection (isolation).
                                      A connection between a potable water
                                      system and a nonportable water system
                                      with an approved backflow prevention
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTROLLED:         assembly properly installed and
                                      maintained so that it will continuously
                                      afford the protection commensurate with
                                      the degree of hazard.
                                      Either a pollutant (non-health) or
                                      contaminate (health) hazard that may be
                                      introduced into the public drinking water
                                      system through a cross connection.
DEGREE OF HAZARD:                     Through an evaluation of the consumers
                                      plumbing system, the threat to 6 public
                                      health (the degree of hazard) will be
                                      determined. In the past these terms have
                                      been referred to as high hazard for
                                      health and low hazard for non-health.
                                      The practice of installing approved
                                      backflow prevention assemblies/devices at
ISOLATION (PLUMBING CODE COMPLIANCE): each point of cross connection or system
                                      outlet as required by Plumbing Code as
                                      adopted by the State and its amendments.
                                      Any substance introduced into the public
                                      drinking water system which does not
POLLUTANT:                            create a threat to the public health, but
                                      which does adversely and unreasonably
                                      affect the aesthetic quality of the
                                      water.
                                      A water system that is either publicly or
                                      privately owned, that provides water for
                                      human consumption and other domestic
PUBLIC DRINKING WATER SYSTEM:         uses, which: has at least fifteen (15)
                                      service connections, and/or serves an
                                      average of at least twenty-five (25)
                                      individuals at least sixty (60) days out
                                      of the year.
                                      The terminal end of the public drinking
                                      water system where the water purveyor
                                      transfers jurisdiction and sanitary
SERVICE CONNECTION:                   control of the water. If a water meter is
                                      present, then the service connection
                                      exists at the downstream end of the
                                      meter.
                                      The public or private owner or
WATER PURVEYOR:                       responsible party of a public drinking
                                      water system. (Ord. 91-01, 2-6-1991; amd.
                                      1998 Code; Ord. 2020-06, 12-16-2020)
 
8-3-3: RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   City:
      1.   The city shall be responsible for the protection of the drinking
water distribution system from foreseeable conditions leading to the possible
contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to the backflow of
contaminants or pollutants into the drinking water supply.
      2.   Drinking water system surveys or inspections of the consumer's water
distribution system shall be conducted or caused to be conducted by individuals
deemed qualified by and representing the city. Survey records shall indicate
compliance with the aforementioned health and safety standards. All such
records will be maintained by the city.
      3.   The city shall notify in writing all consumers of the need for the
periodic system survey to ensure compliance with existing applicable minimum
health and safety standards.
      4.   Selection of an approved backflow prevention assembly for
containment control required at the service entrance shall be determined from
the results of the system survey.
   B.   Consumer:
      1.   To comply with this chapter as a term and condition of supply and
consumer's acceptance of service is admittance of his/her awareness of his/her
responsibilities as a water system user.
      2.   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to purchase, install,
and arrange testing and maintenance of any backflow prevention device/assembly
required to comply with this ordinance. Failure to comply with this ordinance
shall constitute grounds for discontinuation of service.
   C.   Building Official:
      1.   The building official's responsibility to enforce the applicable
sections of the plumbing code begins at the point of service (downstream or
consumer side of the meter) and continues throughout the developed length of
the consumer's water system.
      2.   The building official will review all plans to ensure that
unprotected cross connections are not an integral part of the consumer's water
system. If a cross connection cannot be eliminated, it must be protected by the
installation of an air gap or an approved backflow prevention device or
assembly in accordance with the adopted Plumbing Code.
      3.   Water vacating the drinking water supply must do so by an approved
air gap or approved mechanical backflow prevention assembly, properly installed
and in accordance with the adopted Plumbing Code.
   D.   Responsibility - Certified Backflow Technician, Surveyor, or Repair
Person: Whether employed by the consumer or a utility to survey, test, repair,
or maintain backflow prevention assemblies, the certified backflow technician,
surveyor, or repair person will have the following responsibilities:
      1.   Ensure acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for
testing, repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies.
      2.   Make reports of such testing and/or repairs to the consumer and the
water purveyor on form approved for such use by the water purveyor within time
frames as described by the Division of Drinking Water. Include the list of
materials or replacement parts being used on the reports.
      3.   Ensure replacement parts are equal in quality to parts originally
supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being repaired.
      4.   Not change the design, material or operational characteristics of
the assembly during testing, repair or maintenance.
      5.   Perform all tests of the mechanical devices or assemblies and be
responsible for the competence and accuracy of all tests and reports.
      6.   Ensure his/her license is current, the testing equipment being used
is acceptable to the state of Utah and is in proper operating condition.
      7.   Be equipped with, and be competent to use, all necessary tools,
gauges and other equipment necessary to properly test and maintain backflow
prevent assemblies.
      8.   Tag each double check valve, pressure-vacuum breaker, reduced
pressure backflow assembly and high hazard air gap, showing the serial number,
date tested and by whom. The technician's license number must also be on this
tag.
   E.   Responsibility - Repair of Backflow Assemblies: In the case of a
consumer requiring an assembly to be tested, any currently certified backflow
technician is authorized to make the test and report the results to the
consumer and the water purveyor. The installation, replacement or repair of
assemblies must be made by a tester having appropriate licensure from the
Department of Commerce, Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing,
except when the backflow technician is an agent of the assembly owner. (Ord.
91-01, 2-6-1991; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2020-06, 12-16-2020)
8-3-4: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Protection Of Water Supply: No water service connection to any premises
shall be installed or maintained by the Water Purveyor unless the water supply
is protected as required by state laws, regulations, codes, and this ordinance.
Service of water to a consumer found to be in violation of this ordinance shall
be discontinued by the water purveyor after thirty-six (36) due process of
written notification of violation and an appropriate time suspense for
voluntary compliance, if:
      1.   A backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter for control
of backflow and cross connections is not installed, tested and maintained; or
      2.   It is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or
bypassed; or
      3.   An unprotected cross connection exists on the premises; or
      4.   The periodic system survey has not been conducted. Service will not
be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
   B.   Inspection Of Customer's System: The customer's system(s) shall be open
for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the
water purveyor to determine whether cross connections or other structural or
sanitary hazards, including violation of this ordinance exist and to audit the
results of the required survey (R309-400 of the Utah Administrative Code).
   C.   Installation Of Approved Prevention Assembly: Whenever the the water
purveyor, deems a service connection's water usage contributes a sufficient
hazard to the water supply, an approved backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed on the service line of the identified consumer's water system, at or
near the property line, or immediately inside the building being served; but,
in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line
   D.   Type Of Protective Assembly: The type of protective assembly required
under subsection C of this section, shall depend upon the degree of hazard
which exists at the point of cross connection (whether direct or indirect),
applicable to local and State requirements resulting from the required survey.
   E.    Previously Approved Assemblies:
      1.   All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not
meet the requirements of this section but were approved assemblies for the
purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been
properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance
requirements under subsection 3.1.6, be excluded from the requirements of these
rules so long as the water purveyor is assured that they will satisfactorily
protect the public water system. Whenever the existing is moved from the
present location or, requires more than minimum maintenance or, when the water
purveyor finds that the operation or of this assembly constitutes a hazard to
health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly
meeting all local and state requirements.
      2.   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer at any premises where
backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified surveys/
inspections, and operational test made at least once per year at the consumer's
expense. In those instances where the Public Water Purveyor deems the hazard to
be great, he may required certified surveys/inspections and test at a more
frequent interval. It shall be the duty of the purveyor to see that these tests
are made according to the standards set forth by the State Department of
Environmental Quality, Division of Drinking Water.
   F.   Testing Backflow Prevention Assemblies: All backflow prevention
assemblies shall be tested within ten (10) working days of initial
installation.
   G.   Safety Hazards: No backflow prevention assembly shall be installed so
as to create a safety hazard. Example: installed over any electrical panel,
steam pipes, boilers, pits or above ceiling level. (Ord. 91-01, 2-6-1991; amd.
1998 Code; Ord. 2020-06, 12-16-2020)
8-3-5: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
If violation of this chapter exist or if there has not been any corrective
action taken by the consumer within thirty (30) days of the written
notification of deficiencies noted within the survey, then the the water
purveyor shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by
providing a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected
the conditions in conformance with the state and city statutes relating to
plumbing, safe drinking water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto. (Ord. 91-01, 2-6-1991; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2020-06, 12-16-2020)
8-3-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1998 Code)
CHAPTER 4
SEWER SERVICE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Rules Of Operation Adopted
8-4-1: RULES OF OPERATION ADOPTED:
   A.   The "Rules Of Operation Of Ash Creek Special Service District", dated
April 23, 2009, a copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified herein
and by this reference incorporated herein as though fully set forth, is hereby
approved and adopted by the city and incorporated into the rules, regulations
and ordinances of the city.
   B.   The approval and adoption of said rules of operation, in subsection A
of this section, shall specifically include the following exhibits and
schedules: 1) exhibit A: capital facilities plan and development impact fee
analysis (October 2006); 2) exhibit B: construction standards for Ash Creek
special service district (May 28, 2009); 3) schedule I: surcharge rate
structure; 4) schedule II: monthly rate schedule; and 5) impact fee schedule.
(Ord. 2009-11, 9-16-2009)
CHAPTER 5
LAVERKIN CITY WATER BOARD
SECTION:
8-5-1: Water Board
8-5-2: Terms Of Office
8-5-3: Meetings
8-5-4: Powers And Duties
8-5-5: Officers
8-5-6: Compensation
8-5-7: Recommendations
8-5-8: Vacancies And Removals For Cause
8-5-1: WATER BOARD:
A culinary and irrigation water board known as the LaVerkin City water board is
hereby created. The board shall consist of seven (7) members, four (4) of whom
shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council, and the other three (3) members consisting of the mayor or mayor's
assignee during the mayor's term of office, the public works director, and the
city manager. Of the seven (7) members, a majority, four (4) or more, must be
irrigation contract holders. (Ord. 2007-13, 3-21-2007)
8-5-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The terms of office for the four (4) appointed water board members shall be for
four (4) years; except that for the initial appointment the water board
members' terms shall be staggered so that no two (2) members' terms expire
during the same year. The other three (3) members of the water board shall
serve without expiration of their terms. (Ord. 2004-01, 1-21-2004)
8-5-3: MEETINGS:
The water board shall hold meetings as often as necessary to carry out its
duties. The water board shall take full and complete minutes of all meetings
and shall preserve a record of all its proceedings. All meetings of the water
board shall be open to the public. (Ord. 2004-01, 1-21-2004)
8-5-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the water board shall be the study, investigation and
recommendation to the city council upon all matters pertaining to the
acquisition of water for the LaVerkin City water system and the conveyance of
the same to LaVerkin City; to make preliminary studies of all such water
projects recommended; and to make such recommendations as it deems advisable
pertaining to the conservation of water by LaVerkin City and its inhabitants.
The board shall not be concerned with or have powers or responsibilities
pertaining to the use, distribution or administration of the LaVerkin City
water system except as herein provided unless requested by the city council.
The board shall have no authority to appropriate or expend public money or to
incur any obligation except by consent of the city council. (Ord. 2004-01, 1-
21-2004)
8-5-5: OFFICERS:
The water board shall elect a chairperson and chairperson pro tem from among
its members, whose terms shall be for one year. The water board may appoint a
secretary from one of its members, or some other person may be appointed as
secretary. (Ord. 2004-01, 1-21-2004)
8-5-6: COMPENSATION:
The members of the water board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
entitled to reimbursement for actual travel and other expenses incurred in
performance of their duties so long as such expenses are preapproved by the
city manager. (Ord. 2004-01, 1-21-2004)
8-5-7: RECOMMENDATIONS:
The powers and duties of the board shall be of an advisory nature, and the
board shall submit its recommendations to the city council either by a member
or in writing or both, and the council shall as expeditiously as possible take
action on said recommendations as it deems advisable. (Ord. 2004-01, 1-21-2004)
8-5-8: VACANCIES AND REMOVALS FOR CAUSE:
Vacancies of appointed members occurring otherwise than through the expiration
of their terms shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by
appointment of the mayor with the advice and consent of city council. Upon the
recommendation of the chairperson of the water board, the mayor, with the
advice and consent of the city council, shall have the right to remove any
member for nonperformance of duty. Nonperformance of duty shall include a
repeated failure to attend water board meetings. (Ord. 2004-01, 1-21-2004)
CHAPTER 6
WATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Policy
8-6-2: Purpose And Objectives
8-6-3: Procedures And Responsibilities
8-6-4: Water Conservation Plan
8-6-5: Enforcement And Violation Penalties
8-6-6: Time Of Day Landscape Watering Restrictions
8-6-1: POLICY:
It shall be the policy of the city to implement the procedures and restrictions
outlined herein under four (4) stages of culinary water resource shortage that
may occur in the LaVerkin City area. (Ord. 2005-23, 5-17-2005)
8-6-2: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The culinary water shortage and drought management plan is intended to
establish measures for essential conservation of water resources and to provide
for the equitable distribution of limited water supplies in order to balance
demand and limited available supplies and to assure that sufficient water is
available to preserve public health and safety within the city of LaVerkin.
(Ord. 2005-23, 5-17-2005)
8-6-3: PROCEDURES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   The city shall encourage wise use of water and conservation of all
water resources on an ongoing basis.
   B.   In the event of an unforeseeable event such as an extended drought,
earthquake, reservoir or well failure or other major disruption of the water
supply, the city will implement the attached four (4) stage culinary water
conservation management plan (the "plan"). The implementation of the plan will
become effective upon the recommendation of the water board and the approval of
the city council. The water board shall meet on a regular basis to discuss
water levels and availability status. The water board will also work to ensure
that all city departments are doing their part to comply, enforce and encourage
the application of the water management plan herein.
   C.   Water conservation stages shall be determined by the amount of water
available or the potential for water interruption. The public works department
shall monitor the supply and customer demand during peak hours for culinary
water on a regular basis. "Peak hours" are defined as the hours between ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. The frequency of monitoring
will increase with the implementation of each subsequent water conservation
stage as defined in the plan. When the public works director and city manager
agree that the conditions meet the guidelines for initiating any stage of the
plan, as set forth in this chapter, they shall: 1) notify the mayor, council
and water board, and 2) recommend that the mayor and/or city council declare
the water conservation plan and applicable stage in effect.
   D.   Except as otherwise stated in this chapter, implementation of the plan
shall become effective immediately upon adoption of this chapter by the city
council. Except as otherwise declared by the city council, any provisions
requiring a reduction in the use of water shall become effective commencing on
or after the date of such notification. (Ord. 2005-23, 5-17-2005)
8-6-4: WATER CONSERVATION PLAN:
The water conservation guidelines included below shall be used to decide which
stage of the water conservation plan shall be implemented.
   A.   Stage 1: Voluntary Restrictions On Nonessential Water Use:
      1.   Reduction Goal: Ten percent (10%) of peak use.
      2.   Measurement Schedule: The public works director will measure the
water usage levels monthly, monitoring LaVerkin City usage levels as a
percentage of the total (yield) of the springs.
      3.   Procedure: Voluntary restrictions shall be in effect annually from
May 1 to September 1. The following conservation methods include a list of
inside and outside conservation efforts and suggestions. The public shall be
given notice of the plan going into effect within twenty four (24) hours of
such declaration. This notice and list of conservation methods shall be
immediately distributed to the public as educational materials in the local
newspaper, flyers and mailers, advising the community that the water
conservation plan is in effect.
         a.   Inside:
            (1)   Fix dripping and leaking faucets and toilets. A leak in the
toilet can waste more than one hundred (100) gallons of water a day.
            (2)   Do not let the water run while shaving. Filling the sink
basin when shaving uses one gallon of water, letting the water run uses five
(5) to ten (10) gallons.
            (3)   Do not flush the toilet unnecessarily. Consider installing
water saving toilets. Water saving toilets use 1.6 gallons of water, standard
toilets use five (5) to seven (7) gallons of water each flush.
            (4)   Take shorter showers or fill bathtub only part way. Long
showers waste five (5) to ten (10) gallons of water every minute.
            (5)   Consider installing low flow showerheads.
            (6)   Do not run the water while brushing teeth. Turning the water
off while brushing your teeth can save 1.5 to 3.5 gallons of water.
            (7)   Do not run the tap to make water hot or cold. Keep a bottle
of drinking water in the refrigerator so you do not have to run the tap to get
a cool drink of water.
            (8)   Wash only full loads of dishes and laundry. A dishwasher uses
approximately twenty five (25) gallons of water; a washing machine uses thirty
(30) to thirty five (35) gallons of water per cycle.
            (9)   Consider replacing any appliance that utilizes water with a
low flow type appliance if such appliance is not already low flow.
            (10)   Reduce or eliminate the use of the garbage disposal.
            (11)   Wash fruits and vegetables in a basin instead of under
running water.
            (12)   Adjust temperatures in buildings with water cooled air
conditioners to require less water.
         b.   Outside:
            (1)   Reduce the use of culinary water for irrigation.
            (2)   Raise your lawn mower cutting height. Longer grass needs less
water.
            (3)   Delay planting any new grass, sod or other new landscaping.
            (4)   Do not fill swimming pools. If possible, cover the swimming
pool. An uncovered pool will lose nine hundred (900) to three thousand (3,000)
gallons of water a month to evaporation. A covered pool loses three hundred
(300) to one thousand (1,000) gallons a month.
            (5)   Use a hose with a shutoff nozzle if washing cars at home or
wash at a facility that recycles water. Washing the car with the hose running
uses one hundred (100) to two hundred (200) gallons of water.
            (6)   Sweep sidewalks and steps rather than hosing.
            (7)   Aerate turf areas.
            (8)   Know your plants' water requirements and apply only the
amount required for good plant health.
            (9)   Monitor ET data. Know how much moisture is lost to
evapotranspiration (ET) as this is what needs to be replaced back into the soil
for good plant health.
            (10)   Monitor soil moisture to determine if watering is needed.
            (11)   Water between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
            (12)   Avoid watering on windy days or midday when the evaporation
rate is the highest.
            (13)   Keep fire hydrants closed.
            (14)   Repair leaks in hoses, pipes, faucets, and connections.
            (15)   Limit operation of nonrecycling fountains.
            (16)   Limit city fleet washing by thirty percent (30%) to fifty
percent (50%).
   B.   Stage 2: Mandatory Restrictions On Nonessential Water Use:
      1.   Reduction Goal: Fifteen (15) to twenty percent (20%) of peak use.
      2.   Measurement Schedule: The public works director will measure the
water usage levels weekly, monitoring LaVerkin City usage levels as a
percentage of the total (yield) of the springs. If municipal water usage
reaches ninety percent (90%) of the available water resources out of the upper
and lower Toquerville Springs ("the springs"), stage 2 water conservation is
determined. Note: "Available water resources" means the percentage of city
ownership of the total available yield from the springs up to a maximum of the
city's current water rights.
      3.   Procedure: When the public works director and city manager determine
that water utilization and availability has triggered stage 2 of the water
conservation plan, they shall notify the mayor, city council and water board.
The public shall also be given notice that stage 2 is going into effect.
The city manager and/or the mayor and city council shall then implement the
following mandatory water conservation measures in addition to voluntary
conservation:
         a.   Large irrigators using culinary water, including, but not limited
to, city parks and schools shall reduce irrigation by twenty five percent (25%)
of baseline year use. (The year 2000 is the recommended baseline year.)
         b.   Those using culinary water for irrigation will be allowed to
irrigate between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:
00) A.M.
         c.   Use of water for washing streets, driveways, or other paved areas
is prohibited except to alleviate immediate fire or sanitation hazards.
         d.   Noncommercial car washing requires using a hose with an automatic
shutoff nozzle.
         e.   Filling of private swimming pools or hot tubs is prohibited.
         f.   Use of culinary water for ornamental fountains, waterfalls, or
reflection pools is prohibited.
         g.   Delay planting any new grass or sod or other new landscaping.
         h.   Encourage the usage of secondary water for all outdoor commercial
and residential uses.
   C.   Stage 3: Mandatory Restrictions On All Culinary Water Use:
      1.   Reduction Goal: Twenty five (25) to thirty percent (30%) of peak
use.
      2.   Measurement Schedule: The public works director will measure the
water usage levels daily, monitoring LaVerkin City usage levels as a percentage
of the total (yield) of the springs. If municipal water usage reaches ninety
five percent (95%) of available water resources out of the springs, stage 3
water conservation is determined.
      3.   Procedure: When the public works director and city manager determine
that water utilization and availability has triggered stage 3 of the water
conservation plan, they shall notify the mayor, city council and water board.
The public shall also be given notice that stage 3 is going into effect.
The city manager and/or the mayor and city council shall then implement the
mandatory water conservation measures required in stage 2 as well as the
following additional mandatory conservation measures in addition to voluntary
conservation:
         a.   The use of fire hydrants for purposes other than fire protection
will be prohibited.
         b.   If available, irrigation water may be used for construction
purposes.
         c.   Water use for noncommercial washing of automobiles and trucks
shall not be permitted.
         d.   Users will be allowed seventy percent (70%) of use levels of the
baseline year use. All users will reduce demand by thirty percent (30%).
         e.   Culinary water will not be used to irrigate city parks or
schools.
         f.   Spray irrigation and hand watering may occur for a total of
fifteen (15) minutes per landscaped area.
         g.   Culinary drip irrigation systems, bubbler, or soaker hoses may be
operated for maximum of two (2) hours.
      4.   Exemptions:
         a.   If compliance with the nonessential use of water restrictions
would result in extraordinary hardship upon a water user, the water user may
apply for an exemption or variance. For purposes of this section,
"extraordinary hardship" means a permanent damage to property or other personal
or economic loss, which is substantially more severe than the sacrifices borne
by other water users subject to the nonessential use of water restrictions.
         b.   A person or business entity believing he suffers an extraordinary
hardship and desiring to be wholly or partially exempt from the restrictions on
the nonessential use of water shall submit a written request with full
documentation supporting the need for the requested relief to the city. The
application shall contain information specifying:
            (1)   The nature of the hardship claimed and reasons for the
requested exemption or variance.
            (2)   The efforts taken by the applicant to conserve water and
extent to which the applicant, without extraordinary hardship, may reduce water
use.
         c.   The city shall advise the applicant of its decision regarding the
application within ten (10) days. An exemption or variance will be granted only
to the extent necessary to relieve extraordinary hardship.
   D.   Stage 4: Water Rationing Plan For All Available Culinary Water
Resources:
      1.   Reduction Goal: Forty (40) to sixty percent (60%) of peak use.
      2.   Measurement Schedule: The public works director will measure the
water usage levels at least one or more times daily as deemed necessary,
monitoring LaVerkin City usage levels as a percentage of the total (yield) of
the springs. If municipal water reaches ninety eight percent (98%) of available
water resources out of the springs, stage 4 water conservation is determined.
      3.   Procedure: When the public works director and city manager determine
that water utilization and availability has triggered stage 4 of the water
conservation plan, they shall notify the mayor, city council and water board.
Additional communication will also include press releases to the local
television, radio and newspaper services.
The city manager and/or the mayor and city council shall then implement the
following mandatory water conservation measures, in addition to voluntary
conservation:
         a.   General: It is imperative that water customers within the city of
LaVerkin area achieve an immediate and further reduction in the water use in
order to extend existing water supplies and, at the same time, assure that
sufficient water is available to preserve the public health, sanitation, and
provide fire protection service.
The objective of this local water rationing plan is to effect an immediate
forty percent (40%) reduction in water use. Should drought conditions continue,
further reductions in usage might be required. If it is necessary to implement
further reductions, this plan will be modified to meet the crisis.
The plan provides for equitable reductions in water use on the part of each
water customer. The success of this plan depends on the cooperation of all
water customers. During this stage, the approval of any new building permits
will be prohibited until the conservation restrictions are lifted.
         b.   Nonessential Use: It is the primary responsibility of each water
customer to meet its mandated water use reduction goal in whatever manner
possible. The following culinary water uses are declared nonessential and shall
be prohibited within the city of LaVerkin, in addition to the restrictions
specified in stages 2 and 3:
            (1)   Watering lawns with culinary water.
            (2)   Culinary watering of outdoor gardens, landscaped areas,
trees, shrubs and other outdoor plants, except by means of a bucket, pail or
handheld hose, equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
            (3)   Use of water for flushing sewers or hydrants by
municipalities or any public or private individual or entity, except as deemed
necessary and specifically approved by the city in the interest of public
health and/or safety.
            (4)   Use of fire hydrants for construction purposes.
            (5)   Use of fire hydrants by the fire department for testing fire
apparatus and for fire department drills, except as deemed necessary and
specifically approved by the city in the interest of public safety.
         c.   Water Use Restrictions For All Culinary Water Customers:
Customers include residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, public,
and all other users, with the exception of healthcare facilities.
         d.   Water Use Restrictions For Healthcare Facilities: Healthcare
facilities shall comply with all restrictions imposed on water customers as may
be applicable to each individual institution to the extent compliance will not
endanger the health of the patients or residents of the institution.
Each healthcare facility shall survey its water usage patterns and requirements
and implement such additional conservation measures as may be possible without
endangering the health of patients or residents to achieve a twenty five
percent (25%) reduction in the institution's water usage. That level of
conservation will be recommended to the city for billing and record. The
established level that does not endanger the health of the patients will be
provided to the city for record.
      4.   Exemptions:
         a.   If compliance with the nonessential use of water restrictions
would result in extraordinary hardship upon a water user, the water user may
apply for an exemption or variance. For purposes of this section,
"extraordinary hardship" means a permanent damage to property or other personal
or economic loss, which is substantially more severe than the sacrifices borne
by other water users subject to the nonessential use of water restrictions.
         b.   A person or business entity believing he suffers an extraordinary
hardship and desiring to be wholly or partially exempt from the restrictions on
the nonessential use of water shall submit a written request with full
documentation supporting the need for the requested relief to the city. The
application shall contain information specifying:
            (1)   The nature of the hardship claimed and reason for the
requested exemption or variance.
            (2)   The efforts taken by the applicant to conserve water and the
extent to which the applicant without extraordinary hardship may reduce water
use.
         c.   The city shall advise the applicant of its decision regarding the
application. An exemption or variance will be granted only to the extent
necessary to relieve extraordinary hardship. (Ord. 2005-23, 5-17-2005)
8-6-5: ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATION PENALTIES:
The LaVerkin City utility billing department shall be charged with monitoring
culinary water usage. Upon documentation of a customer's violation of the
required water conservation reduction amounts, the billing department shall
impose the following penalties:
   A.   Stage 1:
Violations: Notice of violation with request for greater attention to water
usage reduction.
   B.   Stage 2:
First violation: Notice of violation with one billing period from date of
notice to cure and reduce water usage.
Second violation: Fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
Third violation: Fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
Fourth violation: Fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   C.   Stage 3:
First violation: Notice of violation with one billing period from date of
notice to cure and reduce water usage.
Second violation: Fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
Third violation: Fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Fourth violation: Fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   D.   Stage 4:
First violation: Notice of violation and fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Second violation: Fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
Third violation: Fine of four hundred dollars ($400.00) plus misdemeanor
citation.
Fourth violation: Fine of six hundred dollars ($600.00), misdemeanor citation
and water shutoff. (Ord. 2005-23, 5-17-2005)
8-6-6: TIME OF DAY LANDSCAPE WATERING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Purpose: It is in the public interest to conserve water resources and
to promote efficient use of water on public and private amenity landscapes; and
to protect and enhance the community's economic, environmental, recreational,
and aesthetic resources by reducing water waste and promoting water use
efficiency in amenity landscape irrigation.
   B.   Restrictions: Sprinkler irrigation of public and private amenity
landscapes should be limited to those periods where the maximum benefit can be
obtained from the water used.
      1.   Where feasible, such irrigation should be limited to the hours of
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and to times of low wind,
to avoid excessive loss of water through evapotranspiration.
      2.   Water users are strongly encouraged to avoid overwatering and/or
wasting of water; and to apply water at the times and using the methods most
appropriate for the soils and ground cover involved, with due consideration for
the limited nature of water as a resource and the need for such water by
others.
   C.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words or
phrases shall have the meanings set forth hereinbelow:
AMENITY LANDSCAPE: A parcel of land upon which landscaping materials are
present for purposes other than necessity.
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION: The loss of water from a land area due to the transpiration
of plants and evaporation from soil.
PRIVATE LANDSCAPE: A parcel of land, owned by a private person or entity, upon
which grass and/or plants require irrigation.
PUBLIC LANDSCAPE: A parcel of land, owned by public entities, upon which grass
and/or plants require irrigation.
SPRINKLER IRRIGATION: The application of water to land and/or plants by
distributing water under pressure through spray, rotary, or drip heads.
TRANSPIRATION: The loss of water vapor through the pores or stoma of plants.
WATER: Culinary and secondary (irrigation class) water, whether provided by,
through, or by means of the city, or any servicing water conservancy district,
within the boundaries of LaVerkin City.
   D.   When Applicable; Conflicts: This section shall be applicable at all
times, to both culinary and secondary (irrigation class) water; provided, that
where a water shortage is declared, and there is a conflict between the
provisions of this section and the applicable provisions of section
8-6-4 of this chapter, the provisions of the latter section shall prevail.
(Ord. 2008-16, 9-17-2008)
CHAPTER 7
WATER SYSTEMS DESIGN, INSTALLATION, SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Culinary Water Design
8-7-2: Design Flow Pressures
8-7-3: Peak Instantaneous Flow
8-7-4: Minimize Size And Depth
8-7-5: Valves And Hydrants
8-7-6: Pressure Reducing Valves
8-7-7: Fire Hydrants
8-7-8: Miscellaneous Design Criteria
8-7-9: Secondary Water Or Wastewater Reuse Irrigation System
8-7-10: Materials
8-7-11: Pipeline Construction
8-7-12: Tracer Wire
8-7-13: Construction Methods
8-7-14: Cleaning And Disinfection
8-7-15: Testing And Acceptance
8-7-1: CULINARY WATER DESIGN:
All culinary water mains and appurtenances within LaVerkin City shall be
designed to provide for adequate future service for all contiguous areas which
may, within a twenty (20) year period in the future, be tributary thereto.
Trunk lines shall be designed in accordance with the system master plan. (Ord.
2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-2: DESIGN FLOW PRESSURES:
Water mains shall be designed to provide a minimum residual pressure of forty
(40) psi under maximum day demand conditions including designed fire flow. A
minimum of thirty five (35) psi residual pressure must be maintained under
normal peak hour conditions without fire flow. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-3: PEAK INSTANTANEOUS FLOW:
Peak instantaneous flow as determined in section 5.1 of the State of Utah
public drinking water regulations shall be as follows:
   A.   Residential (indoor use; not including fire flow): Qi = 10.8N0.64 where
Qi = Total indoor flow (in gpm) in delivered to all connections. N = Total
number of equivalent residential connections. Required storage is four hundred
(400) gallons per connection. Peak instantaneous fire flows shall be added to
peak instantaneous domestic flows for distribution system design flow total.
   B.   Commercial or industrial areas may require special investigation to
determine fire flow requirements. Existing and future static pressure and flow
information used in the design must be obtained from or approved by the water
department. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-4: MINIMIZE SIZE AND DEPTH:
The minimum depth of cover (to the top of the pipe) for water mains shall be
three feet (3') below the final grade of the street. Where final grades have
not been established, mains shall be installed to a depth great enough to
ensure three feet (3') of cover below future grade based on the best
information available. Maximum depth shall be four feet (4') of cover below the
final grade of the street, unless otherwise determined by the LaVerkin City
public works department or engineer. The water mains shall be sized to deliver
the peak instantaneous flow rate as previously determined within this chapter.
The fire flow requirements and pressures shall be as previously outlined within
this chapter. The minimum water main size for residential or commercial
development shall be six inches (6"). The minimum size water mains serving any
fire hydrant shall be eight inches (8") in diameter. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-5: VALVES AND HYDRANTS:
The water system shall be looped and valves shall generally be spaced such that
a break in any one length of main will put no more than five hundred feet
(500') of main nor more than two (2) fire hydrants out of service (whichever is
less) while maintaining adequate minimum service in the remainder of the water
system during repairs, except for major transmission lines, where longer
spacing may be allowed. All distribution mains connecting to larger
transmission mains shall be valved at the connection. All fire hydrant runs
shall also be valved at the distribution main. Valves generally shall be
located at street intersections in line with an extension of the property line.
(Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-6: PRESSURE REDUCING VALVES:
The locations of the high water pressure zones within the city can be located
and identified upon request, from the water department. The water department
requires that in high water pressure zones, secondary pressure reducing devices
shall be installed by the owner on all water connections to buildings per the
current international plumbing code. Maintenance shall be the owner's
responsibility. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-7: FIRE HYDRANTS:
   A.   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be Kennedy, model K81A, or approved
equal with four and one-half inch (41/2") pumper nozzle and two (2) 21/2-inch
hose nozzle, five and one-fourth inch (51/4") main valve and six inch (6")
mechanical joint connection. Fire hydrants shall conform to the latest edition
of AWWA C-502, "dry barrel fire hydrants". All hydrants shall be designed for a
working pressure of two hundred (200) psi and a hydrostatic pressure of three
hundred fifty (350) psi. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to furnish
hydrants with finish paint above the ground line identical to the existing
hydrant paint (red).
   B.   Design: The hydrant shall be of a flanged joint type or mechanical
joint inlet. All hydrants shall be so designed as to allow the flanges at
sidewalk level to separate without material damage to the main barrel section
when struck by a large object, such as a car. Upon such damage, the main gate
must remain closed to avoid flooding or washout. Hydrants with a five inch (5")
valve opening shall be furnished with two and one-half inch (21/2") national
standard thread hose nozzles and one 41/2-inch national standard thread pumper
nozzle. All nozzles shall be furnished with a cap and gasket with attaching
chain. All hydrants shall open counterclockwise with a pentagon operating nut
conforming in size to the specifications of the water department (11/2 inch
pentagon).
   C.   Specifications: Fire hydrants shall be set so that at least the minimum
pipe cover is provided for the branch supply line and the nozzles are at least
eighteen inches (18") above finish grade. Each hydrant shall be set on a
concrete foundation at least eighteen inches (18"), but not more than twenty
four inches (24") square and four inches (4") thick. Each hydrant shall be
restrained with Megalugs and joint restraints. Hydrant drainage shall be
provided by installing gravel or crushed rock around the hydrant, and below the
top of the hydrant supply line. One-third (1/3) cubic yard of one and one-half
inch (11/2") gravel shall be placed around the drain holes just above the
hydrant valve casing. All hydrants shall stand plumb. Hydrant pumper nozzles
shall have hose nozzles parallel and perpendicular to the curb line. Hydrants
shall be located inside the street right of way and/or as directed by the water
department. All auxiliary valves for fire hydrants shall be flanged to main
line tees.
   D.   Maintenance: After the hydrant is installed and approved, it will be
the water department's responsibility to maintain the hydrant, and, where
applicable, the customer/property owner will allow access for the water
department to do so.
   E.   Dead End Mains: Dead end mains shall be avoided wherever possible. If
installed they shall not exceed five hundred feet (500'). Hydrants or taps
shall be installed at the end of dead end mains for flushing purposes as well
as for fire protection and must be approved by the LaVerkin City water
department. Washout valves, in lieu of fire hydrants, are not allowed without
prior approval of the water department.
   F.   Hydrant Spacing And Locations: Generally, fire hydrants shall be spaced
and located as follows:
      1.   At each intersection, generally on the same sides of the street.
      2.   In residential areas, fire hydrant spacing shall be no greater than
five hundred feet (500') and no house shall be more than two hundred fifty feet
(250') from a hydrant via a street access to the property being served.
      3.   In multiple-family areas, PUD zones, PD zones, industrial, business,
or commercial areas, fire hydrant spacing shall require special investigation
to determine the hydrant spacing per the international fire code (IFC).
      4.   Generally, hydrants shall be located in line with extensions of the
property line when located mid block.
      5.   Hydrants shall be placed no more than five feet (5') from the back
of the sidewalk, with a five foot (5') radius of clearance to adjacent
obstacles and with the lowest water outlet not less than eighteen inches (18")
nor more than thirty inches (30") from the final ground elevation (see standard
drawings). The "break away" flange at bottom of hydrant shall be installed so
that it is at, or within six inches (6") above, final ground elevation.
      6.   All fire hydrants to be installed on dedicated easements or public
rights of way will be owned and maintained by the water department.
   G.   Fire Flow Requirements:
      1.   Under maximum day demand conditions, fire flow shall be at least one
thousand (1,000) gallons per minute at any one hydrant with a total fire flow
of at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) gpm at any combination of two (2)
hydrants in the area. The total system design shall be such that fire flows and
normal peak instantaneous flow demand (as called out within this chapter) can
be met while still maintaining a minimum pressure of twenty (20) psi at all
points in the distribution system.
      2.   High density residential, commercial, or industrial areas shall
require special investigation to determine fire flow requirements and hydrant
spacing per the IFC.
      3.   Existing and future static pressure and flow information used in the
design shall be obtained from or approved by the LaVerkin City water
department. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-8: MISCELLANEOUS DESIGN CRITERIA:
   A.   Easements: All public water mains shall be installed in an easement at
least fifteen feet (15') in unobstructed width or in public rights of way with
adequate access for maintenance vehicles.
   B.   Separate Services: Each building shall be served by a separate line and
meter except in PUDs (or PDs) as approved by LaVerkin City's representative. In
some situations, a common tap and service line from the main to a manifold with
two (2) meter setters and boxes may be installed to serve two (2) adjacent
properties. All lots shall have a minimum of three-fourths inch (3/4") service
line from the main to the meter box.
   C.   Machine Tapping: All service line taps shall be machine tapped at the
time of the water main installation. Service lines shall be installed prior to
testing and acceptance of the water main.
   D.   Line Spacing: Water mains shall be laid at least ten feet (10')
horizontally from any existing or proposed sewer main. The distance shall be
measured edge to edge. Irrigation lines shall be separated from culinary water
lines by a horizontal distance of three feet (3').
   E.   Vertical Spacing: When a water main crosses over a sewer main, the
water main shall be laid at such an elevation that the bottom of the water main
is at least eighteen inches (18") above the top of the sewer. When the water
main cannot be as high as eighteen inches (18") above the sewer, the sewer
shall be constructed of material with pressure conduit standards for a distance
of ten feet (10') on either side of the crossing.
   F.   Blocking: All tees, bends, plugs and hydrants shall be provided with
reaction blocking, tie rods, and/or joints designed to prevent movement, i.e.,
"Megalug" or approved equal. Wood blocking of future main extensions is not
acceptable. Concrete thrust blocks shall be formed and poured in place and must
bear against undisturbed soil, per the thrust block details in the standard
drawings.
   G.   Air Release: Air release vacuum assemblies and blow off valves shall be
provided on all mains larger than twelve inches (12"), where required, to
prevent damage due to air accumulations. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-9: SECONDARY WATER OR WASTEWATER REUSE IRRIGATION SYSTEM:
   A.   Secondary Water: All secondary water irrigations systems shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements outlined for
culinary water systems in these specifications. However, all valve box covers
shall bear the legend "Sprinkler" or "Irrigation" in order to differentiate
between culinary and secondary systems. In addition, there shall be no cross
connections between secondary and culinary water systems.
   B.   Reuse Water: All wastewater reuse irrigation systems shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the requirements outlined for culinary water
systems in these specifications. However, all requirements for the treating and
reuse of wastewater outlined in the latest applicable Utah division of water
quality standards for utilization and isolation of domestic wastewater
treatment works effluent shall be followed. These requirements include, but are
not limited to, a reuse project plan, allowed uses, required treatment
processes, and water quality limits. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-10: MATERIALS:
This section specifies acceptable pipe and accessories for underground
culverts, storm drains, and water pipe construction. The materials used for
pipe and fittings shall all be new and conform to the requirements for class,
brand, size and material as specified. Each pipe used shall have a
manufacturer's stamp on it indicating that it complies with the requirements of
the appropriate specification. Any pipe not so stamped shall be rejected. All
pipe shall be homogeneous throughout and free from cracks, holes, foreign
inclusions or other defects. All PVC pipe shall be made from clean, virgin,
type 1, grade 1, polyvinyl chloride conforming to ASTM resin specification
D1784. All pipe joints shall be bell and spigot type with rubber ring gasket to
permit expansion and contraction. Pipe and fittings shall be assembled with a
nontoxic lubricant.
   A.   Storm Drain Pipe: All pipes listed under these standards, as well as
the following pipes, may be used in the construction of storm drain lines and
culverts:
      1.   Nonreinforced Concrete Pipe: Nonreinforced concrete sewer pipe may
be used for storm drains, up to and including eighteen inch (18") size, unless
otherwise specifically designated in these standards or on the approved
drawings. Pipe shall be extra strength and manufactured to comply with the
requirements set forth in ASTM designation C14, class 3 unless otherwise
approved by LaVerkin City's representative. Joints shall be of the bell and
spigot with rubber gasket design, and with joints and gaskets conforming to the
requirements of ASTM designation C443. Pipe joints shall be so designed as to
provide for self-centering, and when assembled, to compress the gasket to form
a watertight seal. The gasket shall be confined in a groove on the spigot so
that pipe movement or hydrostatic pressure will not displace the gasket.
      2.   Reinforced Concrete Pipe: Reinforced concrete pipe shall be used for
all storm drains greater than eighteen inches (18") in diameter, and for all
drains of smaller size where installation does not provide a cover of at least
three feet (3') over the top of the pipe. Reinforced concrete pipe shall comply
with the requirements of ASTM C76 (class II) unless otherwise approved by
LaVerkin City's representative. Joints shall be of the bell and spigot design
with rubber gasket type joints for storm drains, with an alternate option of
tongue and groove mortar joints for storm drain lines when approved by LaVerkin
City's representative.
      3.   Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe: Corrugated polyethylene pipe shall be
high density polyethylene corrugated exterior/smooth interior pipe. Twelve inch
(12") to thirty six inch (36") diameters shall conform to AASHTO M294 type S;
eight inch (8") to ten inch (10") diameter shall meet the strength requirements
of AASHTO M252 with the addition that the pipe have a smooth interior liner.
Materials shall conform to ASTM D3350. All pipe joints and fittings shall be
watertight and conform to AASHTO M353 or M294, and shall be approved by
LaVerkin City's representative.
   B.   Water Pipe And Fittings: The materials used for pipe and fittings shall
all be new and conform to the requirements for class, brand, size and material
as specified. A copy of the manufacturer's installation recommendation for each
kind of pipe shall be provided to each foreman prior to construction. These
recommendations shall be followed during construction unless instructed
otherwise by LaVerkin City's representative. All pipe materials are as outlined
below.
   C.   General Pipe Requirements: Pipe materials shall conform to the
following requirements:
 
   Size             Type
3/4 inch - 1 inch   Copper type K
                     Polyethylene IPS PE3408 200 psi
11/2 inch - 2 inch  Rigid copper type K (sweat fittings)
                     Polyethylene CTS PE3408 200 psi
3 inch and larger   Ductile iron class 50 minimum,
                     PVC C900
 
All pipe shall conform to the current AWWA standards for each class of pipe
listed above.
   D.   Connecting Water Meters: Only authorized employees of the water
department shall be allowed to connect or disconnect water meters. All boxes
set in concrete shall be flanged to prevent settlement.
   E.   Ductile Iron Pipe: All ductile iron pipe shall be a minimum of class 50
conforming to the latest edition of AWWA specifications C-151 (ANSI A21.51).
      1.   Joints: Ductile iron pipe shall be either mechanical joints, rubber
gasket slip on joints, flanged joints, or a combination of the above as
specified on the approved plans. Pipe shall also conform to all current AWWA
standards.
      2.   Polyethylene Wrapping: A polyethylene wrap will be required on all
ductile iron pipe laid in corrosive soils or where directed by LaVerkin City's
representative.
         a.   The polyethylene wrap tubing shall be cut to provide for a
minimum of one foot (1') of lap over both the adjoining pipes.
         b.   The ends of the tubing shall be wrapped using three (3)
circumferential turns of plastic adhesive tape.
         c.   The loose wrap on the barrel shall be pulled snugly around the
barrel of the pipe and the excess folded over at the top. This fold shall be
held in place by means of six inch (6") strips of plastic tape placed at
intervals of three feet (3') along the pipe barrel.
         d.   Bends, reducers, offsets, and restraint gland locations shall be
wrapped in the same manner as the pipe. Valves shall be wrapped by bringing the
tube wrap on the adjacent pipe over the bells of the valve and sealing with
adhesive tape. The valve bodies shall then be wrapped with flat sheets passed
under the valve bottom and brought up around the body to the stem and fastened
with the tape.
   F.   Copper Pipe: Where service lines are two inches (2") or less in
diameter, type K copper pipe may be allowed with prior approval of LaVerkin
City's representative. Pipe, which has outside dimensions greater than two
inches (2") in diameter, shall not be copper. All copper pipe shall conform to
the current AWWA standards.
   G.   Tapping Material Specification: For small tappings (3/4 inch through 2
inch) tapped into cast iron, steel or ductile iron pipe, the following
materials shall be required:
      1.   Saddle Castings: Large saddle tappings shall be stainless steel or
bronze single/double strap. Romac 101N or approved equal.
      2.   Stainless Steel Strap: The stainless steel strap shall consist of a
two inch (2") wide strap to spread out the clamping force on the pipe and shall
come complete with sufficient stainless steel or bolts, nuts and washers (with
5/8 inch NC teflon coated roll threads) to properly clamp the strap to the
pipe. MIG welds shall be passivated for resistance to corrosion.
      3.   Gaskets: Gaskets shall be made from virgin SBR compounded for water
services.
   H.   Valves And Boxes: All valves, twelve inches (12") and smaller, may be
of a resilient seat gate valve type, and all valves over twelve inches (12")
shall be butterfly valves unless otherwise specified by the water department.
      1.   Gate And Butterfly Valves: Valves shall conform to the latest
revision of AWWA resilient seated gate valve standards.
         a.   All valves twelve inches (12") and less, installed next to a
fitting must be flange x MJ and installed with the flange end connecting to the
tee, cross, or fitting and megaluged to the line unless otherwise approved by
the water department. Valves greater than twelve inches (12") shall have flange
x flange with an MJ adaptor in order to flange to tee, cross, or fitting and
megalug to line.
         b.   All six inch (6") and eight inch (8") valves shall have a sixteen
inch by sixteen inch by four inch (16" x 16" x 4") slab of concrete placed
under them for support. Valves ten inches (10") and greater shall have a twenty
inch by twenty inch by four inch (20" x 20" x 4") slab placed under them for
support. All support slabs shall be tied to the valves.
      2.   Valve Boxes:
         a.   All valves shall be provided with a cast iron valve box of the
extension sleeve type, and the correct adjustable height to bring the top of
the valve box flush with the ground surface. The valve box shall not be less
than five inches (5") in diameter and shall have a minimum thickness of 0.375
inch. The box provided also shall be provided with a suitable base and cover.
The word "WATER" shall be cast on the cover.
         b.   Valve boxes shall be installed plumb and properly positioned to
allow access of the operating wrench. To ensure that the box is not displaced
during backfill operations, the backfill shall be hand mechanical tamped for a
distance of five feet (5') each way along the trench with a concrete ring of
eighteen inch (18") diameter around the valve box.
   I.   Water Service Laterals: The material used for water service connections
shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Service Pipe: Service pipe shall be copper or polyethylene.
      2.   Corporation Stops: Corporation stops shall be similar to those
manufactured by the Mueller Company, or Ford, similar to Ford F1101-3-G or
Mueller H-15000. All services shall have compression or instratight type joint
for the service pipe and threaded on the inlet end with an iron pipe thread.
      3.   Meter Setter Yokes: Meter setters or meter yokes shall be fifteen
inches (15") high, Ford 70 series copper setter, VBHC72-15W or equal, and shall
have an AWWA approval, built in backflow device and inlet angle ball valve. All
internal parts shall be accessible without removing the valve from the line.
Meters shall only be installed by water department personnel.
      4.   Meter Box And Lid: The meter boxes shall be black or white, high
density polyethylene ADS N-12 or equal, eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18"
x 24") (standard size) or as otherwise approved by water department. The meter
lids shall be cast iron, Tyler 6150BL or approved equal. Lid marking shall be
approved by water department. All meter boxes shall be placed behind sidewalks
in the ten foot (10') easement along the frontage and within two feet (2') of
the sidewalk.
      5.   Service Connections: At all points designated by the water
department, the property owner shall install services for building connections.
The building service shall extend such services from the property line or meter
box to the building, unless otherwise indicated by the water department.
      6.   Service Standard: Individual residential water services shall be one
inch (1") for dual services and three-fourths inch (3/4") for a single service
from the water main to the meter setter for normal domestic service, but may be
one and one-half inches (11/2") or two inches (2") in diameter as directed by
the water department for larger users. Services shall have a minimum of three
feet (3') of cover and be laid as shown in the standard drawings.
      7.   Curb Marking: At the point where the service line crosses under the
curb a "W" for water or a "S" for sewer, will be neatly stamped or inscribed
into the face of the curb.
      8.   Hot Taps: All hot taps shall be performed by the LaVerkin City water
department.
   J.   Irrigation Line: All irrigation pipe shall be DR-18 conforming to the
requirements of AWWA standard C-900 and be NSF approved. The color of the
irrigation pipe is to be purple to conform to the color coding scheme of
LaVerkin City, and classified as irrigation pipe. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-11: PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION:
This section covers the requirements for materials, placement, cleaning and
testing of underground pipelines and incorporates the requirements of the AWWA
standards and manufacturers recommended installation procedures, whichever is
more stringent. Backfill shall include filling of all trenches to the original
ground surface or final grading elevation as shown on the approved construction
drawings, or otherwise directed by LaVerkin City's representative. (Ord. 2007-
01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-12: TRACER WIRE:
14-1-UF jacketed wire was designed specifically for direct burial shall be
installed adjacent to all newly installed PVC water transmission pipeline. The
tracer wire shall be attached to each fire hydrant and meter connected to the
pipeline using waterproof couplers as recommended by the manufacturer. All wire
splices shall be watertight and shall be identified as the location on the as
built plans. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-13: CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
This section covers the requirements for pipe laying, installation and bedding.
Further requirements for trenching, placement, and backfilling of all
underground pipelines and excavation may be found in title 7, chapter 4,
"Excavations", of this code. The methods employed in performing the work shall
be the responsibility of the contractor. The contractor shall make such changes
in the methods employed as are necessary to install an acceptable finished
product. These methods shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
   A.   Pipe Laying And Bedding:
      1.   Pipe will be carefully inspected in the field by LaVerkin City water
department before and after laying. If any cause for rejection is discovered in
a pipe after it has been laid, it shall be removed and replaced by the
contractor.
      2.   When connections are to be made to any existing pipe, conduit, or
other appurtenances, the actual elevation or position of which cannot be
determined without excavation, the contractor shall carefully excavate for, and
expose the existing improvement before laying any pipe or conduit with a water
department inspector present. LaVerkin City water department shall be given the
opportunity to inspect the existing pipe or conduit before the connection is
made. Any adjustments in line or grade, which may be necessary to accomplish
the intent of the plans, will be made.
      3.   Pipe shall be laid upgrade with the socket or collar ends of the
pipe upgrade unless otherwise authorized by the water department.
      4.   Pipe shall be laid true to line and grade, with uniform bearing
under the full length of the barrel of the pipe. Suitable excavation shall be
made to receive the bell or collar, which shall not bear upon the subgrade or
bearing material. Any pipe that is not true to alignment or shows any
settlement after laying, shall be removed and relaid to the proper grade and
alignment. Wherever possible, sanitary sewers shall be installed on the
downhill side of the street.
   B.   Requirements For Line And Grade: All drainage pipe shall be installed
accurately to the defined line and grade within the following limits:
      1.   Variance from established grade shall be not greater than one-tenth
(1/10) of a foot between manholes. Variance from established line shall be not
more than one-half foot (1/2') between manholes. Any variances approved shall
not impact the system design capacity in the judgment of LaVerkin City's
representative. In addition, any variations granted shall not result in a level
or reverse sloping invert.
      2.   Invert elevations of each box inlet and outlet and distance
measurements between boxes shall be verified by a surveying instrument prior to
pouring of the box floor.
   C.   Installation Of Pipe:
      1.   A groove shall be excavated in the bottom of the trench to receive
the bells. Bell holes shall be excavated so that only the barrel of the pipe
receives bearing from the trench bottom. Large rocks (over 6 inches in least
dimension) near the surface shall be removed and the hole refilled with
approved backfill in accordance to requirements in title 7, chapter 4,
"Excavations", of this code.
      2.   Drainpipe shall be laid upgrade. All pipe installation shall proceed
with joints closely and accurately fitted. Gaskets shall be fitted properly in
place and care shall be taken in joining the units to avoid twisting the
gaskets. Joints shall be clean and dry and a joint lubricant, as recommended by
the pipe supplier, shall be applied uniformly to the mating joint surfaces to
facilitate easy and positive joint closures. If adjustments to the position of
a pipe length are required after being laid, the pipe shall be removed and
rejoined as for a new pipe. When laying is not in progress, the ends of the
pipe shall be closed with a tightfitting stopper to prevent the entrance of
foreign material. In addition to the above requirements, all pipe installation
shall comply with the specified requirements of the pipe manufacturer.
   D.   Setting Bends, Tees, Crosses And Reducers:
      1.   Bends, tees, crosses, and reducers shall be lowered into the trench,
inspected, cleaned, and joined to the pipe.
      2.   Reaction or thrust blocking, when permitted by LaVerkin City, shall
be applied at bends and tees, and at points of reducing or in fittings where
changes in pipe diameter occur. The design of concrete thrust blocking shall be
as shown in the standard drawings or as directed by the water department. The
mat for reaction or thrust blocking shall be concrete composed of concrete
aggregates in accordance with ASTM designation C33, Portland cement in
accordance with ASTM designation C150. If an air entraining agent is used, it
shall conform to ASTM designation C175 and C260. The mix shall not be leaner
than one part cement, two and one-half (21/2) parts sand, and five (5) parts
stone, and shall have a compressive strength of not less than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) psi. Blocking shall be placed between solid ground and the
fitting to be anchored. The area of bearing on the fitting and on the ground
shall in each instance be that required in the approved drawings or by LaVerkin
City. Unless otherwise directed by LaVerkin City, the blocking shall be placed
so that the pipe and fitting joints will be accessible for repair. Restraining
joints (Megalug or equal) shall also be used to prevent movement wherever
thrust blocks are required.
      3.   Concrete thrust blocks shall not be used as a restraining system for
water line mains or laterals without prior approval of water department.
      4.   A Megalug retainer gland system shall be used on all mechanical
joints. These shall meet Uni-B-13 for PVC and be UL/FM approved through twelve
inches (12") for both ductile iron and PVC. The restraint mechanism shall
consist of individually activated gripping surfaces to maximize restraint
capability. Twist off nuts, sized the same as the tee head bolts, shall be used
to ensure proper activating of restraining devices. The gland shall be
manufactured of ductile iron conforming to ASTM A536-80. The retainer gland
shall have a pressure rating equal to that of the pipe on which it is used
(through 14 inches) with a minimum safety factor of two to one (2:1). Gland
shall be Megalug by EBAA Iron, Inc., or approved equal. The type of model of
retainer and amount for each connector is shown on standard drawings.
      5.   If a Megalug retainer system cannot be used, a concrete thrust block
system can be substituted, if designed and approved by the water department, on
a case by case basis.
   E.   Plugging Dead Ends: Standard plugs shall be inserted into the bells of
all dead end fittings. Spigot ends of fittings and plain ends of pipe shall be
capped. When directed by LaVerkin City's representative, a concrete reaction or
thrust block shall be provided at all plugged outlet fittings in the sizes
indicated on the standard drawings or as directed by LaVerkin City. They also
shall be tied to the pipe with restraining joints. The number and size of rods
shall be as specified.
   F.   Service Lines: All service lines shall be installed according to the
details shown on the standard drawings. A "W" (for water) or "S" (for sewer)
shall be stamped or inscribed in the curb where the service lines cross the
curb line.
   G.   Pipe To Be Kept Clean: All foreign matter or dirt shall be removed from
the interior of the pipe before lowering into position in the trench. Pipe
shall be kept clean by means approved by LaVerkin City during and after laying.
   H.   Jointing Pipe Sections: The sealing surface of the pipe, the bell to be
joined, and the elastomeric gaskets shall be cleaned immediately prior to
assembly, and assembly shall be made as recommended by the manufacturer. When
pipe laying is not in progress, the open ends of installed pipe shall be closed
to prevent entrance of trench water into the line. Whenever water is excluded
from the interior of the pipe, enough backfill shall be placed on the pipe to
prevent floating. Any pipe that has floated shall be removed from the trench
and the bedding restored. No pipe shall be laid when the trench conditions or
the weather are unsuitable for proper installations as determined by the
LaVerkin City water department.
   I.   Cutting Pipe: The pipe shall be cut in a neat manner without damage to
produce a smooth end at right angles to the axis of the pipe.
   J.   End Preparation: Pipe ends shall be cut square, deburred and beveled in
accordance with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations.
   K.   Push On Joints: The push on joint shall be a single elastomeric
gasketed joint, which shall be assembled by positioning the elastomeric gasket
in the annular groove of the bell and inserting the spigot end of the pipe into
the bell. The spigot end of the pipe shall compress the gasket radially to form
a positive seal. The gasket and annular groove shall be designed, sized, and
shaped so that the gasket will resist displacement. Care shall be taken so that
only the correct elastomeric gasket, compatible with the annular groove of the
bell, is used. Insertion of the elastomeric gasket in the annular groove of the
bell must be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
   L.   Mechanical Joints: The mechanical joint shall be a bolted joint of the
stuffing box type, and installation recommendations from the manufacturer shall
be followed. Each joint shall consist of:
      1.   A bell provided with an exterior gland having bolt holes or slots
and a socket with an annular recess for the sealing gasket and the spigot end
of the pipe.
      2.   A sealing gasket.
      3.   A follower gland with bolt holes matching those in the fitting.
      4.   Tee bolts and hexagonal nuts of cor-ten metal.
   M.   Meter Boxes: All meter boxes shall be located behind the sidewalk. Any
meter box covered or damaged during the construction operations shall be
replaced or uncovered and raised to finish grade by the contractor. Any meter,
which is placed in a driveway, shall have a concrete or equivalent box with
brake joints around it. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-14: CLEANING AND DISINFECTION:
   A.   Chlorination: Each line, after being tested and before being placed in
service, shall be disinfected by chlorination. Prior to chlorination the entire
line shall be flushed to ensure that all dirt or foreign objects have been
removed from the line. Sufficient chlorine shall be added to ensure a residual
of twenty five (25) parts per million in the water after twenty four (24) hours
standing in the pipe. Chlorine calcium hypochlorite dry chlorinating chemical
solution may be used for this purpose. Methods of application shall be approved
by the water department. Following chlorination, all treated water shall be
drained and the pipeline thoroughly flushed with clean water. Water will be
metered through a hydrant meter approved from the LaVerkin City water
department.
   B.   Flushing: The entire line shall be flushed after the specified contact
period, and such flushing shall be continued until the water is free from
excess chlorine. The entire line, including hydrant laterals, branch lines, and
dead end mains shall be flushed. Chlorine residual must be tested after final
flushing by the water department. The discharge of flushed water shall be
accomplished in such a manner that no erosion will occur and with no damage to
streets or other property. Procedures for discharge will be subject to the
review of the water department. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
8-7-15: TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE:
The owner and/or contractor shall test all water mains prior to final
acceptance. This shall include the repairing of existing facilities that must
be included in the test but are not capable of holding test pressures. All
concrete reaction blocks, given prior approval by LaVerkin City's
representative, shall be in place at least five (5) days before the initial
filling of the line, unless high early strength concrete is used which will
require three (3) days in place.
   A.   Pressure Test: After all utility services have been installed in the
trench and the water pipe has been laid, including fittings, valves,
corporation stops, services, and hydrants, and the line has been backfilled in
accordance with these standards, each valved section, unless otherwise directed
by the water department, shall be subjected to hydrostatic pressure of not less
than two hundred (200) pounds per square inch prior to asphalt installation.
The duration of each such test shall be twenty four (24) hours unless otherwise
specified by the LaVerkin City public works director. Water added to maintain
the pressure shall not exceed 0.4 gallons per inch diameter per one thousand
(1,000) linear feet of main being tested during the twenty four (24) hour test
period.
   B.   Test Requirements: Each valved section of pipe shall be slowly filled
with water, and the specified test pressure measured at the lowest point of
elevation. This shall be applied by means of a pump connected to the pipe in a
satisfactory manner. The pump, pipe connection, gauges, and all necessary
apparatus shall be furnished by the contractor. Gauges and measuring devices
must meet with the acceptance of the water department and the necessary pipe
taps shall be made as directed. Before applying the specified test pressure,
all air shall be expelled from the pipe by drilling small holes at points of
highest elevations and afterward tightly plugging those holes with brass plugs.
   C.   Defective Pipes, Cracks: Any cracked or defective pipes, fittings,
valves, or hydrants discovered in the pressure test shall be removed and
replaced with sound material in the manner provided. The test shall be repeated
until the water main passes the pressure test and is accepted by the water
department.
   D.   Operational Inspection: At the completion of the project and in the
presence of the LaVerkin City's representative, the contractor shall operate
all valves, hydrants, and water services to ascertain that the entire facility
is in good working order; that all valve boxes are centered and valves are
operational; that all hydrants operate and drain properly and that water is
available at all meter boxes.
   E.   Test Results And Certificates Of Compliance: Test results shall be
submitted for pressure and operational testing in accordance with current water
department requirements. Certificates of compliance may be required, at option
of LaVerkin City's representative, from materials suppliers for any materials
not specifically covered herein. (Ord. 2007-01, 1-3-2007)
CHAPTER 8
CONSERVATION LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
8-8-1: General Provisions
8-8-1-1: Short Title
8-8-1-2: Conflict
8-8-1-3: Applicability
8-8-1-4: Severability
8-8-2: Definitions
8-8-3: Single-Family And Multiple-Family Residential Water Efficiency Standards
8-8-3-1: Construction Standards
8-8-3-2: Landscape Standards
8-8-3-3: Restrictive Covenants In Conflict With Water Efficiency Standards
8-8-4: Nonresidential Zones And Development Water Efficiency Standards
8-8-4-1: Construction Standards
8-8-4-2: Landscaped Standards
8-8-4-3: Irrigation Design Standards
8-8-5: Relief From Application Of Provisions Of Chapter
8-8-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
8-8-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known as “Conservation Landscape Requirements”. (Ord.
2022-08, 9-7-2022)
8-8-1-2: CONFLICT:
The terms and requirements of this Chapter and those of the currently-adopted
Building Related Codes identified in Chapter 1 of Title 9 shall be read and
applied together. Any conflict between the terms and requirements of this
Chapter and those of the Building Related Codes shall be resolved in favor of
the latter. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-2022)
8-8-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this Chapter are applicable to all new construction,
development and major landscape improvements within the City limits of the City
(a) located above the cliffs running along the main portion of the City (known
as “the Top Side”); and (b) in the residential areas within the main land area
of the City below said cliffs, except for those lands for which the city has a
legal obligation, appurtenant water rights or sufficient water delivery
contracts with the City (from the City’s secondary water system) are owned and
assigned for use on said main land property. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-2022; amd. Ord.
2023-04, 3-1-2023; Ord. 20231-14, 12-6-2023)
8-8-1-4: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are severable and if any provision, clause,
sentence, word, or part thereof is held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or
inapplicable to any person or circumstances, such illegality, invalidity,
unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, clauses, sentences, sections, words or parts thereof of
this chapter or their applicability to other persons or circumstances. (Ord.
2022-08, 9-7-2022)
8-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
              Active recreation areas shall be: a minimum of 1,500 contiguous square feet of
              lawn area not less than 30 feet in any dimension not less than 10 feet from areas
ACTIVE        dedicated to vehicular use, such as a street or parking lot designed and located
RECREATION    to be accessible to large populations, such as at a school, daycare, recreation
AREA:         center, senior center, public park, private park, water park or religious
              institution. co-located with amenities, including but not limited to trash bins,
              benches, tables, walking paths, drinking water, playground equipment and/or other
              recreational amenities.
CHECK VALVE:  A device used in sprinkler heads or pipe to prevent water from draining out of
              the pipe through gravity flow.
CONTROLLER:   A device used in irrigation systems to automatically control when and how long
              sprinklers or drip irrigation systems operate.
DRIP EMITTER: A drip irrigation fitting that delivers water slowly at the root zone of the
              plant, usually measured in gallons per hour.
              An irrigation system that delivers water by adding water at the plant’s base and
DRIP          root zone, usually measured in gallons per hour. Drip irrigation exhibits a
IRRIGATION:   droplet, trickle, umbrella or short stream pattern, to reduce evaporation,
              overspray, and water use, and improving water conservation.
GRADING PLAN: The grading plan shows all finish grades, spot elevations, drainage as necessary,
              and new and existing contours with the developed landscaped area.
GROUND COVER: Material planted in such a way as to form a continuous cover over ground that can
              be maintained at a height no more than twelve (12) inches.
              Elements of landscape constructed from non-living materials such as concrete,
HARDSCAPE:    boulders, brick, blacktop, and lumber. It includes patios, decks, and paths, but
              does not include driveways and sidewalks.
HYDROZONE:    Portion of landscape area having plants with similar water needs and rooting
              depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.
IRRIGATION    A plan that shows the components of the irrigation system with water meter size,
PLAN:         backflow prevention, precipitation rates, flow rate, and operating pressure for
              each irrigation circuit, and identification of all irrigation equipment.
IRRIGATION    Irrigation water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape area to which it
RUNOFF:       is applied, and that flows onto other areas.
              A person who holds a professional license to practice landscape architecture in
LANDSCAPE     the state of Utah. Per State Code, licensed landscape architects, licensed
ARCHITECT:    architects, licensed land surveyors, and licensed engineers can professionally
              stamp plans that fall under the practice of landscape architecture. This includes
              commercial landscape and irrigation plans.
LANDSCAPE     Area within a lot or parcel that is not the home footprint, driveway, sidewalk or
AREA:         patio.
              A person who may or may not hold professional certificates for landscape design/
LANDSCAPE     architecture, and who generally focuses on residential design and horticultural
DESIGNER:     needs of home landscapes. Landscape designers cannot legally create commercial
              landscape plans.
              The documentation of graphic and written criteria, specifications, and detailed
LANDSCAPE     plans to arrange and modify the effects of natural features to comply with the
DOCUMENTATION provisions of this chapter. The Landscape Documentation Package shall include a
PACKAGE:      project data sheet, a site plan, a planting plan, an irrigation plan,
              construction details, and a grading plan.
              Any combination of berms; living plants, such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground
LANDSCAPE OR  covers, annuals, perennials, ornamental grass, or seeding; natural features such
LANDSCAPING:  as rock, stone, or bark chips; and structural features, including but not limited
              to outdoor artwork, screen walls, fences or benches that create an attractive and
              pleasing environment.
              Maintaining or keeping any landscaping, or any area required to be landscaped:
LANDSCAPE OR  A.   In a live and thriving condition, with consideration for normal growth and
LANDSCAPING   water needs; and
MAINTENANCE:  B.   Fertilized, mowed, trimmed, edged, mulched and free from weeds, dead plants,
              litter, refuse, or debris in compliance with regionally accepted horticultural
              practice and city ordinances.
LANDSCAPE     A plan that clearly and accurately identifies the location and species of new and
PLAN:         existing trees, shrubs, ground covers, and other plants on a site, and any other
              landscape element, and includes an irrigation plan.
LAWN:         Irrigated nonagricultural land planted in closely mowed, managed grasses.
              Material (such as, but not limited to, rock, bark, wood chips) uniformly applied
              upon the surface of the soil to reduce evaporation and weed growth. Mulches must
MULCH:        allow penetration of water and air. For purposes of this standard, ungrouted
              pavers, stepping stones and artificial turf manufactured to be permeable to air
              and water may be considered mulch.
PARK STRIP:   A typically narrow landscaped area located between the back-of-curb and sidewalk.
              A list of locally adaptable and environmentally sustainable plants for compliant
              Planting Plans as provided by the Washington County Water Conservancy District
PLANT LIST:   (see current version of the Washington County, Utah, Plant Guide, or successor
              thereof, available at the Washington County Water Conservancy District, or online
              at www.wcwcd.org).
PLANTING BED: Areas of the landscape that consist of plants, such as trees, ornamental grasses,
              shrubs, perennials and other regionally appropriate plants.
PLANTING      A Planting Plan that clearly and accurately identifies the type, size, and
PLAN:         locations for new and existing trees, shrubs, planting beds, ground covers, lawn
              areas, driveways, sidewalks, hardscape features, and fences.
PRECIPITATION The depth of water applied to a given area, usually measured in inches per hour.
RATE:
PRESSURE      A drip irrigation system that compensates for fluctuating water pressure by only
COMPENSATING: allowing a fixed volume of water through drip emitters.
PRESSURE      A valve installed in an irrigation mainline that reduces a higher supply pressure
REGULATING    at the inlet down to a regulated lower pressure at the outlet.
VALVE:
REHABILITATED Landscape area in which over 50% percent of existing landscaping is removed and
LANDSCAPING:  replaced. Includes all landscaping funded in part, or completely, by Washington
              County Water Conservancy District’s landscape conversion program.
SECONDARY     Non-potable water that is untreated and used for irrigation of outdoor
IRRIGATION    landscaping.
WATER:
SLOPE:        A vertical rise in feet measured over a horizontal distance, expressed as a
              percentage, measured generally at right angles to contour lines.
TOP SIDE:     the area of the city situated atop the cliffs that line the easterly portions of
              the City, designated as “Top side / East Bench” in the City’s General Plan.
WATER-        A plant that can generally survive with available rainfall once established, with
CONSERVING    possible supplemental irrigation needed or desirable during spring and summer
PLANT:        months or during drought periods. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-14, 12-
              6-2023)
 
8-8-3: SINGLE-FAMILY AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL WATER EFFICIENCY
STANDARDS:
These provisions are applicable to all new construction, and new development in
any residential zone, or for any single family or multiple family residential
development in any zone located in the areas identified in Section
8-8-1-3 above. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-2022)
8-8-3-1: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   The following shall be installed in new single-family and multiple-
family dwellings of 1,400 square feet or greater: A Hot water recirculation
system shall be required, unless hot water can be delivered without displacing
more than 0.6 gallons of water.
   B.   The following shall be installed in all new single-family and multiple-
family dwellings:
      1.   Water Sense labeled fixtures, including, but not limited to
irrigation controllers, faucets, showerheads, toilets, and urinals.
      2.   Energy Star qualified appliances.
   C.   All multiple-family units shall be separately metered, sub-metered, or
equipped with alternative technology capable of tracking the water use of the
individual unit; and the information related thereto shall be made available to
the resident of each unit.
   D.   All multiple-family projects shall be equipped with separate water
meters for all outdoor water usage, including landscaping. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-
2022; amd. Ord. 2023-14, 12-6-2023)
8-8-3-2: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
   A.   For all new residential construction or development, landscaping shall
meet the following requirements:
      1.   Single-Family Dwellings.
         a.   The total grass area shall not exceed the following:
 
Lot size             Maximum grass
Up to 7,500 sf       600 sf
7,500 + to 25,000 sf 8% of lot sf
25,000+ sf           2,000 sf
 
         b.   Multi-family developments with less than 6 dwelling units shall
be allowed 600 square feet of lawn.
         c.   Multi-family developments with more than 6 dwelling units shall
be allowed 100 square feet per of lawn per dwelling unit.
         d.   lawn is prohibited in park strips, in landscape areas less than
eight feet wide, and on any slope that exceeds 15%; and
         e.   Lawns must be accessible for active use and may not be in
streetscape frontages, parking lots, roundabouts, medians, driveways and other
areas not conducive to access and safe use. Lawns may not be within 10 feet of
a roadway.
         f.   Certain special purpose landscape areas (e.g., stormwater
management areas, cemeteries, etc.) may receive exceptions from the slope or
lawn allowances and other elements of the Landscaping Requirements. Exceptions
shall be considered by the municipality on a case-by-case basis.
         g.   Each single-family dwelling shall have a minimum of two water-
efficient shade trees with a minimum one-and-one-half-inch (1½”) caliper trunk.
Each multiple-family development with ten units or less shall follow city
approved landscape planting plans for number of shade trees.
      2.   Multiple-Family Dwelling Projects with More than Ten Units: Comply
with the Landscape Standards in
8-8-4-2 , below.
   B.   The Plant List, as defined in Section
8-8-2 , shall be consulted in determining appropriate, adaptable and
environmentally sustainable trees, shrubs, and other plants to be planted and
maintained. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-14, 12-6-2023)
8-8-3-3: RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS IN CONFLICT WITH WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS:
To the extent permitted by applicable law, any homeowners or property owners’
association governing documents, such as bylaws, operating rules, covenants,
conditions, and restrictions, that govern the operation of a common interest
development, recorded after adoption of this Chapter, are deemed void and
unenforceable if they conflict with the water efficiency standards in this
Chapter, or if they have the effect of prohibiting or restricting compliance
with this Chapter. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-2022)
8-8-4: NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES AND DEVELOPMENT WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS:
These provisions are applicable to all new construction and new development in
all nonresidential zones, and nonresidential development in any zone located in
the areas identified in Section
8-8-1-3 above. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-2022)
8-8-4-1: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   A Hot water recirculation system, unless hot water can be delivered
without displacing more than 0.6 gallons of water.
   B.   Water Sense labeled fixtures shall be installed, including, but not
limited to irrigation controllers, faucets, showerheads toilets, and urinals.
   C.   Energy Star qualified appliances shall be installed.
   D.   All shell units with ground floor square footage, or which are
individually platted, shall be separately metered, sub-metered, or equipped
with alternative technology capable of tracking the water use of the individual
unit,; and the information related thereto shall be made available to the
individual unit.
      1.   Individually-platted condominium units are excepted if a property
owners association owns and maintains the water lines and meters. If the units
platted are at ground level, they are required to have individual water meters.
      2.   All nonresidential projects require separate water meters for all
outdoor water usage, including landscaping.
   E.   All carwash projects shall recirculate and limit the maximum amount of
water to 35 gallons per vehicle washed.
   F.   Manmade Ornamental Water Features, Manmade ornamental water features
are limited to 25 square feet of surface area per parcel and are limited to the
parcel.
   G.   All golf courses using water district or municipal water supplies shall
irrigate with secondary irrigation water and shall have separate water meters
for the golf course. Irrigation with potable water is prohibited. Each golf
course development shall submit and follow a water budget with the Landscape
Documentation Packet and identify water conservation measures for city
approval.
   H.   Outside misting systems shall only operate during the May through
August time period where the daily high temperature is 90 degrees Fahrenheit or
greater. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-14, 12-6-2023)
8-8-4-2: LANDSCAPED STANDARDS:
   A.   All new construction, new development and rehabilitation shall meet the
Landscape Design Standards and Irrigation Design Standards of this Chapter.
      1.   Lawn areas are prohibited except where an Active Recreation Area is
appropriate, such as at a childcare center or athletic complex.
      2.   Lawn is prohibited in any area less than 8 feet wide and/or upon a
slope that exceeds 15 percent and/or within any area less than 10 feet from a
roadway. lawn is not allowed within streetscape frontages, parking lots,
roundabouts, medians, driveways, park strips and other areas not conducive to
access and safe use.
      3.   Landscape and irrigation installers shall follow the plans that have
been signed and approved by the city.
      4.   Each project shall propose and follow an approved Planting Plan. At
least forty percent (40%) of the project’s proposed (and installed) landscaped
area shall contain vegetative cover consisting of water-efficient shade trees
and/or bushes adequate in number and configuration to visually enhance the
project, prevent heat islands, and prevent soil erosion. The configuration of
the vegetation in the Planting Plan is in the sole discretion of the city.
      5.   If secondary irrigation water is reasonably available, each project
shall connect to the system for all outdoor water use. A city may make minor
exceptions, allowing use of treated water for outdoor plantings in small
beautification areas, in its sole discretion.
   B.   The Plant List, as defined in Section
8-8-2 , shall be consulted in determining appropriate, adaptable and
environmentally sustainable trees, shrubs, and other plants to be planted and
maintained.
   C.   Required Documentation
      1.   Landscape Documentation Package: A copy of a Landscape Documentation
Package shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the issue of
any building permit. A copy of the approved Landscape Documentation Package
shall be provided to the property owner or site manager. The Landscape
Documentation Package shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect
(PLA) and shall consist of the following items:
         a.   Project Data Sheet containing the following:
            (1)   Project name and address;
            (2)   Applicant or applicant agent’s name, address, phone number,
and email address;
            (3)   Landscape architect’s name, address, phone number, and email
address; and
            (4)   Landscape contractor’s name, address, phone number and email
address, if available at this time.
         b.   Planting Plan. A detailed Planting Plan shall be drawn at a scale
that clearly identifies the following:
            (1)   Location of all plant materials, a legend with common and
botanical names, and size of plant materials;
            (2)   Property lines and street names;
            (3)   Existing and proposed buildings, walls, fences, utilities,
paved areas and other site improvements;
            (4)   Existing trees and plant materials to be removed or retained;
            (5)   Scale: graphic and written.;
            (6)   Date of design;
            (7)   Designation of hydrozones; and
            (8)   Details and specifications for tree staking, soil
preparation, and other planting work.
         c.   Irrigation Plan. A detailed irrigation plan shall be drawn at the
same scale as the Planting Plan and shall contain the following information:
            (1)   Layout of the irrigation system and a legend summarizing the
type and size of all components of the system, including manufacturer name and
model numbers;
            (2)   Static water pressure in pounds per square inch (psi) at the
point of connection to the public water supply;
            (3)   Flow rate in gallons per minute and design operating pressure
in psi for each valve and precipitation rate in inches per hour for each valve
with irrigation equipment (i.e., sprinklers, drip emitters, bubblers, etc.);
and
            (4)    Installation details for irrigation components.
         d.   Grading Plan. A grading plan shall be drawn at the same scale as
the Planting Plan and shall contain the following information:
            (1)   Property lines and street names, existing and proposed
buildings, walls, fences, utilities, paved areas and other site improvements;
and
            (2)   Existing and finished contour lines and spot elevations as
necessary for the proposed site improvements, as well as drainage.
      2.   Plan Review, Construction Inspection, and Post-Construction
Monitoring.
         a.   As part of the building permit approval process, a copy of the
Landscape Documentation Package shall be submitted with a city-provided pre-
submittal checklist completed to initiate a review and approval process before
construction begins.
         b.   All installers and designers shall meet state and local license,
insurance, and bonding requirements, and shall be able to show proof of such.
         c.   During construction, site inspection of the landscaping may be
performed by the city Building Inspection Department or another entity tasked
with approvals.
         d.   Following construction, and prior to issuance of an occupancy
permit, an inspection shall be scheduled with the Building Inspection
Department or other appointed entity to verify compliance with the approved
landscape plans. The Certificate of Substantial Completion shall be completed
by the property owner, developer, contractor or landscape architect, and
submitted to the city.
         e.   The city or other appointed entity reserves the right to perform
site inspections at any time before, during or after the irrigation system and
landscape installation, and to require corrective measures if requirements of
this Chapter are not satisfied. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-14, 12-
6-2023)
8-8-4-3: IRRIGATION DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Pressure Regulation. A pressure regulating valve shall be installed by
the builder or developer, and maintained by the owner, if the static service
pressure exceeds 90 pounds per square inch (psi). The pressure-regulating valve
shall be located between the meter and the first point of water use, or first
point of division in the pipe, and shall be set at the manufacturer’s
recommended pressure for the sprinklers.
   B.   Irrigation Controller. It is required that landscaped areas use a Water
Sense labeled smart irrigation controller, which automatically adjusts the
frequency and/or duration of irrigation events in response to changing weather
conditions. All controllers shall be equipped with automatic rain delay or rain
shut-off capabilities and shall have memory retention capability to retain pre-
programmed irrigation schedules. Sites are not exempt from water waste
prohibitions.
   C.   Each valve shall irrigate a landscape with a similar site, slope and
soil conditions, and plant materials with similar watering needs. Grass, trees
and non-grass areas shall be irrigated on separate valves. Drip emitters and
sprinklers shall be placed on separate valves.
   D.   Low-volume irrigation equipment (i.e., drip emitters discharging 20
gallons per hour, or less) shall be provided for each tree.
   E.   Drip irrigation shall be used to irrigate plants in non-grass areas.
Spray head to drip conversion for rehabilitated landscape sites may be
acceptable with city approval of Irrigation Plans.
   F.   High conservation efficiency spray nozzles are required for sprinkler
applications.
   G.   Sprinkler heads shall have matched precipitation rates with each
control valve circuit.
   H.   Sprinkler heads shall be attached to rigid lateral lines with flexible
material (swing joints) to reduce potential for breakage.
   I.   Check valves are required. Pressure compensating valves and sprinklers
are required where a significant variation in water pressure occurs within the
irrigation system due to elevation differences.
   J.   Filters, pressure regulating valves and end-flush Fittings shall be
provided for drip irrigation lines. Drip systems shall not use emitters that
discharge more than 20 gallons per hour (GPH).
   K.   Landscape watering with potable (treated) water is prohibited from 10:
00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., June 1 to September 1, to maximize irrigation efficiency;
and it should be limited to the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 a.m. during times
of low wind, year-round, to avoid excessive loss of water through
evapotranspiration, with treated or untreated (secondary) water. (c.f., Section
8-6-6)
   L.   Water waste is prohibited.
      1.   Waste includes overwatering, irrigating during a precipitation
event, water that sprays or flows off your property, failure to comply with
drought restrictions and/or a failure to repair irrigation system leaks and/or
malfunctions in a timely manner. [See Section
8-1-17.]
      2.   Overwatering can be avoided by following the Washington County
Conservancy District recommended irrigation schedule and practices as noted on
wcwcd.org. The generally recommended schedule is:
         a.   Winter (Nov - Feb) - sprinkler and drip irrigation up to 1 day a
week. Irrigation is typically not needed in December and January
         b.   Spring (Mar - April) - sprinkler irrigation up to 3 days a week
and drip irrigation up to 2 days a week
         c.   Summer (May - Aug) - sprinkler irrigation up to 4 days a week and
drip irrigation up to 3 days a week
         d.   Fall (Sept - Oct) - sprinkler irrigation up to 3 days a week and
drip irrigation up to 2 days a week
   M.   Program valves for multiple repeat cycles are required to reduce runoff
on slopes and for soils with slow infiltration rates. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-2022;
amd. Ord. 2023-14, 12-6-2023)
8-8-5: RELIEF FROM APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER:
Any landowner or developer of property located within the main land area of the
City-for which new construction, development and/or major landscape
improvements are desired, but which the landowner or developer asserts is not
connected and cannot reasonably connect to and be served by the City’s
secondary water system-may submit a written request for relief to the City
Administrator, who shall review the request within ten (10) business days and
grant such relief as he or she deems necessary and proper, and in accordance
with application state and local law. If aggrieved by the decision of the City
Administrator, such landowner or developer may make application to appear
before the City Council to request relief. (Ord. 2022-08, 9-7-2022)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING RELATED CODES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Interpretation
9-1-2: Building Code Adopted
9-1-3: Residential Code Adopted
9-1-4: Electrical Code Adopted
9-1-5: Plumbing Code Adopted
9-1-6: Fuel Gas Code Adopted
9-1-7: Mechanical Code Adopted
9-1-8: Fire Code Adopted
9-1-9: Wildland-Urban Interface Code Adopted
9-1-10: Energy Conservation Code Adopted
9-1-11: Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings Code Adopted
9-1-12: Existing Building Code Adopted
9-1-13: Swimming Pool And Spa Code Adopted
9-1-14: Building Official
9-1-15: Building Permit Required
9-1-16: Grading Permit Required
9-1-17: Penalty; Exception
9-1-1: INTERPRETATION:
Any reference in this code to “the applicable building related code” or “the
applicable building related codes” shall mean and include the applicable code
or codes identified and adopted in this chapter, as well as any subsequent
amendments or revisions which shall automatically be adopted and included in
this chapter. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024)
9-1-2: BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Building Code: The 2021 edition of the international
building code (IBC),including appendices chapters C and J and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms as published by the
International Code Council and as adopted and amended by the state, with the
exception of appendix B entitled “Board Of Appeals”, as published by the
International Code Council and as adopted and amended by the state, is hereby
adopted as the code for LaVerkin City for regulating the design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and two-family
dwellings and townhouses in the city and providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor. Such international building code shall be on
file in the LaVerkin City office for use and examination by the public.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections of the IBC are hereby revised:
      1.    Section 101.1 Insert: city of LaVerkin.
      2.   Table R301.2(1) Insert: Ground snow load - 21 lbs., roof snow load -
15 lbs., wind speed (mph) - 115, seismic design category - soils/engineering;
weathering - moderate, frost line depth - 12 inches; termite - moderate to
heavy, decay - none/slight, design temperature dry bulb 2.5% - 102°, wet bulb
2.5% - 70°, flood hazards - a) August 19, 1987 and b) January 7, 1998.
   C.   Building Valuation Tables: The February 2023 building valuation data
and tables included therein, as promulgated by the International Code Council,
is hereby adopted by the city for the determination of square-foot construction
costs used in the calculation of the building permit fees-to ensure that
building construction values are up-to-date and reflective of the current
building environment, and to provide fairness in the assessment of building
permit fees under the code or codes in this chapter. Provided that, in
calculating values within the jurisdictional boundaries of LaVerkin, the city
shall apply a factor of 100% against the values in said tables. (Ord. 2019-07,
8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024)
9-1-3: RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   The International Residential Code: The 2021 edition of the
international residential code (IRC) including appendix chapters D, E, G, L, M,
R, AE and AQ and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms as published by the International Code Council and as adopted and amended
by the state, is hereby adopted as the code of LaVerkin City for regulating the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three (3) stories in
height in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor. Such international residential code shall be in book form on
file in the LaVerkin City office for use and examination by the public.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections of the IRC are hereby revised:
      1.   Section R101.1 Insert: city of LaVerkin.
      2.   Table R.301.2(1) Insert: Ground snow load - 21 lbs., roof snow load
- 15 lbs., wind speed (mph) - 115, seismic design category D - soils/
engineering; weathering - moderate, frost line depth - 12 inches; termite -
moderate to heavy, decay - none/slight, design temperature dry bulb 2.5% -
102°, wet bulb 2.5% - 70°, flood hazards - a) August 19, 1987 and b) January 7,
1998. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024)
9-1-4: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts the 2020 version of the national electrical code (NEC)
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms as published by the National Fire Protection Association as adopted and
amended by the state, as the electrical code of LaVerkin City for regulating
the design, construction, quality of materials, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
electrical systems in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor. Such national electrical code shall be in book
form, on file in the LaVerkin City office for use and examination by the
public. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024)
9-1-5: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Plumbing Code: The city hereby adopts the 2021 version of
the international plumbing code (IPC) as adopted and amended by the state,
including appendix chapters B, D, E, and F and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms, published by the International
Code Council, as the plumbing code of LaVerkin City for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing
systems in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor. Such international plumbing code shall be in book form, on file
for use and examination by the public in the LaVerkin City office.
   B.   Revisions: The international plumbing code, section 101.1 is hereby
revised to insert city of LaVerkin. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06,
2-21-2024)
9-1-6: FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Fuel Gas Code: The city hereby adopts the 2021 version of
the international fuel gas code (IFGC) as amended and adopted by the state, and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms as
published by the International Code Council, as the fuel gas code for LaVerkin
City for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use or maintenance of fuel gas systems in the city and providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor. Such international fuel
gas code shall be in book form on file for use and examination by the public in
the LaVerkin City office.
   B.   Revisions: The international fuel gas code, section 101.1 is hereby
revised to insert city of LaVerkin. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06,
2-21-2024)
9-1-7: MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Mechanical Code: The city hereby adopts the 2021 version
of the international mechanical code (IMC) as amended and adopted by the state,
including appendix A and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms as published by the International Code Council,
as the mechanical code for LaVerkin City for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems
in the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor. Such international mechanical code shall be in book form on file for
use and examination by the public in the LaVerkin City office.
   B.   Revisions: The international mechanical code, section 101.1 is hereby
revised to insert city of LaVerkin. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06,
2-21-2024)
9-1-8: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Fire Code: The city hereby adopts the state fire code, as
adopted by the state of Utah, in chapter 5 of title 15A, Utah Code Annotated
(1953, as amended, and effective July 1, 2013) including, but not limited to,
the 2021 edition of the international fire code, as amended and adopted by the
state in said chapter, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms, and appendices A through D thereto, as
published by the International Code Council, as the fire code for LaVerkin
City, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire
and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials
and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy
of buildings and premises as provided; and providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor. Such fire code shall be in book form
on file in the LaVerkin City office for use and examination by the public.
   B.   Revisions: The international fire code, section 101.1 is hereby revised
to insert city of LaVerkin.
   C.   Geographic Limits: The geographic limits referred to in certain
sections of the international fire code are hereby established as follows:
      1.   Section 3204.3.1.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of
flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): Hurricane
fire department.
      2.   Section 3404.2.9.5.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of
class I and class II liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is
prohibited): Hurricane fire department.
      3.   Section 3406.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the storage of class
I and class II liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited): Hurricane fire
department.
      4.   Section 3804.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the storage of
liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated
or congested areas): Hurricane fire department. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd.
Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024)
9-1-9: WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Wildland-Urban Interface Code: The city hereby adopts the
2020 edition of the international wildland-urban interface code, but (unless
otherwise specified herein) not including the appendices thereto, as published
by the International Code Council, as the wildland-urban interface code for
LaVerkin City, regulating and governing the mitigation of hazard to life and
property from the intrusion of fire from wildland exposures, fire from adjacent
structures, and prevention of structure fires from spreading to wildland fuels
within and surrounding the jurisdictional boundaries of LaVerkin City; and
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
      1.   Section 101.1. Insert “LaVerkin City”.
      2.   Section 103.1. Insert “LaVerkin City”.
      3.   Section 109.4.7. Insert “LaVerkin City”.
      4.   Delete section 114.4.
   C.   Specific Boundaries Of Areas: Specific boundaries of natural or manmade
features of wildland-urban interface areas shall be as shown on the wildland-
urban interface area as depicted on any wildland-urban interface map or maps
adopted pursuant to chapter 3 of said code. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord.
2024-06, 2-21-2024)
9-1-10: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Energy Conservation Code: The city hereby adopts the 2018
version of the international energy conservation code (IECC) as amended and
adopted by the state, including appendix A and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms as published by the International
Code Council, as the energy code for LaVerkin City for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of energy systems in
the city and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor. Such international energy code shall be in book form on file for use
and examination by the public in the LaVerkin City office.
   B.   Revisions: The international energy code, section 101.1 is hereby
revised to insert city of LaVerkin. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06,
2-21-2024)
9-1-11: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE ADOPTED:
   Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings: The city hereby
adopts the 1997 edition of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous
buildings (“UCADB”), as published by the International Code Council and as
adopted and amended by the state, as a code for LaVerkin City for regulating
building alteration, remodeling, maintenance, repair, removal, seismic
evaluation, and rehabilitation of buildings and structures that fail to meet
minimum maintenance standards and become or are deemed or declared by the city
building inspector to be unsafe, unsightly, unstable, dangerous, dilapidated,
deleterious and/or hazardous. Provided, that any reference therein to the
uniform building code (UBC) or any provision thereof, shall refer instead to
the international building code (IBC) or international residential code (IRC),
and any similar or substantially similar provision therein, as applicable.
(Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024)
9-1-12: EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
International Existing Building Code: The city hereby adopts the 2021 edition
of the international existing building code (“IEBC”) as a code for LaVerkin
City for regulating and providing flexibility with regards to the repair,
alteration, change of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing
buildings, to meet minimum acceptable levels to safeguard the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024)   
9-1-13: SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE ADOPTED:
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code: The city hereby adopts the 2021
edition of the international swimming pool and spa code (“ISPSC”) as a code for
LaVerkin City for regulating and controlling the design, construction,
installation, alteration, quality of materials, location, movement, renovation,
replacement, repair and maintenance of aquatic recreation facilities, pools,
and spas, to meet minimum acceptable levels to provide a reasonable level of
safety and protection of health, property and public welfare. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-
7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024)
9-1-14: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created the position of building official who
shall also be known as the city building inspector.
   B.    Powers:
      1.   The building inspector shall have the power to order all work
stopped on construction, alteration or repairs of buildings in the city when
such work is being done in violation of any provisions of any ordinance
relating thereto, or in violation of the subdivision or zoning titles of the
city. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such order, except on the
written permission of the inspector; provided, that if the stop order is an
oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within one hour. Such
written stop order may be served by any peace officer or other authorized
person.
      2.   The building inspector shall have the power to enter into any
building or the premises where the work of altering, repairing or constructing
any building or structure is going on, for the purpose of making inspections at
any reasonable hour, pursuant to any of the provisions of this title and title
4 of this code.
   C.   Duties: The building inspector shall, in addition to all other duties
imposed on him by the city:
      1.   Enforce the provisions of the applicable building-related codes.
      2.   Inspect all buildings, structures, ditches, signs, fences and
objects to determine their safety and effect on the persons who are within the
city.
      3.   Review all building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be
reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a location
that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial
improvement (including prefabricated and mobile homes) must:
         a.   Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
         b.    Use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage; and
         c.    Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
      4.    Review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to
assure that:
         a.    All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
         b.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage; and
         c.   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
      5.    Require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary
sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters
and require on site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid
impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2019-07,
8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024)
9-1-15: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Application And Plans: A building permit shall be submitted to the city
on written application accompanied by plans and specifications in duplicate,
which must state the specific nature of the construction or alterations to be
made. The plan must be verified by the person who will perform or be in charge
of the construction or alteration.
   B.   Variations Of Plan Prohibited: No material variation from the approved
plan shall be allowed unless such variations shall first have been approved in
writing by the building inspector.
   C.   Approval Of Plan: The application and plans shall be reviewed by the
building inspector to determine whether the proposed construction or alteration
conforms to the building codes and ordinances of the city. The building
inspector shall make the plan available for return within ten (10) days with
the statement “approved” if the plans do conform or “disapproved” if the plans
do not conform. If the plans are disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be
attached to the plans. Upon approval of the plans and receipt of the applicable
fee therefor the city shall issue a permit to the applicant, together with one
set of the approved plan. One set of the plans shall be retained by the
building inspector. The building inspector may revoke at any time a permit
which has been issued for any building constructed or being constructed or
which would be or would result, if construction continued, in violation of any
ordinance of the city.
   D.   In addition to any other requirement in this Chapter, issuance of a
building permit for any structure or improvement in any area characterized by
the presence of subsurface water, groundwater, unstable soils or other
identifiable geological hazard shall be subject to the following:
      1.    Any person or entity desiring to obtain a building permit in any
area characterized by the presence of subsurface water, groundwater, unstable
soils or other identifiable geological hazard, shall, as a condition of
obtaining a building permit for any structure or improvement in these areas:
         a.   obtain a geotechnical report from a qualified engineer, stating
that such structure or improvement can be safely constructed and inhabited, or
used for its intended purpose,
         b.   be responsible for strictly following all recommendations
contained in said geotechnical report, and
         c.   be required to sign an acknowledgment, waiver, and release in
substantially the following form:
   When Recorded Return to:
   LaVerkin City
   435 North Main Street
   LaVerkin, Utah 84745
   Parcel ID#: LV-___________
   Acknowledgment, Waiver, and Release
   In consideration of the agreement by LaVerkin City to issue the undersigned
property owner a building permit for the construction of a structure or other
improvement upon the real property described below, the undersigned
acknowledges, covenants and agrees as follows:
   1.   I am aware that subsurface water, high groundwater, unstable soil
conditions, or other geological hazards have been found to exist in areas of
LaVerkin City, which may include the property described below.
   2.   I acknowledge that I have obtained from a competent engineer a
geotechnical report which analyzes subsurface water, groundwater, soil
conditions and seismic conditions on my property described below.
   3.   I acknowledge that it is my responsibility to cause the construction of
my structure or improvement to be completed in strict compliance with the
recommendations of any such geotechnical report, I agree to strictly comply
with the recommendations of such geotechnical report, and I understand and
agree that the inspections performed by LaVerkin City will not include
inspection for compliance with such geotechnical report.
   4.   In view of the foregoing, I agree on behalf of myself, my heirs,
successors, and assigns to waive any and all claims as against LaVerkin City,
and, further, do hereby release LaVerkin City from any and all liability for
damages to, diminution in value of, and payment of all costs and expenses for
maintenance, repair or replacement of any home, structure or improvement which
is in any way attributable or related to subsurface water, groundwater,
unstable soil conditions and/or any other geological hazards upon or under the
property described below, or by reason of my own or my agent’s or contractor’s
violation of any applicable laws, ordinances, or City standards.
   The covenants and agreements contained herein shall run with the land and
shall be binding upon the heirs, successors, and assigns of the undersigned.
   THE REAL PROPERTY AFFECTED BY THIS AGREEMENT IS DESCRIBED AS:
   (Insert Legal Description)
   Address: ______________________________________________
   Subdivision: __________________ Phase: _______ Lot: ________
   Dated this ______ day of _____________, 20____.
         Property Owner Signature
         ____________________________
         ____________________________
   STATE OF UTAH
   COUNTY OF WASHINGTON
   On the ___ day of _____, 20___, personally appeared before me _______, the
signer(s) of the foregoing instrument, who did say that he/she/they is/are the
owner(s) of the above-described property and that he/she/they has/have signed
the foregoing instrument for the reasons stated therein.
                           _____________________________
Notary Public
My commission expires: _________
   2.   Property owners applying for a building permit to: (1) construct an
accessory building on a developed lot or (2) remodel an existing building shall
not be required to obtain a geotechnical report or enter into the above
agreement, except as may be required by the City Building Official on a case-
by-case basis.
   3.   The issuance of a building permit by the City is not, and should not in
any way be interpreted or construed as, a guarantee, representation, warranty,
or assurance of any kind: (1) as to the lack of geological hazards on the
property; (2) as to the reliability or soundness of any geotechnical report
obtained by the owner; or (3) that any structure or other improvement
constructed on the property in accordance with any such geotechnical report
will be free from damages, diminution in value, and/or increased costs and
expenses for maintenance, repair and replacement because of subsurface water,
groundwater, unstable soils or other geological hazards.
   4.   The City shall not be responsible or liable for mitigation of any
damage to, diminution in value of, and payment of any costs and expenses for
maintenance, repair or replacement of any structure or other improvement
constructed or maintained on property resulting from the presence of subsurface
water, groundwater, unstable soil, or any other geological hazard. (Ord. 2019-
07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-05, 2-21-2024; Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024)
9-1-16: GRADING PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Definition: For purposes of this section, "grading" shall mean the
process of clearing, leveling or reshaping land to a desired elevation, slope
or contour in preparation for development activity or other purpose.
   B.   General Requirement: No person shall commence or perform any grading,
excavation, filling or clearing of land without (i) ascertaining the existence
and location of any underground utilities, and (ii) having obtained a permit
from the Zoning Administrator or his designee. No grading permit shall be
issued except in connection with a permitted use allowed within the zoning
district where the property to be graded, filled or cleared is located. All
grading plans submitted for approval must be prepared by a professional
engineer licensed in the State of Utah.
   C.   Exemptions: The following grading activities are exempt from the permit
requirement:
      1.   Emergency grading which is immediately necessary for protecting
life, property, or natural resources from imminent threat or danger.
      2.    Grading in connection with existing agricultural uses conducted as
a permitted or accessory use.
      3.    Swimming pools: In-ground residential or commercial uses that
require a building permit.
      4.    Residential Landscaping: Minor grading, excavation, filling, or
clearing associated with landscaping projects for single-family residential
uses.
      5.    Grading activities in connection with general cleanup of single
residential lots which include removal of weeds, junk, trash, debris, or other
unwanted matter without leveling/grading, removing, or adding dirt to the lot.
      6.   Grading in connection with a drainage study (done by a licensed
Engineer) on parcels under one acre.
      7.    Grading in connection with a sediment and erosion control plan on
parcels under one acre.
      8.    Air quality/dust control plans are not required for grading
activities on parcels under one acre; provided that such grading activities
shall comply with Utah Administrative Code R-307-205-5.
   D.   Application: Each application for a grading permit shall include the
following:
      1.   Name of applicant.
      2.   Business or residence address of applicant.
      3.   Name, address or telephone number of the owner of the property of
record.
      4.   Address and legal description of subject property including the tax
reference number and parcel number of the subject property.
      5.   Name, address and telephone number of the contractor and any
subcontractor(s) who shall perform the land disturbing/grading activity and who
shall implement the erosion and sediment control plan.
      6.   A written statement indicating the nature, extent, and purpose of
the land disturbing/grading activity, including the size of the area for which
the permit shall be applicable and a schedule for the staffing and completion
dates of the land disturbing/grading activity.
      7.   A wading diagram with contours of two feet and cross sec ions
showing the extent of grading with cut/fill, import/export, and grading volumes
in cubic yards; as well as a statement identifying the location of where any
excess dirt is transported to within City limits.
      8.   For grading associated with a pending land use application, a
written statement from the property owner or project proponent acknowledging
that grading contours and elevations shown on the grading plan are subject to
change pending final approval of the land use application and construction
drawings.
      9.   A drainage study conducted by a licensed and qualified engineer.
      10.   A sediment and erosion control plan.
      11.   A drainage plan.
      12.   An air quality/dust control plan, which shall include a detailed
plan to control and limit dust, noise, vibration, smoke, and odor created on
the site during actual extraction operations and during idle times. This plan
shall reflect the requirement that all access and haul roads on the site shall
be maintained in a dust free condition by impervious surfacing or some other
treatment approved by the City. Dust mitigation must be pursuant to Rule R-307-
205 of the Utah Administrative Code, applicable City ordinances, and any other
applicable statute or regulation
      13.   A weed control and abatement plan.
      14.   Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by
payment of grading permit and other review fees, as adopted by resolution and
found in the City fee schedule.
      15.   Reclamation Bond: In reviewing a grading permit application, the
Zoning Administrator may require the applicant/permittee to post a grading
bond, in the form of (i) a cash bond, (ii) a surety bond, or (iii) letter of
credit or similar security from a licensed and insured lender in an amount
sufficient to cover ten percent (10%) of the cost to restore the graded area to
an acceptable level of appearance and stability. The City Engineer must approve
the cost breakdown for the proposed bond prior to the City accepting said bond.
Once the City approves the cost breakdown, the applicant will be required to
provide the bond in the amount shown on the approved cost breakdown.
      16.   Inspections: All construction or work for which a permit is
required shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times by the Zoning
Administrator and Public Works.inspectors. The Zoning Administrator and or
Public Works Inspectors may make any inspections of any construction work
deemed necessary to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this article
and other ordinances which are applicable. The permittee shall notify the
Zoning Administrator and or Public Works inspectors when grading reaches
completion and prior to being covered or concealed by additional work. Whenever
any work on which inspections are required is covered or concealed by
additional work without first having been inspected, the Zoning Administrator
and or public works inspectors may require, through written notice, that such
work be exposed for examination. The work of exposing and recovering shall be
an expense of the permittee requiring the inspection.
   E.   Approval Procedure:
      1.   The Zoning Administrator, upon receiving a complete application for
a grading permit, shall present the application to the Joint Utility Committee
for review to determine compliance with the approval standards of this section.
After reviewing the application with the Joint Utility Committee, the Zoning
Administrator shall provide to the applicant one (1) of the following responses
in writing:
         a.   Approval of the permit application.
         b.   Approval of the permit application, subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be necessary to achieve the objectives of this title, and
issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
         c.   Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for
the denial.
      2.   If the Zoning Administrator has granted conditional approval of the
permit, the applicant shall submit a revised plan that conforms to the
conditions established by this code. No grading permit will be released until
the development plans have been approved.
   F.   Permit Duration: A grading permit issued pursuant to this section shall
expire and become null and void if substantial work authorized by such permit
has not commenced within sixty (60) calendar days of issuance. A grading permit
shall also become null and void if the entire project is not completed within
twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. A grading permit may be extended
for an additional time period deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator
not to exceed twelve (12) months, provided that the applicant is in compliance
with this section, substantial work has been completed on the site, and the
reclamation bond is renewed and updated as may be required by the City
Engineer.
   G.   Inspections: The applicant must notify the Public Works Director in
advance of the commencement of grading to schedule a preconstruction meeting.
If deemed unnecessary, the Public Works Director may waive the requirement to
hold a preconstruction meeting for grading not associated with a pending or
active, approved land use application. No work under any grading permit may be
commenced until the Public Works Director has issued a Notice to Proceed
letter. The Public Works Director may inspect the work for conformance to the
approved plans at any time. Failure to comply with the approved plans shall
subject the property owner, contractor, and applicant to stop work orders,
civil damages, and any other recourse or penalties available under City, state,
or federal law.
   H.   Reclamation Bond: Prior to the grading permit being issued, a bond in
an amount ten percent (10%) must be in place to be used to mitigate any
potential hazards or disruptions caused by the grading work.
   I.   Approval Standards: No grading permit shall be issued unless and until
the applicant:
      1.   Submits a complete application in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
      2.   Provides verification that no increase in stormwater drainage will
occur on neighboring properties.
      3.   Provides verification that sediment will be adequately retained and
erosion adequately controlled.
      4.   Provides verification that weeds will be adequately controlled.
      5.   Provides verification that dust, noise, vibration, smoke, and odor
created on the site during actual extractions operations and during idle times
will be controlled and limited to prevent nuisance to neighboring properties,
to comply with Utah Administrative Code R-307-205, applicable City ordinances,
and any other applicable statute or regulation.
      6.   Provides verification from the City Engineer that the overall extent
of the grading shown in the plans matches the amount used to calculate the
reclamation bond.
      7.   Provides verification that legal access to the property is
available. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024; Ord. 2025-02,
4-2-2025)
9-1-17: PENALTY; EXCEPTION:
   A.   It shall be a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1  of this code, for any homeowner and a class B misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1  of this code, for any person who receives payment or anything of value
to construct or alter any building or structure, except a fence, without first
securing the permit required by this chapter.
   B.   This section shall not apply where the retail cost of the materials
used in the construction or alteration is less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), except that it shall apply in all cases where the construction or
alteration results in an enlarged structure or affects the walls of the
building or structure. (Ord. 2019-07, 8-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2024-06, 2-21-2024)
CHAPTER 1A
APPEALS PROCEDURE
SECTION:
9-1A-1: Board Of Appeals; Established; Purpose And Authority
9-1A-2: Appointment; Membership; Quorum; Term; Organization
9-1A-3: Appeals Petition
9-1A-4: Rules Of Conduct
9-1A-5: Judicial Review Of Board's Decision(s)
9-1A-1: BOARD OF APPEALS; ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   There shall be created a board of appeals and examiners, hereinafter
called "board", consisting of five (5) members who:
      1.   Are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters
pertaining to the technical building related construction codes adopted by the
city and set forth and/or incorporated by chapter 1 of this title; and
      2.   Are not employees of the city.
   B.   The board:
      1.   Shall interpret the provisions of the technical building related
construction codes adopted by the city and set forth and/or incorporated by
chapter 1 of this title.
      2.   Shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error
in any notice, order, requirement, decision or determination made by a building
official in the enforcement of this title.
      3.   May recommend new ordinances to the city council.
      4.   Shall have only those powers expressly set forth herein and in the
adopted codes under which it is acting.
      5.   Shall have no authority to waive requirements of the technical
building related construction codes adopted by the city and set forth and/or
incorporated by chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 2013-02, 2-6-2013)
9-1A-2: APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP; QUORUM; TERM; ORGANIZATION:
   A.   The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall
appoint a five (5) member appeals board.
   B.   Initially, three (3) of the members of the board shall be appointed to
serve until January 31, 2016, and two (2) of the members shall be appointed to
serve until January 31, 2018. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for a four
(4) year term. Any vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any
member whose office becomes vacant.
   C.   The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may appoint
up to two (2) qualified individuals to serve, on an annual basis, as alternate
members of the board.
   D.   No meeting or hearing of the board may be commenced or continued, and
no action of the board may be taken, without a quorum of the board's members
present. A quorum shall consist of three (3) or more members of the board. The
minimum number of affirmative ("yes") votes, for any motion or action of the
board, shall be a majority of the members present.
   E.   The members of the board shall elect a chairperson and a chairperson
pro tem from among its members, who shall serve until such time as said
officer's term on the board expires and he/she is not reappointed, or new
elections are held and new officers are elected to serve in said positions,
whichever occurs first.
   F.   Members shall be selected without respect to political affiliations and
shall serve without compensation, except for reasonable expenses. (Ord. 2013-
02, 2-6-2013)
9-1A-3: APPEALS PETITION:
Any individual or entity who/that has been directly and negatively impacted by
a decision or determination of the building official, or a notice or order
issued under and/or pursuant to the authority and/or provisions of a building
related code adopted by the city, may (as "appellant") appeal that decision,
determination, notice, or order, by filing an appeals petition:
   A.   In writing;
   B.   With the city administrator;
   C.   Addressed to the board of appeals;
   D.   Unless otherwise specifically provided by the relevant and adopted
building related code, within twenty (20) days of the date of the decision,
determination, notice, and/or order from which an appeal is taken;
   E.   Accompanied by the requisite appeals fee established by resolution or
ordinance of the city council. The appeals board shall not consider an appeal
petition until the requisite fee has been paid; and
   F.   Based on a supportable claim that:
      1.   The true intent of the relevant building related code or rule(s)
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted;
      2.   Said code or rule(s) do not fully apply to appellant's action or
anticipated action; or
      3.   An equally good or better form of construction exists and is
proposed (detailing what that form of construction is or may be). (Ord. 2013-
02, 2-6-2013)
9-1A-4: RULES OF CONDUCT:
The board of appeals shall:
   A.   Adopt reasonable rules and policies for conducting their
investigations, meetings, and business.
   B.   Hold such meetings or hearings as may be necessary and prudent to carry
out the intent of this chapter.
   C.   Strictly respect the procedural and substantive due process rights of
the persons and entities that appear before it in connection with an appeal,
and follow and adhere to the provisions of the applicable municipal ethics
codes, privacy and records management acts, and open meetings laws of the city
and the state of Utah.
   D.   Render, in writing and in a prompt and timely manner, its decisions and
findings to the building official and appellant. (Ord. 2013-02, 2-6-2013)
9-1A-5: JUDICIAL REVIEW OF BOARD'S DECISION(S):
   A.   Decisions and findings become final when: 1) reduced to writing and
signed by an authorized officer of the board, and 2) written notice thereof is
given to the building official and appellant.
   B.   Either the city or appellant may seek judicial relief from an adverse
interpretation, order, determination, or decision of the board, provided that
the petition for relief is filed with the court within thirty (30) days of the
date that the decision and/or finding becomes final. (Ord. 2013-02, 2-6-2013)
CHAPTER 2
IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Administrative Provisions
9-2-2: Schedule Of Impact Fees
9-2-3: Endangered Species Act Impact Fees
9-2-4: Stormwater (Drainage) Impact Fees
9-2-1: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Definitions: The city hereby adopts and incorporates the definitions
set forth in Utah Code Annotated Section 11-36a-102, UCA, for the terms used in
this chapter.
   B.   Service Area Established: The city hereby establishes one service area
consisting of the entire geographical area of the city.
   C.   Schedule Adopted: Based upon an analysis study, the type of development
activity and the improvements involved, the city hereby adopts the schedule of
impact fees set forth in section
9-2-2  of this chapter.
   D.   Adjustments:
      1.   A developer may be allowed to receive a credit against or a
proportionate reimbursement of impact fees if the developer dedicates land for
a system improvement, builds and dedicates some or all of a system improvement,
or dedicates a public facility that the City and the developer agree will
reduce the need for a system improvement. A credit against impact fees shall be
granted for any dedication of land for, improvement to, or new construction of
any system improvement provided by the developer if the facilities are system
improvements or are dedicated to the public and offset the need for an
identified future improvement.
      2.   The city council may adjust the impact fees set forth herein upon a
showing of unusual circumstances and to ensure fairness in the allocation and
imposition of impact fees upon new development. Such adjustment shall be made
only upon specific written request to the city council by persons subject to
payment of such fees and after consideration of such matter by the city council
at a regular meeting of the city council.
      3.   The city council may adjust the amount of impact fees to be paid on
any specific development based upon certified and reliable data and studies
submitted by the developer evidencing that the impact fee imposed is unfair or
not reasonably related to the impacts caused by such new development.
   E.   Increase In Density: Any home or structure which increases the family
occupancy of that home or structure shall pay all current impact and connection
fees applicable for each family unit increase. All increases in family density
must be properly permitted and meet current ordinances. This is not meant to
govern temporary “mother-in-law” type or other temporary blood relative type
arrangements.
   F.   Impact fees shall be fair, proportionate, supported by, and not in
excess of the maximum fees justified by (and as calculated and set forth in)
the approved impact fee facilities plan and analysis serving as the basis
therefor.
   G.   Unless and except as may be required by a servicing district (e.g.,
water conservancy district, solid wase district, sewer district, etc.), impact
fees shall be paid to the City prior to final plat recordation or prior to
issuance of a building permit for an existing platted lot where such fees were
not collected at the time of final plat recordation. If the servicing district
requires the payment at a time prior to that which is provided above, the
district’s required date of payment shall take precedence.
   H.   All impact fees assessed and received by the City pursuant to the
Ordinance shall be accounted for, used, and (as appropriate) refunded in
compliance with the requirements of Section 11-36a-601, et seq., UCA.
   I.   Subject to the time limitations as provided in Section 11-36a-702, UCA,
any person or entity that has paid the impact fee pursuant to this Chapter may
challenge the impact fee as provided for in Section 11-36a-701, et seq., UCA,
by filing:
      1.   A written administrative appeal to the City pursuant to Subsection J
of this Section; or
      2.   A request for arbitration as provided in Utah Code Ann. 11-36a-705,
as amended; or
      3.   An action in state district court.
   J.   A written administrative appeal challenging the impact fee or fees may
be made to the City by any person or entity that has paid or made an impact fee
required by this Chapter.
      1.   To do so, the aggrieved person or entity shall file, in writing with
the City Recorder, a letter or notice of appeal, setting forth (a) the name of
the person or entity challenging the impact fee or fees, (b) the specific
impact fee or fees challenged, (c) evidence of payment by the person or entity
of the impact fee or fees challenged, and (d) alleged grounds for such
challenge.
      2.   A written administrative appeal (subject to the time limitations as
provided in Section 11-36a-702, UCA, containing the information set forth
herein and filed with the City, comprise the necessary document for filing an
administrative appeal as provided in Section 11-703(2)(a),UCA.
      3.   An administrative appeal shall be considered and decided by the
“Appeal Authority”, which is currently designated as the City Council, or such
other body as the City shall designate, within thirty (30) days after the day
on which the appeal is filed.
      4.   The person or entity challenging or appealing the impact fee may
appear at the hearing and present any written or oral evidence deemed relevant
to the imposition of the impact fee.
      5.   The decision of the Appeal Authority shall be in writing and shall
be supported by written findings. No appeal shall be permitted unless and until
the impact fees at issue have been paid. (Ord. 2007-10, 3-21-2007; amd. Ord.
2023-13, 11-1-2023)
9-2-2: SCHEDULE OF IMPACT FEES:
Stormwater (drainage):  
 Residential          $5,086.00 per acre*
 Nonresidential or    $7,629 per acre*
  Commercial
                     *See Section
                       9-2-4  below
Parks                        3,256.00 per unit
Streets:                
 Residential                   678.00
 Commercial                    1.00    per square foot of total building size
Public safety:
 Residential:
                     Police      133.00 per unit
 Commercial:
                     Police      2,353.00 per acre
Culinary water meter impact:
 5/8 inch         1,478.00
 3/4 inch         2,128.00
 1 inch            3,784.00
 11/2 inch         8,513.00
 2 inch            15,135.00
 3 inch            34,053.00
 4 inch            60,539.00
 6 inch            136,212.00
Secondary water:        
 R-A-1                       $ 6,644.00
 R-1-14                        1,545.00
 R-1-10                        850.00
 R-1-8                         618.00
 R-3-6                         386.00
 
(Ord. 2015-11, 12-2-2015, eff. 12-8-2015; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 11-1-2023)
9-2-3: ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT IMPACT FEES:
   A.   There is further established an endangered species act impact fee of
two-tenths of one percent (0.2%) of the total value of construction for which a
permit is requested, payable at the time application is made for issuance of a
building permit on all new residential, commercial, and industrial
construction. This shall not apply to building permits for remodeling, add ons
of existing structures, or outbuildings.
   B.   The city treasurer is hereby directed to collect and deposit these
funds in a separate account designated the "endangered species conservation
fund" and to disburse the funds accumulated therein quarterly to Washington
County on or before the last day of the month following a calendar quarter,
together with an appropriate report showing the number of subdivision final
plats issued and their acreages, and the number of applicable building permits
and their construction values.
   C.   This section is in furtherance of the city's obligations under the
interlocal agreement executed between the city and Washington County, a copy of
which is attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein and
incorporated by reference herein. (Ord. 2006-12, 4-19-2006; amd. Ord. 2021-03,
4-21-2021)
9-2-4: STORMWATER (DRAINAGE) IMPACT FEE:
   A.   The City hereby renames, reestablishes, and expands the scope and
breadth of stormwater (drainage) impact fee, to be charged to all new
development within the City [except for (a) City-owned properties and (b)
school district and charter school properties, which are hereby exempted in
accordance with Section 11-36a-403, UCA)].
   B.   The Stormwater (Drainage) Impact Fee (formerly called Storm drain fees)
shall be as follows:
      1.   Residential Impact Fee: Five Thousand Eighty-six Dollars ($5,086.00)
per acre.
      2.   Nonresidential or Commercial Impact Fee: Seven Thousand Six Hundred
Twenty-nine Dollars ($7,629) per acre.
   C.   The per-acre impact fee (or fractional portion thereof) shall be
calculated and charged to all new nonexempted development within the City as
follows: the size of the parcel being developed, multiplied by the applicable
fee found in subsection “1" or “b” of Section
9-2-4.B (depending on whether the development is residential or nonresidential/
commercial in nature).
      1.   Parcels located in residential zones (including the mobile home
zone) shall be assessed the residential impact fee.
      2.   Parcels located in nonresidential zones (including commercial zones)
shall be assessed the nonresidential or commercial impact fee.
      3.   Assessed Impact fee = size of parcel (actual acreage or portion
thereof) x the applicable impact fee set forth in Section 3 above. (Ord. 2023-
13, 11-1-2023)
CHAPTER 3
CONTRACTOR SPECIFICATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Purpose
9-3-2: Definitions
9-3-3: Preconstruction Conference
9-3-4: Starting The Work
9-3-5: Bonds And Insurance
9-3-6: Clarification And Interpretations
9-3-7: General Provisions
9-3-8: Cooperation With Utilities
9-3-9: Cooperation Between Contractors
9-3-10: Contractor Employees
9-3-11: Construction Stakes, Lines, And Grades
9-3-12: Underground Facilities
9-3-13: Historic, Archaeological, Or Paleontological Discoveries
9-3-14: Reference Points And Monuments
9-3-15: Safety And Protection
9-3-16: Warranty And Guarantee
9-3-17: Tests, Inspections, And Observations
9-3-18: Test Reports
9-3-19: Completed Work
9-3-20: Final Inspection
9-3-21: Final Acceptance
9-3-22: Correction Or Removal Of Defective Work
9-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the information required for
efficient contract administration. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24,
8-15-2007)
9-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Wherever used in this chapter, or in other contracts or submitted documents,
the following terms have the meanings indicated, which are applicable to both
the singular and plural thereof:
ADDENDA: Written or graphic instruments issued prior to the opening of bids,
which supplement, clarify, correct, or change the bid documents or the contract
documents.
BONDS: Bid, performance, and payment bonds; irrevocable letters of credit;
cashier's or certified bank check; and other instruments of security.
CHANGE ORDER: A written instrument prepared by the LaVerkin City
representative, signed by the contractor on or after the effective date of the
agreement, which authorizes an addition, deletion, or revision in the work, or
an adjustment.
CONTRACTOR: The person, firm, or corporation with which LaVerkin City has
entered into an agreement for a public construction or improvement project.
DAY: Any twenty four (24) hour period measured from midnight to the next
midnight.
DEFECTIVE: An adjective which, when modifying the word "work" refers to work
that is unsatisfactory, faulty or deficient; or does not conform to the
submitted documents; or does not meet the requirements of any inspection,
reference standard, test or approval referred to in the submitted documents; or
has been damaged prior to the LaVerkin City representative's final inspection.
DRAWINGS: The graphic and pictorial portions of the submitted documents
approved by the LaVerkin City representative showing the design, location, and
dimensions of the work, and generally include, the plan, elevations, sections,
details, schedules, and diagrams.
FIELD AGREEMENT: A written agreement signed by the contractor and LaVerkin
City's representative or resident project representative, which orders minor
changes in the work.
FINAL ACCEPTANCE: Satisfaction on the part of LaVerkin City's representative
that all work is completed, and there are no other obligations to be fulfilled
by the contractor.
FINAL INSPECTION: An inspection of the entire work, or portion agreed upon,
conducted by LaVerkin City's representative, after such work is fully
completed.
FINAL INSPECTION PUNCH LIST: A written list of work discrepancies and
deficiencies compiled by the LaVerkin City representative at the final
inspection.
INSURANCE: The following types of insurance are required of all contractors:
   A.   Public liability insurance, protecting the contractor as well as the
city from any and all liability in tort or otherwise that may be alleged by
third parties in connection with work performed or existing conditions of the
work on the project performed by the contractor, subcontractors or any other
laborers or materials suppliers;
   B.   Workers' compensation insurance and other insurance required by the
workers' compensation laws of the state of Utah for persons employed on public
construction and improvement projects; and
   C.   Hazard insurance and work in progress insurance, protecting the city
and the work during all phases of construction against the risks of fire,
tornado, earthquake, windstorm, or other similar natural disasters, as well as
coverage protecting the city and the work against theft, vandalism, arson or
other intentional acts.
All such insurance shall be in force before contractor or anyone employed by
contractor commences work on the project and shall remain in full force and
effect until the work has been accepted by the city as complete. Contractor
shall obtain such insurance coverage in the amounts specified by the city's
engineer and/or attorney based on the given needs of the project. Contractor
shall also, where possible, name the city as an additional insured on such
policies of insurance and provide certificates of insurance so indicating.
LAWS AND/OR REGULATIONS: Any federal, state, county, city, or local
jurisdiction's laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, codes, and orders.
MODIFICATION: Any change order, field agreement, or work directive change.
PARTIAL UTILIZATION: Placing a portion of the work into service for the
intended purpose or a related purpose, before reaching substantial completion
of all the work.
PLANS: Drawings.
PROJECT: The total work to be provided under the submitted documents.
PUNCH LIST: The list of unfinished work items compiled by LaVerkin City's
representative after work, or portion of work, is determined substantially
complete.
PUNCH LIST TIME: The number of calendar days specified in the agreement for the
completion of the final inspection punch list work.
SHOP DRAWINGS: All drawings, diagrams, illustrations, schedules and other data
prepared by or for the contractor to illustrate some portion of the work and
all illustrations, brochures, standard schedules, performance charts,
instructions, diagrams and other information prepared by suppliers and
submitted by the contractor to illustrate material or equipment for some
portion of the work.
SPECIFICATIONS: Those portions of the submitted documents consisting of written
requirements for materials, equipment, construction systems, standards, and
workmanship as applied to the work and certain applicable administrative
details.
SUBCONTRACTOR: An individual, supplier, firm, or corporation having a contract
with the contractor or with any other subcontractor for the performance of a
part of the work.
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION: The work, or a specified part thereof, has progressed
to a point where only occasional construction personnel and equipment are
required for correcting work deficiencies. In the opinion of LaVerkin City's
representative, the work required in correcting such deficiencies will not
interfere with the area's intended use or occupancy. Such opinion shall be
evidenced by written notice that the work is sufficiently complete in
accordance with the submitted documents.
SUPPLIER: A manufacturer, fabricator, distributor, material producer, or
vendor.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: All pipelines, conduits, ducts, cables, wires,
manholes, vaults, tanks, tunnels or other such facilities or attachments, and
any encasement containing such facilities which have been installed underground
to furnish any of the following services or materials: electricity, gases,
steam, liquid petroleum products, telephone or other communication, cable
television, sewage and drainage removal, traffic or other control systems or
water.
WORK: The construction and services required under the submitted documents,
which may be the whole or part of the project. Work is the result of performing
services, furnishing labor, and/or furnishing and incorporating materials and
equipment into the construction.
WRITTEN AMENDMENT: A document that is signed by the contractor and LaVerkin
City on or after the effective date of the agreement. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006;
amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-3: PRECONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE:
   A.   Before the contractor starts the work at the site, the contractor will
attend a conference with LaVerkin City's representative and others:
      1.   To discuss the work progress schedule,
      2.   To designate the name of the individual who shall have the authority
to act for the contractor at all times while work is in progress, and
      3.   To establish a working understanding among the parties as to the
work.
   B.   When the contractor is comprised of two (2) or more persons, firms,
partnerships or corporations functioning on a joint venture basis, before
starting work, the contractor shall designate in writing the name of a
representative who shall have the authority to represent and act for the joint
venture persons, firms, partnerships or corporations at all times while work is
actually in progress. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-4: STARTING THE WORK:
No work shall be done at the site prior to receipt of the notice to proceed.
The contractor shall provide a contact office and telephone number. If contact
office is greater than fifty (50) miles from the job site and if required by
LaVerkin City or if desired by the contractor, the contractor shall provide a
temporary field office near the project. This office shall be in such a
location that LaVerkin City's representative may contact the contractor for
transmittal of plans, instructions, and dissemination of project information.
The contractor shall provide and maintain a telephone in the field office
during the life of the project. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-
15-2007)
9-3-5: BONDS AND INSURANCE:
When the contractor delivers the executed agreement to LaVerkin City, he shall
also deliver such bonds and insurance certificates as required by the city.
(Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-6: CLARIFICATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS:
The LaVerkin City representative will issue with reasonable promptness such
written clarifications or interpretations of the requirements of the submitted
documents as may be determined necessary. Such documents shall be consistent
with the overall intent of the submitted documents. Should it appear that the
work or any of the matters relative thereto are not sufficiently detailed or
explained in the documents, the contractor shall request the LaVerkin City
representative provide such further explanations as may be necessary for the
contractor to conform to them as part of the work. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006;
amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-7: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Supervision And Superintendence: The contractor shall supervise and
direct the work competently and efficiently, devoting such attention thereto
and applying such skills and expertise as necessary to perform the work in
accordance with the submitted documents. The contractor shall be solely
responsible for the means, methods, techniques, sequences and procedures of
construction, and shall be responsible to see that the finished work complies
accurately with the submitted documents.
   B.   Giving Notice: Whenever any provision of the submitted documents
requires the giving of written notice, it will be deemed to have been validly
given if delivered:
      1.   In person to the individual or to a member of the firm or to an
officer of the corporation for whom it is intended, or
      2.   Sent by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the last
business address known to the giver of the notice.
   C.   Computation Of Time: When any period of time is referred to in the
contract documents by days, it will be computed to exclude the first and
include the last day of such period. If the last day of any such period falls
on a Saturday or Sunday or on a day made a legal holiday by the law of the
applicable jurisdiction, such day will be omitted from the computation.
   D.   Liability: Should LaVerkin City or the contractor suffer injury or
damage to person or property because of any error, omission or act of the other
party or of any of the other party's employees or agents or others for whose
acts the other party is legally liable, claim will be made in writing to the
other party within a reasonable time of the first observance of such injury or
damage. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed as a
substitute for or a waiver of the provisions of any applicable statute of
limitations or repose.
   E.   Working Hours: Construction activities on the contract work site shall
comply with all applicable local noise ordinances. Working hours at the
contract work site shall be limited to between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. local time, unless otherwise directed by the special
provisions of this contract or, upon approval of different hours by the
LaVerkin City representative. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-
2007)
9-3-8: COOPERATION WITH UTILITIES:
   A.   The contractor will notify all utility companies, all pipeline owners,
or other parties affected, and endeavor to have all necessary adjustments of
the public or private utility fixtures, pipelines, and other appurtenances
within or adjacent to the limits of construction, made as soon as practicable.
   B.   The contractor shall comply with the requirements of Blue Stakes one
call system, in notification to the interested utility owners prior to start of
construction. The contractor shall resolve all problems with the utility owners
concerned.
   C.   Where water user association facilities obstruct construction of the
work, the contractor shall contact officials of the association relative to the
shutdown of culinary or irrigation water and shall become acquainted with and
conform to the requirements of the association.
   D.   Contractor shall relocate, adjust or move water lines, gas lines, wire
lines, service connections, water and gas meter boxes, water and gas valve
boxes, light standards, cable ways, signals and all other utility appurtenances
within the limits of the proposed construction at his expense, except as
otherwise provided for in the special provisions or as noted on the plans. In
the event an existing service is found to be in a materially different location
than shown on the plans and requires additional or more costly work on the part
of the contractor, the procedures of LaVerkin City's change order process will
apply.
   E.   It is understood and agreed that the contractor has considered in his
proposal all of the permanent and temporary utility appurtenances in their
present or relocated positions as shown on the plans and that no additional
compensation will be allowed for any delays, inconvenience, or damage sustained
by him due to any interference from the said utility appurtenance or the
operation of moving them. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-
2007)
9-3-9: COOPERATION BETWEEN CONTRACTORS:
   A.   Each contractor shall conduct his work so as not to interfere with or
hinder the progress or completion of the work being performed by other
contractors. Contractors working on the same project shall cooperate with each
other as directed by the LaVerkin City representative.
   B.   Each contractor involved shall assume all liability, financial or
otherwise, in connection with his work.
   C.   The contractor shall arrange his work and shall place and dispose of
the materials being used so as not to interfere with the operations of the
other contractors within the limits of the same project. He shall join his work
with that of others in an acceptable manner and shall perform it in proper
sequence to that of the others. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-
15-2007)
9-3-10: CONTRACTOR EMPLOYEES:
Only competent employees of the contractor, or subcontractor, shall be employed
on the work project. Any person employed by contractor, the subcontractor
themselves, or subcontractor employees, who is found by LaVerkin City to be
incompetent, intemperate, troublesome, disorderly or otherwise objectionable,
or who fails or refuses to perform work properly and acceptably, shall be
immediately removed from the work project by the contractor and shall not be
reemployed on the work project. The contractor shall have the right to appeal
this decision to city manager and then, if not satisfied, to the city council.
(Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-11: CONSTRUCTION STAKES, LINES, AND GRADES:
   A.   The owner will set construction stakes establishing lines and grades
for roadwork, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, structures and centerlines for
utilities and necessary appurtenances as may be deemed necessary. In the event
that the owner is anyone other than a public body (i.e., the developer), the
city shall have the right to approve the independent laboratory, and the costs
shall be borne by that owner or developer. The LaVerkin City representative (or
the developer in the event that the owner is anyone other than a public body)
will furnish the contractor all necessary information relating to the lines and
grades. These stakes and marks shall constitute the field control by and in
accordance with which the contractor shall establish other necessary controls
and perform the work.
   B.   The contractor shall perform the work in accordance with the entity
responsible for the improvement's stakes and marks, and shall be charged with
full responsibility for conformity and agreement of the work with such stakes
and marks. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-12: UNDERGROUND FACILITIES:
The information and data shown or indicated in the submitted documents with
respect to existing underground facilities, at or contiguous to the site, are
based on information and data furnished by the owners of such underground
facilities or by others. Unless it is otherwise expressly provided in the
supplementary conditions:
   A.   LaVerkin City shall not be responsible for the accuracy or completeness
of any such information or data;
   B.   The contractor shall have full responsibility for reviewing and
checking all such information and data, with the one call center (Blue Stakes
location center) or other utility coordination service two (2) to seven (7)
working days prior to any excavation to locate all underground facilities shown
or indicated in the submitted documents:
      1.   For coordination of the work with the owners of such underground
facilities during construction; and
      2.   For the safety and protection thereof and repairing any damage
thereto resulting from the work.
   C.   If an underground facility is uncovered or revealed at or contiguous to
the site which was not shown or indicated in the submitted documents which the
contractor could not reasonably have been expected to be aware of, the
contractor shall promptly after becoming aware thereof and before performing
any work affected thereby (except in an emergency), identify the owner of such
underground facility and give notice thereof to that owner and to LaVerkin
City's representative. LaVerkin City's representative will promptly review the
underground facility to determine the extent to which the submitted documents
should be modified to reflect and document the consequences of the existence of
the underground facility. The submitted documents will be amended or
supplemented to the extent necessary. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-
24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-13: HISTORIC, ARCHAEOLOGICAL, OR PALEONTOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES:
   A.   If a suspected historic, archeological, or paleontological item,
feature, or site is encountered, construction operations shall be immediately
stopped near the discovery and the LaVerkin City representative shall be
verbally notified of the nature and exact location of the findings. The
contractor shall not damage the discovered objects and shall provide written
confirmation of the discovery to the LaVerkin City representative within two
(2) calendar days.
   B.   After operations near the discovery have been restricted, the LaVerkin
City representative will keep the contractor informed concerning the status of
the restriction. The contractor should be aware that the time necessary for
LaVerkin City to handle the discovered item, feature, or site is variable and
is dependent on the nature and condition of the discovered item, feature, or
site and possible involvement of state and federal agencies. LaVerkin City's
representative will verbally inform the contractor when the restriction is
terminated, with written confirmation following, within two (2) calendar days.
Any request by the contractor for adjustment in length of contract time shall
be in accordance with the provisions outlined in LaVerkin City's change order
process. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-14: REFERENCE POINTS AND MONUMENTS:
   A.   LaVerkin City shall require land survey reference points for
construction, which in the LaVerkin City representative's judgment are
necessary to enable the contractor to proceed with the work. The contractor
shall:
      1.   Be responsible for laying out the work;
      2.   Make no changes or relocations without the prior written approval of
LaVerkin City's representative;
      3.   Report to LaVerkin City's representative whenever any reference
point is lost or destroyed or requires relocation because of necessary changes
in grades or locations; and
      4.   Be responsible for the accurate replacement or relocation of such
reference points by a professionally qualified surveyor or engineer.
   B.   The contractor shall not disturb any survey monuments found on the line
of the improvements until ordered by the LaVerkin City representative. No
survey monument shall be disturbed or moved until the LaVerkin City
representative has been notified and has referenced the survey monument for
resetting.
   C.   The contractor shall be held responsible for the preservation of all
stakes and marks, and if the construction stakes or marks have been carelessly
or wilfully destroyed or disturbed by the contractor, the cost for replacing
them will be charged against him. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24,
8-15-2007)
9-3-15: SAFETY AND PROTECTION:
   A.   The contractor shall be responsible for initiating, maintaining, and
supervising all safety precautions and programs in connection with the work.
The contractor shall take all necessary precautions for the safety of, and
shall provide the necessary protection to prevent damage, injury or loss to:
      1.   All employees on the work and other persons and organizations who
may be affected thereby;
      2.   All the work, materials and equipment to be incorporated therein,
whether in storage on or off the site; and
      3.   Other property at the site or adjacent thereto, including trees,
shrubs, lawns, walks, pavements, roadways, structures, utilities and
underground facilities not designated for removal, relocation or replacement in
the course of construction.
   B.   The contractor shall:
      1.   Comply with all applicable laws and regulations of any public body
having jurisdiction for the safety of persons or property or to protect them
from damage, injury or loss;
      2.   Erect and maintain all necessary safeguards for such safety and
protection; and
      3.   Notify owners of adjacent property, of underground facilities and
utility owners when prosecution of the work may affect them, and shall
cooperate with them in the protection, removal, relocation, and replacement of
their property. All damage, injury or loss to any property caused, directly or
indirectly, in whole or in part, by the contractor; any subcontractor; supplier
or any other person or organization directly or indirectly employed by any of
them to perform or furnish any of the work; or anyone for whose acts any of
them may be liable, shall be remedied by the contractor.
   C.   The contractor's duties and responsibilities for the safety and
protection of the work shall continue until all of the work is complete and has
had a final approval. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-16: WARRANTY AND GUARANTEE:
The contractor warrants and guarantees to LaVerkin City that all work will be
in accordance with the contract documents and will not be defective. All
defective work, whether or not in place, may be rejected, corrected, or
accepted. The contractor's obligation to perform and complete the work in
accordance with the submitted documents shall be absolute. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-
2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-17: TESTS, INSPECTIONS, AND OBSERVATIONS:
All construction work involving the installation of improvements in LaVerkin
City shall be subject to the city's inspection and testing as outlined in this
section.
   A.   The contractor shall give the LaVerkin City representative at least
twenty four (24) hours' notice of readiness of the work for all required
inspections, tests, or approvals. If an inspection is called in prior to work
completion and inspection is made, such inspection shall not be a guarantee of
acceptance of unfinished work or material. Any retesting of work or materials
rejected by the LaVerkin City representative, after the initial testing, shall
be at the contractor's expense until a retest meets the requirements of the
submitted documents.
   B.   LaVerkin City representatives, testing agencies and governmental
agencies with jurisdictional interests will have access to the work at
reasonable times for their observation, inspecting and testing. The contractor
shall provide proper and safe conditions for such access.
   C.   Material testing shall be conducted by an independent laboratory
approved by LaVerkin City at the contractor's expense. All testing shall comply
with current ASTM, AASHTO, AWWA, or public drinking water regulation standards,
or as specified in special provisions of the contract and shall meet the
minimum testing requirements as outlined in the specifications. The cost of any
retesting required to bring materials into specification shall be borne by the
contractor. If determined necessary by LaVerkin City, additional testing may be
required.
   D.   If any work is covered contrary to the request of the LaVerkin City
representative, it must, if requested, be uncovered for city observation/
inspection and replaced at the contractor's expense. Any work to be backfilled
or covered shall not be backfilled or covered prior to inspection. (Ord. 2006-
22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-18: TEST REPORTS:
   A.   Written test results will be required for review by the LaVerkin City
representative after each portion of the work (i.e., pipeline construction,
earthwork, curb, gutter, and sidewalk, roadway construction) has been tested.
   B.   A final report of compliance will be required from the contractor upon
completion of the project. This report will include all test results, drawings
of record and any other items required in the plans and specifications. (Ord.
2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
   C.   A certification of compliance with minimum inspection and testing
requirements must be submitted for any subdivision, planned unit development,
commercial planned unit development, large scale commercial development, and/or
other developments, which contain private streets, as outlined in the
applicable code. This certification must be on a form approved by LaVerkin City
and certified to by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Utah.
(Ord. 2011-09, 8-3-2011)
9-3-19: COMPLETED WORK:
Work is fully completed when LaVerkin City considers the work, or portion
thereof, ready for its intended use.
   A.   The contractor shall certify in writing to the LaVerkin City
representative that the work, or portion thereof, has been completed in
accordance with the submitted documents.
   B.   A final inspection as outlined below shall be made by the LaVerkin City
representative, upon receipt of a written request by the contractor.
   C.   The contractor shall include, in such written certification, if
applicable, a list of any work deficiencies.
   D.   Within ten (10) days after LaVerkin City's representative receives the
contractor's certification and list of work deficiencies, the representative
will issue written notice either accepting the work as fully completed or
stating reasons why the work is not fully completed. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006;
amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-20: FINAL INSPECTION:
When the contractor certifies that the work is fully completed, a final
inspection shall be made. The LaVerkin City representative will prepare a final
inspection punch list and will deliver such list to the contractor in writing.
The list shall be considered complete and final, and no additional punch list
items will be presented to the contractor, except for latent defects, damage
due to punch list rework, fraud, gross mistakes amounting to fraud, or work
required by the contract documents. Delivery of the final inspection punch list
or accomplishment of the work thereon by the contractor does not relinquish any
of LaVerkin City's rights under the correction or removal process or the
warranty and guarantee provisions of these specifications. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-
2006; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-21: FINAL ACCEPTANCE:
   A.   LaVerkin City's representative will give written notice to the
contractor that the work is acceptable on the basis that:
      1.   The contractor has requested that work be given final acceptance;
and
      2.   The LaVerkin City representative is satisfied that the work has been
completed and the contractor's other obligations under the submitted documents
have been fulfilled,
   B.   Otherwise, LaVerkin City's representative will indicate in writing to
the contractor the reasons for refusing to recommend final acceptance. The
contractor shall then make the necessary corrections as outlined above and
resubmit request for final acceptance approval. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd.
Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
9-3-22: CORRECTION OR REMOVAL OF DEFECTIVE WORK:
LaVerkin City's representative will have authority to disapprove or reject work
which does not meet LaVerkin City's specs, codes or industry standards, and
will also have authority to require special inspection or testing of the work
whether or not the work is fabricated, installed or completed. Work may be
found to be defective regardless of cause, except when such failures or defects
are the result of use or misuse by LaVerkin City or the LaVerkin City
representative's design deficiencies. The contractor shall promptly, without
cost to LaVerkin City, either correct defective work, or, if it has been
rejected by LaVerkin City, remove it from the site and replace it with
nondefective work.
   A.   Any faulty or defective work shall be corrected by the persons
responsible for the work within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of
the inspection report defining the faulty or defective work; or
      1.   Such longer period of time as may be prescribed by laws or
regulations; or
      2.   By the terms of any applicable special guarantee required by the
submitted documents; or
      3.   By any specific provision of the submitted documents.
   B.   If, after thirty (30) days, or such time as allowed by the special
circumstances listed, the faulty or defective work has not been completed
another "final inspection" may be conducted by LaVerkin City's representative
to determine if additional corrective action is required.
   C.   If the contractor fails to proceed to correct defective work or to
remove and replace rejected work as required by the LaVerkin City
representative, or if the contractor fails to perform the work in accordance
with the documents, or if the contractor fails to comply with any other
provision of the documents; LaVerkin City may, after seven (7) days' written
notice to the contractor, or in an emergency where notice and delay would cause
serious risk of loss or damage, have the defective work corrected or the
rejected work removed and replaced. The contractor and contractor's surety
shall be liable for all direct, indirect, and consequential costs of such
removal and replacement, including, but not limited to, fees and charges of
engineers, architects, attorneys and other professionals.
   D.   In exercising the rights and remedies under this subsection, LaVerkin
City shall proceed expeditiously. To the extent necessary to complete
corrective and remedial action, LaVerkin City may:
      1.   Exclude the contractor from all or part of the site;
      2.   Take possession of all or part of the work, and suspend the
contractor's services related thereto;
      3.   Take possession of the contractor's tools, appliances, construction
equipment and machinery at the site; and
      4.   Incorporate in the work all materials and equipment stored at the
site or for which LaVerkin City has paid contractor but which are stored
elsewhere.
   E.   LaVerkin City shall have the right to exclude the contractor from the
work after the date of full completion, but LaVerkin City shall allow the
contractor reasonable access to complete or correct items on the final
inspection punch list.
   F.   The contractor shall allow the LaVerkin City representatives, agents
and employees such access to the site as may be necessary to enable the city to
exercise the rights and remedies under this chapter. All direct, indirect, and
consequential costs of LaVerkin City in exercising such rights and remedies
will be charged against the contractor in an amount approved as reasonable by
the LaVerkin City representative. Such direct, indirect and consequential costs
will include, but not be limited to, fees and charges of engineers, architects,
attorneys and other professionals; all court costs; and all costs of repair and
replacement of work whether destroyed or damaged by correction, removal or
replacement of the contractor's defective work. (Ord. 2006-22, 7-5-2006; amd.
Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Interpretation
10-1-4: Conflict
10-1-5: Effect On Previous Ordinances And Maps
10-1-6: Definitions
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ZONING TITLE OF LAVERKIN CITY, UTAH, and may
be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 99-06, 6-16-1999)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   This title is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and
future inhabitants, and to promote and provide for the peace and good order,
comfort, convenience, and aesthetics of the present and future inhabitants and
businesses of the city, including, among other things, the lessening of
congestion in the streets or roads, securing safety from fire and other
dangers, providing adequate light and air, classifying land uses and land
development and protecting the tax base, securing economy in governmental
expenditures, fostering agricultural and other industries, protecting urban and
nonurban development, and protecting property values.
   B.   To accomplish the purposes of this title, the city may enact
ordinances, resolutions, and rules and may enter into other forms of land use
controls and development agreements that it considers necessary or appropriate
for the use and development of land within the city, including ordinances,
resolutions, rules, restrictive covenants, easements, and development
agreements governing uses, density, open spaces, structures, buildings, energy
efficiency, light and air, air quality, transportation and public or
alternative transportation, infrastructure, street and building orientation and
width requirements, public facilities, and height and location of vegetation,
trees, and landscaping, unless expressly prohibited by law. (Ord. 2007-25, 10-
3-2007)
10-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions of
this title, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum
requirements for the purposes set forth.
   B.   Prohibitions: Uses of land which are not expressly permitted within a
zone are hereby declared to be expressly prohibited therein, except as may be
permitted by action of the planning commission or city council, pursuant to
express authority given under terms of this code. Any person who may obtain
state or federal properties by purchase, lease, or other arrangement must
utilize such properties in accordance with the provisions of this code. The
planning commission, board of adjustment, nor the building inspector shall
permit a use within a zone which is not expressly permitted by the terms of
this code. (Ord. 2007-26, 10-3-2007)
10-1-4: CONFLICT:
The provisions of this title shall not nullify more restrictive provisions of
covenants, agreements or other ordinances or laws, but shall prevail whenever
such provisions are less restrictive. (Ord. 2007-25, 10-3-2007)
10-1-5: EFFECT ON PREVIOUS ORDINANCES AND MAPS:
The existing ordinances covering zoning, in their entirety and including the
maps heretofore adopted and made a part of said ordinances, are hereby
superseded and amended to read as set forth herein; provided however, that the
ordinance codified herein, including the attached map, shall be deemed a
continuation of previous ordinances and not a new enactment, insofar as the
substance or revisions of previous ordinances is included in the ordinance
codified herein, whether in the same or in different languages; and the
ordinance codified herein shall be interpreted upon all questions of
construction relating to tenure of officers and boards established by previous
ordinances and to questions of conforming or nonconforming uses and buildings
and structures, and to questions as to the dates upon which such uses,
buildings or structures became conforming or nonconforming. (Ord. 99-06, 6-16-
1999)
10-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used
in the interpretation and construction of this title:
   A.   Words used in the present tense include the future;
   B.   The singular number shall include the plural and the plural the
singular;
   C.   The word "used" or "occupied" shall include arranged, designed,
constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to be used;
   D.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, and the word "may" is
permissive;
ABANDONMENT: A use, building or structure shall be deemed abandoned if said use
has not applied to the premises for any period of twelve (12) consecutive
months.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU): An adjunct living unit - sometimes known as a
casita, guest house, or mother-in-law apartment - (a) which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the primary use of the primary dwelling or
residence (for residential purposes), and (b) which contains a sleeping area
and has access to a bathroom within the structure in which it is located, and
(c) which may or may not have its own dedicated kitchen facilities, and (d)
which is located either within or detached from the primary dwelling or
residence on the same lot or parcel of real property, or (e) which may be used
by members of the family or nonpaying guests, or rented for thirty (30)
consecutive days or longer, but shall not be used for short-term rental
purposes [rentals intended to be rented out for a period of twenty-nine (29)
days or fewer]. No more than one ADU per lot or parcel of property, whether
designated as detached (“DADU”) or internal (“IADU”), is permitted; provided
that, a lot or parcel of property that is one- half (½) acre or larger may
contain a DADU and an IADU.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure.
AESTHETICS: The nature of the appearance of a land use, property or building,
in respect to whether it would be considered attractive and pleasing to the
eye, or visually displeasing, or a blemish. Aesthetics have an impact on
economic and property values.
AGRICULTURE: The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and
gardening, but not including the breeding, grazing and keeping or raising of
domestic animals and fowl, except household pets, and not including
agricultural industry or business, such as fruit packing plants, fur farms,
stockyards, animal hospitals or similar uses.
ALLEY OR LANE: A public or private way affording only secondary means of access
to abutting property.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
APPEAL AUTHORITY: The body designated by this title to decide an appeal on a
land use application or a variance.
ARCADE OR COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT VIDEO GAME CENTER: Any business establishment
containing greater than three (3) coin operated amusement, electronic or video
machines or games.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline or any other motor fuel or
lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to
the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles, and where
services performed may include tube and tire repair, battery charging, storage
of merchandise, lubricating of automobiles, replacement of spark plugs, lights,
fans and other small parts, but not including major automobile repair.
BASEMENT: A story partly or entirely underground. A basement shall be counted
as a story for the purposes of height measurement if its height is one-half (1/
2) or more above the ground.
BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY (Also Known Herein As A BED AND BREAKFAST
ESTABLISHMENT): Sometimes known as a bed and breakfast home, an overnight
transient lodging facility (as that term is defined in section
3-11-1 of this code), not constituting a boarding house, where: a) the facility
is owner occupied at all times; and b) rooms are rented to overnight guests,
who are provided with one or more on site meals served daily (typically
breakfast); and c) the entire service, food and lodgings are to be included in
one stated price; and d) the facilities are not held out to be a restaurant,
and food is only served to the owner's family and overnight guests; and e) the
occupancy loads of the applicable international building code(s) are not
exceeded, and the facility is in compliance with the applicable rules of such
international code(s).
BOARDING HOUSE: A building with not more than five (5) guestrooms where, for
compensation, meals are provided for at least five (5) but not more than
fifteen (15) persons.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended to be used for the shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals or property. "Building" shall not include any
form of vehicle, even though immobilized.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the average finished grade
surface to the highest point of any building roof or coping.
BUILDING, MAIN: The principal building or one of the principal buildings upon a
lot, or the building or one of the buildings housing a principal use upon a
lot.
CAMPGROUND: A public area designated by a public agency for camping, or a
private area licensed by the city for camping.
CAMPING: A temporary establishment of living facilities such as tents or
recreational coaches as regulated by this title.
CARPORT: A detached accessory structure, or a portion of a main building, with
an overhead covering or roof but not completely enclosed on all sides by walls
or doors, used or intended to be used for the storage of motor vehicles,
trailers, or boats of the occupants of the premises. For purposes of this
title, a carport is not a garage.
CHARTER SCHOOL: Charter schools are semiautonomous public schools, open to all
students that operate under a written contract or charter with the Utah state
charter school board. The contract or charter describes the operating procedure
of the schools, in ways that may differ from traditional public schools.
Charter schools are not private schools, but are public schools which operate
on public funds without tuition.
CHILD NURSERY: An establishment for the care and/or the instruction of five (5)
or more children, other than members of the family residing on the premises.
CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL: A building in which a group of dentists, physicians
and allied professional assistants are associated for the conduct of their
profession. The clinic may include a dental and/or medical laboratory and
pharmacy, but it shall not include inpatient care or operating rooms for major
surgery.
COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: Commercial development wherein ownership
of lots is accomplished by subdivided lots (which may be divided on 0 lot
lines, including common walls), in which the balance of the common areas,
space, and facilities are owned by a commonly managed owners' association.
CONDITIONAL USE: A land use that, because of its unique characteristics or
potential impact on the city, the surrounding neighbors, or adjacent land uses,
may not be compatible in some areas or may be compatible only if certain
conditions are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A real estate plan or project whereby two (2) or more
units, whether contained in an existing or proposed building or buildings, are
separately offered or proposed to be offered for sale. "Condominium project"
shall also mean the property when the context so requires. The owner or
developer of any condominium project or "time period unit project", as defined
in this section, shall comply with the Utah condominium ownership act 1 , which
is hereby incorporated within and made a part of this title by reference. Such
owner or developer shall also comply with all pertinent provisions of this
title.
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING: A governmental action that results in a taking of
private property so that compensation to the owner of the property is required
by the fifth or fourteenth amendment of the constitution of the United States,
or by article I, section 22 of the Utah constitution.
CORRAL: A space other than a building, on less than one acre in area or less
than one hundred feet (100') in width, used for confinement of animals.
CULINARY WATER AUTHORITY: The department, agency, or public entity with
responsibility to review and approve the feasibility of the culinary water
system and sources for the subject property.
DAIRY: A commercial establishment for the manufacture, processing or packaging
and sale of dairy products. For the purpose of this definition, the production
of milk on a farm for wholesale marketing on the premises shall not classify
the farm as a dairy.
DETACHED ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (DADU): An accessory dwelling unit created or
established and operated or used: (a) outside of a primary dwelling or
residence, and having its own separate outside entrance; and (b) within the
appropriate and relevant setbacks established by law or ordinance, and not
encumbering dedicated rights-of-way; and (c) in accordance with the provisions
of Section
10-7-22.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to, the carrying out of any building activity, the
making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or
land, or the dividing of land into parcels by any person, including the
construction of any principal building or structure; an increase in the
intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units
or an increase in nonresidential use that requires additional parking; mining,
dredging, grading, paving; the commencement of drilling for purposes other than
obtaining soil samples; the driving of piles, or excavation on a parcel of
land; demolition of a structure; clearing land as an adjunct of construction,
including removal of vegetation or any significant disturbance of vegetation or
soil manipulation; the deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a
parcel of land or storage of equipment or materials. Exceptions are utility
installations; residential landscaping; and work involving the maintenance of
existing landscaped areas and existing rights of way such as setbacks and other
planting areas.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A binding contract between the city and a developer
wherein the detailed terms upon which development will proceed are agreed upon.
The development agreement specifies any vested rights granted to the developer
or its successor or assigns.
DEVELOPMENT PARCEL: Any quantity of land capable of being described with such
definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, which is
designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit
or which has been used or developed as a unit.
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities (self- care, receptive or expressive
language, learning, mobility, self- direction, capacity for independent living
or economic self- sufficiency), including a person having a record of such an
impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment. Disability does not
include current illegal use of, or addiction to, any federally controlled
substance, as defined in section 102 of the controlled substances act, 21 USC
802. See sections 57-21-2 and 62A-5-101(8), Utah Code Annotated (1953, as
amended).
DISABLED PERSON: A person who has a severe, chronic disability attributable to
a mental or physical impairment or to a combination of mental and physical
impairments which is likely to continue indefinitely and which results in a
substantial functional limitation in three (3) or more of the following areas
of major life activity: self-care, receptive and expressive language, learning,
mobility, self-direction, capacity for independent living or economic self-
sufficiency; and who requires a combination or sequence of special
interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other services that are
individually planned and coordinated to allow the person to function in, and
contribute to, a residential neighborhood.
DRIVE OR DRIVEWAY: A private roadway, the use of which is limited to persons
residing, employed or otherwise using or visiting the private property on which
the driveway is located, or to which the driveway extends.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the
more or less permanent residence or sleeping place of one or more persons or
families, but not including transient residential uses such as a tent,
recreational vehicle (RV), motel, hotel, hospital or nursing home.
DWELLING, FOUR-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by no
more than four (4) families, the structure having only four (4) dwelling units.
DWELLING GROUP: A group of two (2) or more detached buildings used as
dwellings, located on a lot or parcel of land.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by
more than four (4) families, the structure having more than four (4) dwelling
units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by one
family, the structure having only one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by three
(3) families, the structure having only three (3) dwelling units.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by two (2)
families, the structure having only two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment hotel or apartment
motel, designed for or occupied by one family for living or sleeping purposes.
ELDERLY PERSON: A person who is sixty (60) years old or older, who desires or
needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable
of living independently.
FAMILY FOOD PRODUCTION: The keeping of domestic animals and fowl for the
production of food for the sole use of the family occupying the premises.
FLAG LOT: An individual lot that does not have the frontage required in the
zone in which it is located, with the only means of access through a private
driveway. Flag lots are subject to the requirements in section
10-7-12 of this title.
FRONTAGE: The linear measurement of the front lot line.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building, or a portion of a main
building, which is fully enclosed and which has a functional garage door used
or intended to be used for the storage of motor vehicles, trailers or boats, of
the occupants of the premises.
GARAGES FOR REPAIR OF AUTOMOBILES: Any automotive business that relies on
vehicle repair for a customer where, upon completion of repair, said vehicle is
returned and repairs are charged to the customer.
GENERAL PLAN: A document that the city adopts that sets forth general
guidelines for proposed future development of the land within the city, also
commonly referred to as the "master plan".
GRADE: The elevation of the surface of the ground, whether natural or altered.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION: A commission formed pursuant to chapter 5 of
this title for the purpose of identifying, preserving, protecting and enhancing
historic areas and structures lying within the boundaries of the city.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by
persons residing in the dwelling unit, or by no more than a single employee
residing outside the dwelling, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to
the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character
thereof except by the employment of a single employee. Home occupations are
subject to the requirements in chapter 7 of this title.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house and kept for
company or pleasure, such as dogs, cats and canaries, but not including a
sufficient number of dogs to constitute a kennel. Household pets shall not
include the keeping of normally dangerous animals, such as lions or tigers.
IDENTICAL PLANS: Building plans submitted to the city that are substantially
identical to building plans that were previously submitted to and reviewed and
approved by the city and describe a building that is located on land zoned the
same as the land on which the building described in the previously approved
plans is located, and subject to the same geological and meteorological
conditions and the same law as the building described in the previously
approved plans.
INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (IADU): “IADU” means an accessory dwelling
unit created or established and operated or used:
   A.   Within a primary dwelling or residence;
   B.   Within the footprint of the primary dwelling or residence at the time
the internal accessory dwelling unit is created; and
   C.   In accordance with the provisions of Section
10-7-21.
LAND USE APPLICATION: An application required by the city's land use ordinance.
LAND USE AUTHORITY: A person, board, commission, agency, or other body
designated by the city council to act upon a land use application.
LAND USE ORDINANCE: A planning, zoning, development, or subdivision ordinance
of the city, but not including the general plan.
LAND USE PERMIT: A permit issued by the city, such as a conditional use permit,
sign permit, etc.
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The LaVerkin City council.
LODGING HOUSE: A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to at
least three (3) but not more than fifteen (15) persons, but not including
motels or hotels.
LOT: A parcel, plot, or unit of land described by metes and bounds and held or
intended to be held in separate lease or ownership, or shown as a lot or parcel
on a recorded subdivision map, or shown on a plat used in the lease or sale or
offer of lease or sale of land, resulting from the division of a larger tract
into two (2) or more smaller units.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection
or upon two (2) parts of the street, such streets or parts of the same street
forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT LINE: The property lines bounding a lot or parcel of land.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: The relocation of the property boundary line between two
(2) adjoining lots with the consent of the owners of record.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the
required front yard setback line or rear yard setback line, whichever is
shorter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit constructed
according to the national manufactured housing construction and safety
standards act, 42 USC section 5401 et seq., in one or more sections, which, in
the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body
feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is four hundred (400) or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical systems.
MINING OPERATIONS: Any proposed solid mineral mining operation which annually
requires the removal or disturbance of solid minerals or overburden. Such
removal shall be considered part of the same operation if it is all located
within a circle, the radius of which is one mile and the center of which is
located in an area of removal of disturbed solid minerals or overburden.
   A.   The term "overburden" means the natural covering of a solid mineral
sought to be mined including, but not limited to, soils, sands, rocks, gravel,
limestone, water or peat.
   B.   The term "solid mineral" includes, but is not limited to, clay, sand,
gravel, phosphate rock, limestone, and any rare earths contained in the soils
or waters of this state, which have heretofore been discovered or may be
hereafter discovered.
This definition does not include crushing, extraction, refining or smelting
operations.
MIXED USE: Residential uses combined with either or both commercial or office
uses.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit built prior to June 15,
1976, in accordance with a state mobile home code which existed prior to the
national manufactured housing construction and safety standards act, 42 USC
section 5401 et seq.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for residential
use where the lots are to be occupied by mobile or manufactured homes.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING: Housing occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to or less than eighty percent
(80%) of the median gross income for households of the same size in Washington
County.
MODULAR HOME OR UNIT: A structure built from sections which are manufactured in
accordance with the construction standards adopted pursuant to section 58-56-4,
Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended) rather than the national manufactured
housing construction and safety standards act, 42 USC section 5401 et seq., and
transported to a building site and installed on a permanent foundation, for the
purpose of human habitation, occupancy, or use. Any such home shall not be
included in the definition of a "mobile home" or "manufactured home".
NONCOMPLYING BUILDING; NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE: A structure that legally existed
before its current land use designation, but because of one or more subsequent
land use ordinance changes, does not conform to the setback, height
restrictions, or other regulations which govern the use of land.
NONCOMPLYING LOT: A lot that existed before its current land use designation,
but because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not
conform to the size, area, depth, frontage, or other regulations which govern
the use of land.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of land that legally existed before its current land
use designation and has been maintained continuously since the time the land
use ordinance governing the land changed but, because of one or more subsequent
land use ordinance changes, does not conform to the regulations that now govern
the use of the land.
OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES: Any business which creates excessive odors, vibrations,
fumes, smoke, gases or noises, including, but not limited to, packinghouses,
dairies, tanneries, canneries, renderies, junk or salvage yards, bone
factories, slaughterhouses, butcher shops, soap factories, foundries,
breweries, distilleries, livery stables, gravel pits or blacksmith shops.
OFFICIAL MAP: A city map recorded in the Washington County recorder's office
that: a) shows actual and proposed rights of way, centerline alignments, and
setbacks for highways and other transportation facilities; b) provides a basis
for restricting development in designated rights of way or between designated
setbacks to allow the city time to purchase or otherwise reserve the land; and
c) has been adopted as an element of the city's general plan.
100-YEAR FLOOD: A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
PARKING LOT: An open area, other than a street, used for parking of more than
four (4) automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for
compensation or accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE: A permanently surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, for the
parking of one motor vehicle, not less than eighteen feet (18') in length and
not less than nine feet (9') in width. Handicap parking spaces must
additionally meet the requirements found in the Americans with disabilities act
(ADA).
PERMITTED USE: A use of a lot or parcel of land permitted under the
restrictions and regulations of the district in which it is situated and, as
such, subject to such restrictions and regulations governing use, location,
materials and height of buildings, densities, open space and other such
regulations and restrictions as might apply within each specific district.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership, organization, association,
trust, governmental agency, or any other legal entity.
PLAN FOR MODERATE INCOME HOUSING: A written document adopted by the city
council that includes an estimate of the existing supply of moderate income
housing located within the city, an estimate of the need for moderate income
housing in the city for the next five (5) years as revised and reported
biennially, a survey of total residential land use, an evaluation of how
existing land uses and zones affect opportunities for moderate income housing,
and a description of the city's program to encourage an adequate supply of
moderate income housing.
PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT (PCD): A proposed development, featuring
integrated design for development and construction of residential, commercial,
or industrial uses, or combinations of such uses, which, because of the nature
of the proposed use and/or size of the proposed development, will substantially
impact the entire city, therefore requiring special review in accordance with
chapter 15 of this title.
PLAT: A map or other graphical representation of lands being laid out and
prepared in accordance with section 10-9a-603 (subdivisions), 17-23-17
(boundary adjustments), or 57-8-13 (condominiums), Utah Code Annotated (1953,
as amended).
PRIMARY DWELLING or RESIDENCE: A single-family (or one-family) dwelling, that:
   A.   Is detached;
   B.   Is occupied for residential purposes, and
   C.   Is located on the lot or parcel of real property upon which the owner
(or representative thereof, as provided in Section
10-7-22 hereof) resides as his or her primary residence of record.
PUBLIC HEARING: A hearing at which members of the public are provided a
reasonable opportunity to comment on the subject of the hearing.
PUBLIC MEETING: A meeting that is required to be open to the public under title
52, chapter 4, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended), regarding open and
public meetings.
RECORD OF SURVEY MAP: A map of a survey of land prepared in accordance with
section 17-23-17, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit other than a mobile home, primarily
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, or vacation use,
which is either self-propelled or is mounted on or pulled by another vehicle,
including, but not limited to, a travel trailer, a park model unit which in all
respects resembles and is built as a mobile home except that it has a gross
trailer area of under four hundred (400) square feet in the set up mode, a
camping trailer, a truck camper, a motor home, a fifth wheel trailer, a
customized bus with sleeping areas, and a van.
SANITARY SEWER AUTHORITY: The department, agency, or public entity with
responsibility to review and approve the feasibility of sanitary sewer services
or on site wastewater systems.
SETBACK: The shortest horizontal distance between the boundary line of a lot
and the building or structure or part thereof.
SIGN: Any writing or pictorial representation, symbol, banner or any other
figure of similar character of whatever material which is used to identify,
announce, direct attention to or advertise, which is placed on the ground, on
any bush, tree, rock, wall, post, fence, building, structure, vehicle or any
place whatsoever and which is visible from outside a building. The term "place"
shall include constructing, erecting, posting, painting, printing, tacking,
mailing, gluing, sticking, carving, stringing or otherwise fastening, affixing
or making visible in any manner whatsoever.
SITE PLAN: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete
dimensioning, all of the buildings, structures and uses and the exact manner of
development proposed for a specific parcel or parcels of land as required by
this title.
SLOPE: A vertical rise in feet measured over a horizontal distance, expressed
as a ratio, measured generally at right angles to contour lines.
SMALL FOWL: Birds weighing fifty (50) pounds or less. May include chickens,
geese, ducks, turkeys, pigeons, doves or similar.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the floor or ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gable roof, the wall plates
of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than four
feet (4') above the floor of such story; and the floor area of which does not
exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area of the floor next immediately below
it; provided, however, that any partial story used for one or more dwelling
units shall be deemed a full story.
STREET, PRIVATE: A right of way or easement in private ownership, not dedicated
or accepted as a public street, which affords the principal means of access to
one or more sites.
STREET, PUBLIC: A thoroughfare which has been dedicated or abandoned to the
public and accepted by a proper public authority, or a thoroughfare not less
than twenty five feet (25') wide which has been made public by right of use and
which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. A public
street includes a highway, avenue, boulevard, parkway, road, lane, walk, alley,
viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, public easement, or other public way.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed, the use of which requires a fixed location on
the ground, or attachment to something having a fixed location upon the ground.
USABLE OPEN SPACE: Shall include gardens, parks, patios, pavilions or other
recreational structures or areas designated and set aside for residents' use
whether indoor or outdoor, public or private. Parking lots and driveways that
provide access to parking lots, service areas, or required setbacks shall not
be considered as usable open space. Other structures, such as sheds or carports
not related to enhancing the enjoyment of the usable open space, do not qualify
as usable open space.
VACATION RENTAL: Sometimes known as a vacation home, vacation condominium (or
“condo”), or vacation dwelling, a fully furnished overnight transient lodging
facility (as that term is defined in section
3-11-1 of this code), other than the owner’s primary residency, and not
constituting a boarding house, that: a) is rented and used temporarily for
recreational purposes (such as vacations), and b) complies with all applicable
rules, regulations, and occupancy loads of the international building codes.
[VRs are currently limited to Tourist/Resort-Commercial zones.]
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this title when
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this title.
WRECKING/SALVAGE YARD: Any automotive business that relies on vehicles that are
damaged and brought to the business for repair or for salvage by persons who
have no interest in the repair or salvage of said vehicle. Resale or salvage
value for the business shall not be a consideration of interest in the repair
or salvage of the vehicle.
YARD SALES: Any sale held, whether in a residential or commercial zone, by a
person who is not in the regular business of buying and selling. Such sale may
be called a garage sale, a tag sale or any number of similar names. This is not
to be confused with a flea market operation or other similar business where a
conditional use permit and/or business license must first be obtained in order
to operate as a commercial business. Yard/garage sales may be held only four
(4) times per year with a duration up to seven (7) days per sale. No sales may
be held in such a way that there would be a duration of more than seven (7)
days at one time. Any sale held in conjunction with neighbors or others shall
be counted as a sale for each party involved.
ZONING MAP: A map, adopted as part of a land use ordinance, which depicts land
use zones, overlays, or districts. (Ord. 2007-25, 10-3-2007; amd. Ord. 2007-26,
10-3-2007; Ord. 2008-05, 2-20-2008; Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008; Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-
2009; Ord. 2011-05, 4-20-2011; Ord. 2015-04, 7-1-2015; Ord. 2021-07, 10-6-2021;
Ord. 2022-10, 9-21-2022; Ord. 2023-07, 5-3-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA title 57, ch. 8 (1953, as amended).
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-2-1: Enforcement Official
10-2-2: Building Permits
10-2-3: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-2-4: Other Permits Or Licenses
10-2-5: Applicant Notice; Waiver
10-2-6: Compliance With Title
10-2-7: Fees
10-2-8: Inspection
10-2-9: Amendment Of General Plan, Zoning Map And Zoning Text
10-2-10: Remedies
10-2-11: Penalty
10-2-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The mayor is authorized as the enforcing officer for this title and shall
enforce all provisions, entering actions in court if necessary, and by his
failure to do so shall not legalize any violations of such provisions. The city
council may, by resolution or ordinance, from time to time entrust
administration of this title in whole or in part to another officer of the city
without amendment to this title. (Ord., 6-17-1987)
10-2-2: BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   Required: No person shall erect, construct, reconstruct or alter any
building or other structure without having first having applied for and
obtained a building permit from the building inspector. Detached accessory
buildings having floor space less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet are
exempt from this regulation. An application for a building permit shall be on a
form provided by the city, and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee and
detailed drawings showing the intended improvements. No building or structure
shall be erected nor modified so as to be in violation of this title. In
addition to all other requirements necessary to obtain a building permit, the
building permit applicant shall provide proof to the building inspector that
the parcel of property upon which the building is to be erected has access to a
dedicated city street, is within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a fire
hydrant and complies with all requirements with respect to the zone in which
the parcel of property is located. Violation of this section is punishable as a
class B misdemeanor, in addition to any other civil penalties provided by the
applicable building related code(s).
   B.   Improvements: In addition, unless the applicant is a subdivider who has
a current bond which has not yet been released and is currently being held in
escrow for the full cost of subdivision improvements, the building permit
applicant shall provide for the improvement of the abutting street according to
the specifications and procedures set forth in the subdivision title of this
code, in one of the following methods:
      1.   Upon application to the city and upon express written approval by
the city, install all necessary improvements as required by and in accordance
with the provisions of the subdivision title of this code, upon completion of
which the applicant shall deposit cash or post a one year bond approved by the
city in the amount of twenty five percent (25%) of the cost of the
improvements, to cover possible latent defects, which twenty five percent (25%)
amount shall be administered and released as described in section
11-3-5 of the subdivision ordinance of this code; or
      2.   Deposit funds with the city, in an amount to be determined by the
city, using the then current cost to construct and install such improvements as
would be required under this section. In the event this option is chosen by the
building permit applicant, the city shall hold said funds at its discretion
until such time as it deems necessary to improve the street, at which time said
improvements shall be so used without further liability on the part of the
applicant. (Ord. 2007-25, 10-3-2007)
10-2-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building inspector to the
effect that the use of a building or premises will conform to provisions of
this title and related ordinances. A certificate of occupancy will constitute
evidence that work covered in a building permit has been completed to the
extent that occupancy is in compliance with this title and related ordinances.
Occupancy or use of a building without obtaining an occupancy permit shall
constitute a violation of this title, which is punishable as a class B
misdemeanor and subject to any other civil penalties provided by the applicable
building related code(s). (Ord. 2007-25, 10-3-2007)
10-2-4: OTHER PERMITS OR LICENSES:
All departments, officials and public employees of the city who are vested with
the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the
provisions of this title and shall issue no permit or license for uses,
buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions
of this title. Any permits or licenses so issued shall be null and void. (Ord.,
6-17-1987)
10-2-5: APPLICANT NOTICE; WAIVER:
   A.   Each application required by this title shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee and shall also include the required maps, plans and drawings
related to the permit or use applied for that support the request.
   B.   For each land use application, the city shall:
      1.   Notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of each public
hearing and public meeting to consider the application;
      2.   Provide to each applicant a copy of each staff report regarding the
applicant or the pending application at least three (3) business days before
the public hearing or public meeting; and
      3.   Notify the applicant of any final action on a pending application.
If the city fails to comply with the requirements of subsections B1 and/or B2
of this section, an applicant may waive the failure so that the application may
stay on the public hearing or public meeting agenda and be considered as if the
requirements had been met. (Ord. 2007-25, 10-3-2007)
10-2-6: COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE:
The building inspector or any city official shall not grant a permit for the
erection, construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building or
structure if such building or structure would be in violation of any of the
provisions of this title. Any permit that is granted in violation of this title
shall be null and void. The issuance of a building permit by the city does not
permit the owner to violate restrictive covenants effective as to the property
or lot. It will be the responsibility of the owner to adhere to such
restrictive covenants and any violation of such covenants can be remedied as
indicated in the restrictive covenants. (Ord., 6-17-1987; amd. Ord. 2007-25,
10-3-2007)
10-2-7: FEES:
Fees may be charged for zone changes, building, occupancy and conditional use
permits, design review and planned unit development approval, subdivision plat
approval, planning commission and appeal authority (including, but not limited
to, the board of adjustment) hearings and such other services as are required
by this title to be performed by public officers or agencies. Such fees shall
be established by the city council by resolution and shall be in amounts
reasonably necessary to defray costs to the public. (Ord. 2007-25, 10-3-2007)
10-2-8: INSPECTION:
The building inspector is hereby authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected
all buildings or structures in the course of erection, construction,
reconstruction or alteration and to inspect land uses to determine compliance
with the provisions of this zoning title. The building inspector or any
authorized employee of the city shall have the right to enter the premises for
the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this title;
provided, that such right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours
and that in no case shall entry be made to any occupied building in the absence
of the owner or a tenant thereof without written permission of the owner or the
written order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The building inspector may
order the construction, erection, reconstruction or alteration to cease
immediately by issue of a stop order on a form to be approved by the city
council. Any person who wilfully continues to construct, reconstruct, erect or
alter after having received notice of the stop order, unless authorized by the
building inspector, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class C misdemeanor,
for each day that the person continues to construct, reconstruct, erect or
alter on the premises. (Ord., 6-17-1987; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2007-25, 10-3-
2007)
10-2-9: AMENDMENT OF GENERAL PLAN, ZONING MAP AND ZONING TEXT:
The city council may amend the general plan and the number, shape, boundaries,
or area of any zoning district, any regulation of or within the zoning
district, or any other provision of the land use ordinance, including the
zoning map, in accordance with the following:
   A.   General Decision-Making Standards. The decision-making standards set
forth in this section are based on the fundamental distinction between
legislative and administrative proceedings: Legislative proceedings establish
public law and policy applicable generally, while administrative proceedings
apply such law and policy to factually distinct, individual circumstances.
      1.   Legislative proceedings. The following shall apply to legislative
decisions:
         a.   Decisions regarding a legislative application shall be based on
the "reasonably debatable" standard, as follows: the decision-making authority
shall determine what action, in its judgment, will reasonably promote the
public interest, conserve the values of other properties, avoid incompatible
development, encourage appropriate use and development, and promote the general
welfare. In making such determination, the decision-making authority may
consider the following:
         (1)   Testimony and evidence presented at a public hearing or meeting;
and
         (2)   Personal knowledge of various conditions and activities bearing
on the issue at hand, such as, but not limited to, the location of businesses,
schools, roads and traffic conditions; growth in population and housing; the
capacity of utilities; the zoning of surrounding property; and the effect that
a particular proposal may have on such conditions and activities, the values of
other properties, and upon the general orderly development of the City.
         b.   The following types of applications are declared to be
legislative proceedings:
         (1)   General plan amendment
         (2)   Zoning map amendment
         (3)   Land use or zoning text amendment
         (4)   Annexation
         (5)   Temporary regulations.
         c.   The decision-making body should state on the record the basis for
its decision.
      2.   Administrative proceedings. The following shall apply to
administrative decisions:
         a.   Decisions regarding an administrative application shall be based
on the "substantial evidence" standard and shall include at least the following
elements:
         (1)   A statement of the standards for approval of the application;
         (2)   A summary of evidence presented to the decision-making body or
official;
         (3)   A statement of findings of fact or other factors considered,
including the basis upon which such facts were determined and specific
references to applicable standards set forth in this title or other provisions
of this Code; and
         (4)   A statement of approval, approval with conditions, or
disapproval, as the case may be.
         b.   The following types of applications are hereby declared to be
administrative proceedings:
         (1)   Permitted use review
         (2)   Site plan review
         (3)   Special exception
         (4)   Variance
         (5)   Building permit
         (6)   Nonconformities
         (7)   Sign permit
         (8)   Temporary use permit
         (9)   Routine and uncontested matter
         (10)   Administrative interpretation
         (11)   Appeal of administrative decision
         (12)   Subdivision approval
   B.   Amendment of General Plan. Subject to the procedures set forth herein,
the City Council may from time to time amend the general plan in accordance
with the following:
      1.   Persons wishing to propose a general plan amendment shall file their
proposals and shall pay the fee established by the fee schedule adopted by the
City Council. Proposed general plan amendments will be considered by the
Planning Commission twice a year, at the February and August meetings.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council or Planning Commission may, at
any time by majority vote, authorize preparation and consideration of proposed
general plan amendments.
      2.   Persons proposing general plan amendments shall do such survey and
analysis work necessary to support the proposed amendment. To ensure that the
Planning Commission and City Council have sufficient information to evaluate
each proposal, an applicant shall submit the following information:
      3.   For map amendments:
         a.   Eight and one-half inch by 11-inch map showing the area of the
proposed amendment;
         b.   Current copy of county assessor's parcel map showing the area of
the proposed amendment;
         c.   Mapped inventory of existing land uses within the area of the
proposed amendment and extending one-half mile beyond such area;
         d.   Correct property addresses of parcels included within the area of
the proposed amendment;
         e.   Written statement specifying the potential use of property within
the area of the proposed amendment;
         f.   Written statement explaining why the existing general plan
designation for the area is no longer appropriate or feasible;
         g.   Analysis of the potential impacts of the proposed amendment on
existing infrastructure and public services such as traffic, streets,
intersections, water and sewer, storm drains, electrical power, fire
protection, garbage collection, etc.; and
         h.   As part of the general plan map amendment process, the applicant
shall attempt to collect the signature of the property owner or authorized
agent, or, in the case of amendments affecting multiple properties, the
signatures of a majority of the persons who own property within the area
proposed for the general plan map amendment.
      4.   For text amendments:
         a.   Written statement showing the desired language change;
         b.   Written statement explaining why existing general plan language
is no longer applicable or appropriate;
         c.   Analysis of the potential impacts of the proposed amendment; and
         d.   Map showing affected areas if text changes will affect specific
geographic areas.
      5.   Planning Commission Consideration of General Plan Amendment. After
receipt of a complete application for an amendment to the General Plan for all
or part of the City, the Planning Commission shall schedule and hold a public
hearing on the proposed plan as provided in Utah Code Ann. §10-9a-404 and Utah
Code Ann. §10-9a-204 at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing.
After the public hearing, the Planning Commission may recommend approval of the
general plan amendments as is, recommend approval of the general plan amendment
with changes, or recommend denial of the general plan amendment. The Planning
Commission shall then forward the proposed general plan amendment to the
General Plan to the City Council with the recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
      6.   City Council Consideration of General Plan Amendment. The City
Council shall schedule and hold a public hearing on the proposed general plan
amendment recommended to it by the Planning Commission as provided in Utah Code
Ann. §10-9a-404 and Utah Code Ann. §10-9a-204 at least ten (10) days before the
date of the hearing. After the public hearing, the City Council may make any
modifications to the proposed general plan amendment that it considers
appropriate. The City Council may adopt the proposed general plan amendments to
the general plan without further amendment, amend the proposed general plan and
adopt or reject it as amended, or reject the proposed amendments to the general
plan.
      7.   Except as provided in Utah Code Ann. §10-9a-406, the general plan
and any amendments thereto shall be considered only as an advisory guide for
growth and development of the land within the City of LaVerkin. After the City
Council has adopted a general plan, or any amendments thereto, no street, park,
or other public way, ground, place, or space, no publicly owned building or
structure, and no public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, may be
constructed or authorized until and unless it conforms to the general plan as
amended.
   C.   Amendment of Zoning Map and Text of Zoning Ordinance. Subject to the
procedures set forth herein, the City Council may from time to time amend the
text of this title and the zoning map, which may include changes in the number,
shape, boundaries, or area of any zoning district, zoning district regulations
or any other provision of this title. The provisions set forth herein shall not
apply to temporary land use regulations which may be enacted without public
hearing in accordance with Utah Code Ann. §10-9a-504. The use of development
agreements in connection with a zone change to achieve the purposes of this
chapter, as permitted by Utah Code Ann. §10-9a-532(1) is hereby authorized.
      1.   Initiation: Proposed amendments to the text of this title and the
zoning map may be initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission, a
property owner, or the duly authorized agent for a property owner.
      2.   Procedure: Zoning text and map amendments shall be considered and
processed in accordance with the following:
         a.   An application shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in
a form established by the administrator along with any fee established by the
City's schedule of fees. The application shall include at least the following
information:
         (1)   The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
applicant and the applicant's agent, if any;
         (2)   The name and address of every person or company the applicant
represents;
         (3)   The requested amendment and reasons supporting the request;
         (4)   If the proposed amendment requires a change in the zoning map,
the application shall include an accurate property map showing present and
proposed zoning classifications, all abutting properties with present zoning
classifications, and an accurate legal description and approximate address of
the area proposed to be rezoned;
         (5)   The names and addresses of all affected entities;
         (6)   The names of property owners within or immediately adjacent to
the area to be rezoned who support the application for amending the zone; and
         (7)   If the proposed amendment requires a change in the text of this
title, the application shall include chapter and section references and a draft
of the proposed text.
         (8)   A "will serve" letter from utility providers, as may be
applicable.
         b.   After the application is determined to be complete, the Zoning
Administrator shall prepare and submit to the Planning Commission a staff
report evaluating the application.
         c.   After receipt of the staff report, the Planning Commission shall
hold a public meeting, which shall include a public hearing, on the application
for which notice is given as follows:
         (1)   For a public meeting, notice shall be given as a class A notice
under Utah Code Ann. § 63G-30-102 for at least 24 hours before the meeting.
         (2)   For a public hearing, notice of the date, time and place of the
public hearing shall be: (1) given as a class B notice under Utah Code Ann. §
63G-30-102 for the area directly affected by the proposed amendment for at
least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing, (2) mailed to each
affected entity at least 10 days before the public hearing.
         (3)    In addition to the foregoing, the City shall send a courtesy
notice to each owner of private real property whose property is located
entirely or partially within a proposed zoning map enactment or amendment at
least 10 days before the scheduled day of the public hearing. The notice shall:
(1) identify with specificity each owner of record of real property that will
be affected by the proposed zoning map or map amendments, (2) state the current
zone in which the property is located, (3) state the proposed new zone for the
real property, (4) provide information regarding or a reference to the proposed
regulations, prohibitions, and permitted uses that the property will be subject
to if the zoning map or map amendment is adopted, (5) state that the owner of
real property may no later than 10 days after the day of the first public
hearing file a written objection to the inclusion of the owner's property in
the proposed zoning map or map amendment,(6) state the address where the
property owner should file the protest, and (7) notify the property owner that
each written objection filed with the municipality will be provided to the
LaVerkin City Council.
         d.   Following a public hearing, the Planning Commission may make a
recommendation to the City Council for approval, approval with modifications,
or denial of the proposed zoning map or text amendment.
         e.   Following receipt of a recommendation from the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall hold a public meeting on the application as
provided in Utah Code Ann. §10-9a-205. The City Council may, but shall not be
required to, hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. If the City
Council elects to hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment, it shall
follow the notice requirements set forth above for public hearings. At the
conclusion of all hearings, The City Council may approve, approve with
modifications, or deny the proposed amendment in accordance with the following
approval standards:
         (1)   Approval standards. A decision to amend the text of this title
or the zoning map is a matter within the legislative discretion of the City
Council as described herein. In considering such amendment, the following
factors should be considered:
            (A)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with goals,
objectives and policies of the City's general plan;
            (B)   Whether the proposed amendment is harmonious with the overall
character of existing development in the vicinity of the subject property;
            (C)   The extent to which the proposed amendment may adversely
affect adjacent property;
            (D)   The adequacy of facilities and services intended to serve the
subject property, including, but not limited to, roadways, parks and recreation
facilities, police and fire protection, schools, stormwater drainage systems,
water supplies, and wastewater and refuse collection;
            (E)   The extent to which any concerns with the proposed amendment
can be ameliorated with a development agreement; and
            (F)   Other factors deemed relevant by the City Council
         e.   Appeal of decision. Any party adversely affected by a decision of
the City Council to amend the text of this title or the zoning map may, within
30 days after such decision, appeal to the district court subject to the
provisions of Utah Code Ann. §10-9a-801.
         f.   Effect of approval. Approval of an application to amend the
provisions of this title or the zoning map shall not be deemed an approval of
any site plan or other permit. Approval of such permits shall be obtained in
accordance with applicable provisions of this title.
         g.   Effect of disapproval. City Council denial of an application to
amend the provisions of this title or the zoning map shall preclude the filing
of another application covering substantially the same subject or property, or
any portion thereof, for one (1) year from the date of the disapproval, except
that another application for a change of zone may be made sooner if the
Planning Commission determines that a substantial change in circumstances has
occurred to merit consideration of the application. Substantial change may
include:
         (1)   A significant change in the affected land area,
         (2)   An agreement with the applicant reducing overall density and
incorporating significant design changes including reduced building height,
increased setbacks, or other changes resulting in reduced impact on adjacent
land uses,
         (3)   Changes in the neighborhood including recent zone changes or
land use amendments and/or new roads or other infrastructure to serve the area
proposed for the change, or
         (4)   The application is for a change to a different zone.
         h.   The City Council or Planning Commission may propose any text or
zoning map amendment at any time. (Ord. 2007-25, 10-3-2007; amd. Ord. 2024-13,
5-1-2024)
10-2-10: REMEDIES:
The city or any owner of real estate within the district in which a building or
structure is being erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or used in
violation of this title may, in addition to other remedies provided by law,
institute injunctions, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate actions,
proceedings or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or maintenance of use. (Ord.
2007-25, 10-3-2007)
10-2-11: PENALTY:
Any person violating or causing or permitting the violation of the provisions
of this title shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and such person shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day during which any portion of any violation of
this title is committed, continues or is permitted by such person. (Ord., 6-17-
1987; amd. 1998 Code; Ord. 2007-25, 10-3-2007)
CHAPTER 3
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
10-3-1: Created
10-3-2: Terms Of Office
10-3-3: Alternate Members
10-3-4: Compensation
10-3-5: Duties And Responsibilities
10-3-6: Rules Of Procedure
10-3-7: Officers
10-3-8: Meetings
10-3-9: Quorum And Voting
10-3-10: Employees; Expenditures
10-3-11: Vacancies And Removals For Cause
10-3-1: CREATED:
The planning commission shall consist of five (5) members, each to be appointed
by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. It is the intent
of this chapter that the planning commission consist of members from various
fields of expertise. The five (5) members of the planning commission shall be
residents of the city. At least three (3) of the five (5) members shall hold no
other public office or position within the city. (Ord. 2005-40, 12-7-2005)
10-3-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The terms of office for the five (5) planning commission members shall be for
five (5) years, with renewal at the discretion of the mayor and city council on
December 31 of the final year. The planning commission members' terms shall be
staggered so that no two (2) members' terms shall expire at the same time. The
term of office for the city council member designated liaison for the planning
commission shall correspond to his tenure of office as a city council member.
(Ord. 2007-29, 10-17-2007)
10-3-3: ALTERNATE MEMBERS:
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may appoint up to
two (2) alternate members to the planning commission. Alternate members shall
be residents of the city and may only hold another public office if it is one
in which decisions do not generally conflict with land use applications.
Alternates shall be designated by the mayor as alternate one and alternate two,
with alternate one having seniority for service. Alternates shall act as proxy
for any member when there is a vacant seat at a regular meeting. Terms of
office shall run from year to year with renewal at the discretion of the mayor
and city council on December 31. All other rules, duties and responsibilities
shall be consistent with those outlined for planning commission members. (Ord.
2007-29, 10-17-2007)
10-3-4: COMPENSATION:
Members and alternate members of the planning commission shall serve without
compensation, except as provided herein: members shall be paid a per diem for
each duly-called and advertised regular business meeting of the planning
commission that they actually attend, as set by ordinance after public hearing;
and may be reimbursed-for authorized, budgeted, and actual travel expenses
incurred-upon presentation of proper receipts and vouchers. Although not
considered compensation nor compensable: awards, recognitions, and/or
appreciation dinners may be provided to members of the planning commission at
the discretion of the city council. (Ord. 2005-40, 12-7-2005; amd. Ord. 2022-
05, 6-15-2022)
10-3-5: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The planning commission shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities as
are provided by state law, by this title and as are from time to time lawfully
delegated by the city council by ordinance, resolution or otherwise. (Ord.
2005-40, 12-7-2005)
10-3-6: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
The planning commission may adopt such rules and procedures as it may deem
necessary for the proper conduct of its business. The planning commission shall
keep a record of its proceedings. Such record shall be open to inspection by
the public at all reasonable times. (Ord. 2005-40, 12-7-2005)
10-3-7: OFFICERS:
The planning commission shall elect a chairperson and chairperson pro tem from
among its members, whose terms shall be for one year. (Ord. 2005-40, 12-7-2005)
10-3-8: MEETINGS:
The planning commission shall conduct regularly scheduled meetings. All
meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public. Notice for all
public hearings before the planning commission shall be given as outlined in
state law and elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 2007-29, 10-17-2007)
10-3-9: QUORUM AND VOTING:
A quorum shall consist of at least two (2) members or alternate members and a
chairperson or chairperson pro tem. Evidence shall not be presented unless a
quorum is present. The minimum number of yes votes required to take any action
shall be a majority of the members of the quorum present, but in no event shall
be fewer than three (3). (Ord. 2007-29, 10-17-2007)
10-3-10: EMPLOYEES; EXPENDITURES:
The planning commission may, upon the approval of the city council, employ
experts and staff, including consultants and a secretary, and pay such
expenses, exclusive of gifts, as may be reasonable and necessary for carrying
out the duties defined in this title; provided, that such expenditures may not
exceed the amount appropriated for the operation of the planning commission by
the city council. (Ord. 2005-40, 12-7-2005)
10-3-11: VACANCIES AND REMOVALS FOR CAUSE:
Vacancies of planning commission members occurring otherwise than through the
expiration of terms shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by
appointment of the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The
city council shall have the right to remove any member for malfeasance or
nonperformance of duty. Nonperformance of duty shall include a repeated failure
to attend planning commission meetings. (Ord. 2007-29, 10-17-2007)
CHAPTER 4
APPEALS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Composition Of Appeal Authority
10-4-2: Duties And Powers
10-4-3: Rules Of Conduct
10-4-4: Variances
10-4-5: Appeals Procedure
10-4-6: Judicial Review; Time Limitation
10-4-1: COMPOSITION OF APPEAL AUTHORITY:
The appeal authority for the city shall be the board of adjustment. The board
of adjustment shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the city council for a term of five (5)
years; provided, that the term of the members of the first board so appointed
shall be such that the term of one member shall expire each year. Any member
may be removed for cause by the city council upon written charge and after
public hearing, if such public hearing is requested. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant, by appointment
of the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The board of
adjustment shall elect a chairperson and chairperson pro tem from among its
members, whose terms shall be for one year. (Ord. 2007-28, 10-17-2007)
10-4-2: DUTIES AND POWERS:
   A.   The appeal authority shall hear and decide:
      1.   Requests for variances from the terms of the land use ordinances;
and
      2.   Appeals from decisions applying the land use ordinances.
   B.   The appeal authority:
      1.   Shall act in a quasi-judicial manner; and
      2.   Shall serve as the final arbiter of issues involving the
interpretation or application of land use ordinances. (Ord. 2007-28, 10-17-
2007)
10-4-3: RULES OF CONDUCT:
The appeal authority may adopt rules for the regulation of its procedures and
the conduct of its duties not inconsistent with the provisions of this title or
of state law, and may amend such rules upon the majority vote of its members.
The board shall notify each of its members of any meeting or hearing; convene
only if a quorum of its members is present; and act only upon the vote of a
majority of its convened members. (Ord. 2007-28, 10-17-2007)
10-4-4: VARIANCES:
   A.   Requests: Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the
requirements of this title as applied to a parcel of property that he owns,
leases, or in which he holds some other beneficial interest may apply to the
appeal authority for a variance from the terms of the ordinance.
   B.   Granting Of Variance: The appeal authority may grant a variance only
if:
      1.   Literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an unreasonable
hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purpose of the land use ordinances;
      2.   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do not
generally apply to other properties in the same zone;
      3.   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial
property right possessed by other property in the same zone;
      4.   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and will
not be contrary to the public interest; and
      5.   The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial
justice done.
   C.   Unreasonable Hardship: In determining whether or not enforcement of the
land use ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship, the appeal authority may
not find an unreasonable hardship unless it finds all of the following:
      1.   The alleged hardship is located on or associated with the property
for which the variance is sought; and
      2.   The alleged hardship comes from circumstances peculiar to the
property, not from conditions that are general to the neighborhood; and
      3.   The hardship is not self-imposed or economic.
   D.   Special Circumstances: In determining whether or not there are special
circumstances attached to the property, the appeal authority may find that
special circumstances exist only if the special circumstances:
      1.   Relate to the hardship complained of; and
      2.   Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in
the same zone.
   E.   Additional Variance Requirements:
      1.   The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the
conditions justifying a variance have been met.
      2.   Variances run with the land.
      3.   The appeal authority may not grant a use variance.
      4.   In granting a variance, the appeal authority may impose additional
requirements on the applicant that will mitigate any harmful effects of the
variance or serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or
modified. (Ord. 2007-28, 10-17-2007)
10-4-5: APPEALS PROCEDURE:
   A.   Scope: A party bringing an appeal may allege that there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the land use authority
in the administration or interpretation of the land use ordinance. Appeals to
the appeal authority may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer,
department, board or bureau of the city affected by a decision of the land use
authority administering or interpreting the land use ordinance. However, only
those decisions in which a land use authority has applied a land use ordinance
to a particular application, person, or parcel may be appealed to the appeal
authority.
   B.   Time For Appeal: Appeals must be brought within thirty (30) days after
said decision is rendered or (if the decision is in writing) after the decision
is issued in writing.
   C.   Burden Of Proof: A party bringing an appeal to the appeal authority
must present every theory of relief that the party could raise in district
court, and has the burden of proving that the land use authority erred.
   D.   Standard Of Review: The standard of review to be used by the appeal
authority in reviewing the decision of the land use authority is different for
findings of fact than for questions of law or mixed questions of law and fact.
      1.   For findings of fact, the appeal authority must defer to the factual
findings of the land use authority, and may not reverse these findings of fact
unless the appeal authority finds them to be clearly erroneous because they are
against the clear weight of the evidence.
      2.   For questions of law or mixed questions of law and fact, such as the
interpretation and application of a land use ordinance, the appeal authority is
not required to defer to the land use authority, but must only ascertain that
the question of law, or mixed question of law and fact, was decided correctly.
   E.   Decision On Appeal: The appeal authority shall determine the
correctness of a decision of the land use authority in its interpretation and
application of the land use ordinance. In reaching its decision, the appeal
authority may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly the decision appealed from.
The concurring vote of three (3) members of the appeal authority shall be
necessary in its decision. The decision of the appeal authority shall take
effect and be considered final on the date when the appeal authority issues a
written decision. (Ord. 2007-28, 10-17-2007)
10-4-6: JUDICIAL REVIEW; TIME LIMITATION:
A party may not commence judicial review of land use decisions of the city in
which a land use authority has applied a land use ordinance to a particular
application, person, or parcel, until the aggrieved party has exhausted his
administrative remedies by appealing the decision to the appeal authority as
provided in this chapter. After the appeal authority has rendered its decision,
the city or any person aggrieved by any decision of the appeal authority may
have and maintain a plenary action for relief therefor in any court of
competent jurisdiction, provided a petition for such relief is presented to the
court within thirty (30) days after the written decision of the appeal
authority is issued. Judicial review of the decision of the appeal authority
shall be in conformity with Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-801. (Ord. 2007-
28, 10-17-2007)
CHAPTER 5
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
10-5-1: Purpose And Intent
10-5-2: Established
10-5-3: Duties
10-5-4: City Historic Sites List
10-5-5: City Landmark Register
10-5-6: Standards For Rehabilitation And Design Guidelines
10-5-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The city recognizes that the historical heritage of the community is
among its most valued and important assets. It is therefore the purpose and
intent of the city to identify, preserve, protect and enhance historic and
prehistoric areas, buildings, structures, sites, objects, and districts lying
within the jurisdictional limits of the city.
   B.   The requirements are intended to:
      1.   Preserve historic and prehistoric areas and buildings and related
structures of historic and architectural significance; and
      2.   Allow improvements to existing and related structures or new
construction to be conducted without destroying or damaging the historic
character of said district or neighborhood. (Ord. 2008-08, 5-21-2008)
10-5-2: ESTABLISHED:
The LaVerkin City historic preservation commission is hereby established by the
city with the following provisions:
   A.   Definition: "Commission", as used in this chapter, shall mean the
LaVerkin City historic preservation commission (or historic preservation
commission).
   B.   Composition:
      1.   The commission shall consist of a minimum of five (5) members, who
reside within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city and who have a
demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in or of historic preservation.
They are to be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council,
for terms of not less than two (2) years nor more than four (4) years.
      2.   To the extent available in the community, two (2) commission members
shall be professionals, as defined by national park service regulations, from
the disciplines of history, archaeology, planning, architecture or
architectural history.
   C.   Meetings: The commission shall meet at least twice each year and shall
conduct business in accordance with the open public meeting laws of the state
of Utah. This includes public notification of the meeting place, time and
agenda items.
   D.   Officers: The members of the commission shall select, by majority vote
and from among the commission members, a chairperson, vice chairperson, and
secretary.
   E.   Minutes: Written minutes of each commission meeting shall be prepared
and made available for public inspection. (Ord. 2008-08, 5-21-2008)
10-5-3: DUTIES:
The commission shall have the following duties:
   A.   Survey And Inventory Community Historic Resources:
      1.   The commission shall conduct or cause to be conducted a survey of
the historic, architectural, and archaeological resources within the community.
      2.   The survey shall be compatible with the Utah Inventory of Historic
and Archaeological Sites. Survey and inventory documents shall be maintained
and shall be open to the public.
      3.   The survey shall be updated at least every ten (10) years.
   B.   Review Proposed Nominations To The National Register Of Historic
Places:
      1.   The commission shall review and comment to the state historic
preservation officer on all proposed national register nominations for
properties within the boundaries of the city.
      2.   When the historic preservation commission considers a national
register nomination which is normally evaluated by professionals in a specific
discipline and that discipline is not represented on the commission, the
commission shall seek expertise in that area before rendering its decision.
   C.   Provide Advice And Information:
      1.   The commission shall act in an advisory role to the mayor, city
council, and other officials and departments of the city regarding the
identification and protection of local historic, prehistoric, and
archaeological resources.
      2.   The commission shall work towards and facilitate the continuing
education of citizens regarding historic preservation and community history.
   D.   Oversee And Assist In Maintenance And Rehabilitation: Oversee/assist in
the maintenance and rehabilitation of city owned historic buildings and sites.
   E.   Establish One Or More Districts:
      1.   The commission shall identify an area or areas containing
significant historic buildings or structures to be known as the (or a) historic
district, which district or districts shall be established by the city council
by ordinance as an overlay zone to the existing zone.
      2.   The commission shall:
         a.   Propose for adoption, by the city council, rules and/or
regulations:
            (1)   Pertaining to new construction within a historic district;
and
            (2)   Pertaining to alterations, repairs or demolition of existing
buildings within such district which are deemed to be of significant historical
value.
         b.   Assist in the enforcement of said rules and regulations.
   F.   Apply For And Administer Grants: Apply for and administer grants and
other financial aid for historic preservation projects in the city.
   G.   Enforce State Historic Preservation Laws: The commission shall support
the enforcement of all state laws relating to historic preservation. These
include, but are not limited to, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended)
sections 9-8-305, 9-8-307, and 9-8-308 (regarding the protection of Utah
antiquities); section 9-8-404 (regarding notification of the state historic
preservation office of any known proposed action which will destroy or affect a
site, building or object owned by the state of Utah and included on or eligible
for the state or national registers); and section 10-8-85.9 (regarding the
preservation of historical areas and sites). (Ord. 2008-08, 5-21-2008)
10-5-4: CITY HISTORIC SITES LIST:
   A.   Designation Of Historic Properties: The commission may designate
historic properties to the Historic Sites List as a means of providing
recognition to, and encouraging the preservation of, historic properties in the
community.
   B.   Criteria For Designating Properties To The City Historic Sites List:
Any district, building, structure, object or site may be designated to the
Historic Sites List if it meets all the criteria outlined below:
      1.   Location: It is located within the official boundaries of the city.
      2.   Age: It is at least fifty (50) years old.
      3.   Historic Integrity:
         a.   It retains its historic integrity, in that there are no major
alterations or additions that have obscured or destroyed the significant
historic features. Major alterations that would destroy the historic integrity
include, but are not limited to, changes in pitch of the main roof, enlargement
or enclosure of windows on the principal facades, addition of upper stories or
the removal of original upper stories, covering the exterior walls with
nonhistoric materials, moving the resource from its original location to one
that is dissimilar to the original, and additions which significantly detract
from or obscure the original form and appearance of the resource when viewed
from the public way.
         b.   If the property does not meet the integrity requirements outlined
in subsection B3a of this section, it may still qualify for designation if it
meets one of the following requirements for exceptional significance:
            (1)   It is directly associated with events of historic
significance in the community.
            (2)   It is closely associated with the lives of persons who were
of historic importance to the community.
            (3)   It exhibits significant methods of construction or materials
that were used within the historic period.
      4.   Documentation: It has been documented according to the Utah state
historic preservation office standards for intensive level surveys (June 1993
version or subsequent revisions); and copies of that documentation have been
placed in the local and state historic preservation files.
   C.   Designation Procedures: Any person, group, or government agency may
nominate a property for listing in the city Historic Sites List. The nomination
and listing procedures are as follows:
      1.   Completed intensive level survey documentation for each nominated
property must be submitted to the commission.
      2.   The commission will review and consider properly submitted
nominations at its next scheduled meeting. The commission will notify the
nominating party, either orally or in writing, one week prior to the meeting
that the nomination will be considered, and will place that item on the agenda
posted for said meeting. The one week notification may be waived at the
nominating party's option in order to accommodate "last minute" submittals.
      3.   The commission will review the documentation for completeness,
accuracy and compliance with subsection B, "Criteria For Designating Properties
To The City Historic Sites List", of this section and will make its decision
accordingly.
   D.   Results Of Designation To The Historic Sites List:
      1.   Owners of officially designated historic sites may obtain a historic
site certificate from the commission. The historic site certificate contains
the historic name of the property, the date of designation, and signatures of
the mayor and the commission chairperson.
      2.   If a historic site is to be demolished or extensively altered,
efforts will be made to document its physical appearance before such action
takes place.
         a.   The city will delay issuing a demolition permit for a maximum of
thirty (30) days and will notify a member of the commission, who will take
responsibility for the documentation.
         b.   Documentation will include, at a minimum, exterior photographs
(both black and white and color slides) of all elevations of the historic
building. When possible, both exterior and interior measurements of the
building will be made in order to provide an accurate floor plan drawing of the
building.
         c.   The demolition permit will be issued after thirty (30) days of
the initial application, whether or not the commission has documented the
building. The permit may be issued earlier if the commission completes its
documentation before the thirty (30) day deadline.
         d.   The documentation will be kept in the commission's historic site
files, which are open to the public.
   E.   Removal Of Properties From The Historic Sites List: Properties which,
in the opinion of the commission, no longer meet the criteria for eligibility
may be removed from the Historic Sites List after review and consideration by
the commission. (Ord. 2008-08, 5-21-2008)
10-5-5: CITY LANDMARK REGISTER:
   A.   Purpose: Significant historic properties may be designated to the
Historic Landmark Register for the purposes of recognizing their significance
and providing incentives and guidelines for their preservation.
   B.   Criteria For Designating Properties To The City Historic Landmark
Register: Any district, building, structure, object or site may be designated
to the Historic Landmark Register if it meets the criteria outlined below:
      1.   Location: It is located within the official boundaries of the city.
      2.   National Registry:
         a.   It is currently listed in the National Register of Historic
Places; and a copy of the approved national register form has been placed in
the local historic preservation files.
         b.   A property not yet listed in the national register must:
            (1)   Retain its historic integrity as defined in subsection 10-5-
4B3a of this chapter, and
            (2)   Meet at least one of the following national register
criteria:
               (A)   Be associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or
               (B)   Be associated with the lives of significant persons in our
past; or
               (C)   Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period,
method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess
high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable
entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
               (D)   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history (e.g., archeological sites).
            (3)   Has been documented according to the Utah state historic
preservation office standards for intensive level surveys (June 1993 version or
subsequent revisions) or national register standards; and a copy of that
documentation has been placed in the local historic preservation files.
      3.   Owner Approval:
         a.   Individual Properties: The owner of the property must approve the
action to designate his/her property to the Historic Landmark Register by
submitting to the commission a written statement to that effect.
         b.   Historic Districts: A majority (i.e., over 50 percent) of the
property owners in a proposed historic district must be in favor of the
designation or at least not opposed to it. Written objections from over fifty
percent (50%) of the property owners will constitute lack of approval and will
halt the designation process.
   C.   Designation Procedures:
      1.   Submittal to the commission of complete intensive level survey or
National Register of Historic Places documentation shall initiate the review
process.
      2.   The commission shall place properly submitted nominations on the
agenda for its next scheduled meeting; and shall notify the nominating party
and the property owner, either orally or in writing, fourteen (14) days prior
to the meeting that the nomination will be considered.
         a.   The fourteen (14) day notification period may be waived at the
property owner's option.
         b.   In the case of historic districts, notification of proposed
nominations may be made by public notice placed in the local newspaper or
posted in a public building.
      3.   The commission shall review the documentation for completeness,
accuracy, and compliance with subsection B, "Criteria For Designating
Properties To The City Historic Landmark Register", of this section and may, by
passage of an appropriate resolution, designate properties to the Historic
Landmark Register.
   D.   Notification And Recording Of Designation: Following designation by the
commission, a notice of such shall be mailed to the owners of record, together
with a copy of this chapter. In the case of a historic district designation,
notice of such may be placed in the local newspaper or in a public building
rather than mailed to each owner of property in the district. The commission
shall record the Historic Landmark Register status designation with the county
recorder's office.
   E.   Results Of Designation To The Historic Landmark Register:
      1.   Properties designated to the Historic Landmark Register may receive
special consideration in the granting of zoning variances or conditional use
permits in order to encourage their preservation.
      2.   In the event of rehabilitation of the property, local building
officials will consider waiving certain code requirements in accordance with
the provisions of the building related codes, as adopted by the city and
identified in title 9, chapter 1 of this code, as they apply to or deal with
historic buildings and structures.
      3.   Owners of historic landmarks may seek assistance from the commission
in applying for grants or tax credits for rehabilitating their properties.
      4.   Proposed exterior work on historic landmarks is subject to the
review and approval of the commission.
         a.   Purpose: The purpose of this review is to ensure preservation of
historic properties to the greatest degree possible.
         b.   Applicability: This review applies to individually designated
landmark properties or any property, contributing or noncontributing, located
in a landmark designated historic district.
         c.   Exterior Work Requiring Permit: This review applies only to
exterior work which requires a building permit, sign permit, or demolition
permit.
            (1)   Applications for building, demolition, or sign permits
pertaining to landmark properties shall be forwarded by the building inspection
department to the commission prior to their issuance.
            (2)   A permit applicant ("applicant"), which includes the owner of
the property, in order to obtain a permit from the building inspections
department, shall file, with the commission (on a form furnished thereby), a
request for a certificate of appropriateness for rehabilitation or demolition
of a landmark property (hereinafter referred to as a certificate of
appropriateness).
         d.   Application Review: At its next scheduled meeting, the commission
shall review the application and proposed work for compliance with the
"standards for rehabilitation" (hereinafter referred to as the "standards") and
any design guidelines adopted by the commission and the city council.
            (1)   In Compliance: Applicants whose proposed projects comply with
the provisions of this chapter shall be issued a certificate of appropriateness
within ten (10) days, which certificate authorizes the issuance of the
appropriate permit.
            (2)   Not In Compliance:
               (A)   Applicants whose proposed projects are not found to be in
compliance with this chapter shall be offered a negotiating period of sixty
(60) days, during which time the commission and the applicant shall explore all
options for an acceptable solution including, but not limited to, the
feasibility of modifying the plans, using the historic landmark for alternative
purposes, and/or reselling the property to another party.
               (B)   The commission may extend the negotiating period an
additional sixty (60) days for the purposes described above if deemed necessary
to accommodate a potential solution.
               (C)   If no solution has been agreed upon at the conclusion of
either the initial sixty (60) day period or the full one hundred twenty (120)
day period, the certificate of appropriateness will be denied; and the building
official shall not issue any permits.
         e.   Claims Of Economic Hardship: The commission may approve a
certificate of appropriateness if the applicant has presented substantial
evidence demonstrating that unreasonable economic hardship will result from
denial of the certificate of appropriateness.
            (1)   Economic Hardship Criteria: In order to sustain a claim of
unreasonable economic hardship, the commission may require the applicant to
provide information as to whether the property is capable of producing a
reasonable return for the applicant.
            (2)   Demonstration Of Economic Hardship: Demonstration of economic
hardship by the applicant shall not be based on conditions resulting from
wilful or negligent acts by the applicant, purchasing the property for
substantially more than market value at the time of purchase, failure to
perform normal maintenance and repairs, failure to diligently solicit and
retain tenants, or failure to provide normal tenant improvements.
         f.   Appeal: An applicant who has been denied any permit by the
building official, based on the commission's refusal to issue a certificate of
appropriateness, may appeal that decision to the city council. The appeal must
be made on or before thirty (30) days after the commission's decision.
   F.   Removal Of Properties From The Historic Landmark Register: Properties
which, in the opinion of the commission, no longer meet the criteria for
eligibility may be removed from the Historic Landmark Register after review and
consideration by the commission.
   G.   Enforcement: The provisions of this section are subject to the
enforcement provisions established in the applicable building related codes, as
adopted by the city and identified in title 9, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord.
2008-08, 5-21-2008)
10-5-6: STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION AND DESIGN GUIDELINES:
   A.   Determining Historic Appropriateness: The following standards and
guidelines shall be used by the commission in determining the historic
appropriateness of any application pertaining to historic landmark properties.
      1.   This includes individually designated landmark properties and both
contributing and noncontributing properties in landmark designated historic
districts.
      2.   In approving an application for a certificate of appropriateness,
the commission shall find that the project substantially complies with all of
the following standards and guidelines that pertain to the application and that
the decision is in the best interest of the city.
   B.   Standards For Rehabilitation: These standards are based on the
"Secretary Of The Interior's Standards For Rehabilitation", which serve as a
national and state model for appropriate preservation treatment. The standards
are as follows:
      1.   A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
building and its site and environment.
      2.   The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and
spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
      3.   Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development,
such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other
buildings, shall not be undertaken.
      4.   Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired
historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
      5.   Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved.
      6.   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color,
texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement
of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or
pictorial evidence.
      7.   Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of
structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means
possible.
      8.   Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation
measures shall be undertaken.
      9.   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new
work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the
massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic
integrity of the property and its environment.
      10.   New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
(For further details see "The Secretary Of The Interior's Standards For
Rehabilitation And Guidelines For Rehabilitating Historic Buildings" [1990 or
more recent version].)
   C.   General Design Guidelines:
      1.   Landmark Buildings And Contributing Buildings In Landmark Designated
Historic Districts:
         a.   Avoid demolition of landmark and contributing buildings. They are
a finite resource and cannot be replaced.
         b.   Vacant buildings should be weather and vandal proofed in order to
minimize further deterioration and the threat to public safety.
         c.   Rehabilitation work, especially on the exterior and the principal
facade, should: 1) preserve existing historic features or 2) replace existing
historic features only if absolutely necessary (and then only with features and
materials known to have existed on the building). Avoid "dressing up" buildings
by adding features based on speculation.
         d.   Avoid moving buildings whenever possible, especially to create
artificial groupings of historic buildings. If buildings must be moved, the new
site should be similar to the original site; and the original setback and
orientation of the building on the lot should be replicated.
      2.   Additions To Landmark And Contributing Buildings And Construction Of
New Buildings Within A Historic District:
         a.   Scale Of New Additions: New additions to landmark and
contributing buildings should be subordinate to the original building, i.e.,
lower in height, attached to the rear or set back along the side, and
subordinate in scale and architectural detailing.
         b.   Compatibility With Historic Buildings And Overall Streetscape:
Height, width, setback, roof shape, and the overall scale and massing of new
buildings should be compatible with surrounding historic buildings and the
overall streetscape.
         c.   Materials On Primary Facade(s): Materials on at least the primary
facade(s) should be similar to original materials on facades of surrounding
historic buildings (usually brick, stucco, stone, or wood siding, depending on
the specific characteristics of the district).
         d.   Architectural Details: Architectural details (including wood or
metal trim, porches, cornices, arches, window and door features, etc.) should
not replicate historic features on surrounding historic buildings.
         e.   Window And Door Openings: Window and door openings should be
similar in size and orientation (vertical or horizontal) to openings on
historic buildings, and should take up about the same percentage of the overall
facade as those on surrounding historic buildings.
         f.   Proportion Of Principal Facades: The relationship of the width to
the height of the principal elevations shall be in scale with surrounding
structures and streetscape. Wider new buildings can be divided into segments
that more closely resemble the facade widths of historic buildings.
         g.   Roof Shape: The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with the surrounding structures and streetscape. Unusual roof
shapes, pitches, and colors are discouraged. (Ord. 2008-08, 5-21-2008)
CHAPTER 6
ZONES
SECTION:
10-6-1: Zones Established
10-6-2: Boundaries
10-6-3: Ordinance And Map Recorded
10-6-1: ZONES ESTABLISHED:
For the purpose of this title, the following zones are created to be applied as
necessary to regulate the development of the city:
One-family residential                 R-1-8
One- and two-family residential        R-1-10
Multiple-family residential            R-3-6
Residential-agricultural               R-A-1
Low density residential                R-1-14
Open space multiple use                OSMU, OSMU-C
Mobile home                            MH
General commercial                     C
Retail commercial                      Comm-R
Tourist/resort commercial              Comm-T
Industrial                             I
State Street landscaping overlay zone
Public facilities zone                 PF
 
(Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-2009; amd. Ord. 2010-06, 9-15-2010; Ord. 2013-03, 4-3-2013)
10-6-2: BOUNDARIES:
   A.   Established: The boundaries of each of the said zones are hereby
established as described herein or shown on the map entitled "zoning map of
LaVerkin", which map is on file at the city offices, and all boundaries,
notations and other data shown thereon are made by this reference as much part
of this title as if fully described and detailed herein.
   B.   Rules For Location: Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any
zone, the following rules shall apply:
      1.   Where the zone boundary is indicated as being approximately upon the
centerline of a street, alley or block, or along a property line then, unless
otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the centerline of such street, alley
or block or such property line shall be construed to be the boundary of such
zone.
      2.   Whenever the boundary line of such zone is indicated as being
approximately at the line of any river, irrigation canal or other waterway or
public park or other public land or any section line; then in such case, unless
otherwise indicated on the map, the center of such stream, canal or waterway,
and the boundary lines of such public land or such section line, shall be
deemed to be the boundary of such zone.
      3.   Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the zone
or boundary locations, the board of adjustment, or such other appeals authority
as may be specifically designated by ordinance to make such interpretations,
shall interpret the map.
   C.   Changes To Boundaries On Map: Changes to any boundaries shown on the
zoning map, as with all changes of any kind to said map, may only occur through
an amendment of the zoning map in compliance with the requirements in chapter 2
of this title. (Ord. 2007-29, 10-17-2007)
10-6-3: ORDINANCE AND MAP RECORDED:
The ordinance codified herein and the map shall be recorded with the city
clerk/recorder and may be examined by the public, subject to any reasonable
regulations established by the city council. (Ord., 6-17-1987)
ARTICLE A. ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1-8)
SECTION:
10-6A-1: Purpose
10-6A-2: Permitted Uses
10-6A-2-1: Bed And Breakfast Facilities
10-6A-3: Height Regulations
10-6A-4: Area, Width And Yard Requirements
10-6A-5: Modifying Regulations
10-6A-1: PURPOSE:
To provide appropriate locations where low density, one-family residential
neighborhoods may be established, maintained and protected. The regulations
also permit the establishment of public and semipublic uses such as churches,
schools, libraries, parks and playgrounds, which serve the requirements of
families. The regulations are intended to prohibit those uses that would be
harmful to these neighborhoods. (Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-2009)
10-6A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings.
Agriculture, including home gardens and fruit trees.
Churches.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Livestock and fowl, the raising, care, keeping, and feeding of and associated
barns, sheds, corrals, pastures, paddocks, coops, hutches, and similar
facilities therefor, subject to the provisions of section
10-7-19 of this title.
One-family dwellings.
Parks or playgrounds.
Public libraries.
Public schools.
Small/open congregate living facilities. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008; amd. Ord.
2009-02, 2-18-2009; Ord. 2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
10-6A-2-1: BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES:
See section
10-7-20 of this title. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 9-21-2022)
10-6A-3: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No main building shall be erected to a height greater than thirty five feet
(35') and no accessory building shall be erected to a height greater than
twenty feet (20') except that the City shall not impose or restrict the height
of a structure in a manner that imposes a substantial burden on the religious
exercise of a person, including a religious assembly or institution, unless the
City demonstrates that imposition of the burden on that person, assembly or
institution:
   A.   Is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and
   B.   Is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6A-4: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
District Area In     Lot Width Setback In Feet
         Square Feet In Feet   Front Side     Rear
R-1-8    8,000       80        25    8 and 10 10
 
(Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6A-5: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: Private garages and other accessory buildings located at
least ten feet (10') behind the main building may have a side setback of two
feet (2'), except that the street side setback on a corner lot shall be the
same as the front setback required for the zoning district.
   B.   Rear Yards: Private garages and accessory buildings located at least
ten feet (10') behind the main building may have a rear setback of two feet
(2'). (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
   C.   Easement Required: All lots shall have easements on side and rear
property lines a minimum of seven and one-half feet (71/2') and on a street
side property line of ten feet (10') minimum, to be used for utilities and
drainage.
   D.   Accessory Buildings: No accessory building or group of accessory
buildings shall cover more than eight percent (8%) of the total lot area.
   E.   Garages Required: Minimum garage size for new home construction shall
be twenty feet by twenty feet (20' x 20'). (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008; amd. Ord.
2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
   F.   Lot Size: An area of not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet
shall be provided and maintained for each one-family dwelling and uses
accessory thereto. (Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-2009; amd. Ord. 2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff.
2-17-2014)
ARTICLE B. ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-1-10)
SECTION:
10-6B-1: Purpose
10-6B-2: Permitted Uses
10-6B-2-1: Bed And Breakfast Facilities
10-6B-3: Height Regulations
10-6B-4: Area, Width And Yard Requirements
10-6B-5: Modifying Regulations
10-6B-1: PURPOSE:
This residential zone is established to permit one-family housing interspersed
with two-family housing, a minimum of vehicle traffic and quiet neighborhoods
favorable for family life. The regulations are intended to prohibit those uses
that would be harmful to a medium density neighborhood. (Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-
2009)
10-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and buildings.
Agriculture, including home gardens and fruit trees.
Churches.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Livestock and fowl, the raising, care, keeping, and feeding of and associated
barns, sheds, corrals, pastures, paddocks, coops, hutches, and similar
facilities therefor, subject to the provisions of section
10-7-19 of this title.
One-family dwellings.
Parks and playgrounds.
Public libraries.
Public schools.
Small/open congregate living facilities.
Two-family dwellings are allowed on a minimum of sixteen thousand (16,000)
square foot lots where four (4) off street parking spaces per unit are
provided. Such off street parking shall include the minimum garage requirement
for each dwelling unit. The dwellings must be connected by a shared wall, or
roofline connection. One of the dwellings may be a basement or upstairs
dwelling. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008; amd. Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-2009; Ord. 2013-10,
8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
10-6B-2-1: BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES:
See section
10-7-20 of this title. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 9-21-2022)
10-6B-3: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No main building shall be erected to a height greater than thirty five feet
(35') and no accessory building shall be erected to a height greater than
twenty feet (20') except that the City shall not impose or restrict the height
of a structure in a manner that imposes a substantial burden on the religious
exercise of a person, including a religious assembly or institution, unless the
City demonstrates that imposition of the burden on that person, assembly, or
institution:
   A.   Is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and
   B.   Is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6B-4: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
District Area In     Lot Width Setback In Feet
         Square Feet In Feet   Front Side Rear
R-1-10   10,000      80        25    10   10
 
(Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6B-5: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yard: Private garages and other accessory buildings located at
least ten feet (10') behind the main building may have a side setback of two
feet (2'), except that the street side yard of a corner lot shall be the same
as the front setback required for the zoning district.
   B.   Rear Yards: Private garages and accessory buildings located at least
ten feet (10') behind the main building may have a rear setback of two feet
(2'); provided, that on corner lots rearing on the side of another lot, the
minimum rear yard for all buildings shall be ten feet (10'). (Ord. 2008-07, 5-
7-2008)
   C.   Minimum Frontage: On a two-family dwelling with divided ownership, each
dwelling shall have a minimum frontage on a dedicated City street of forty five
feet (45'), which shall be measured at the required setback or building line.
   D.   Easement Required: All lots shall have easements on side and rear
property lines of a minimum of seven and one-half feet (71/2') and on a street
side property line of ten feet (10') minimum, to be used for utilities and
drainage.
   E.   Accessory Buildings: No accessory building or group of accessory
buildings shall cover more than eight percent (8%) of the total lot area. (Ord.
2008-07, 5-7-2008; amd. Ord. 2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
   F.   Lot Size: An area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet
shall be approved and maintained for each one-family dwelling and uses
accessory thereto including detached zero lot line dwellings, and not less than
sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet for each two-family dwelling and uses
accessory thereto. Lots for zero lot line (twin homes) shall have an area of
not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet for each unit. (Ord. 2009-02,
2-18-2009; amd. Ord. 2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
   G.   Garages Required: Minimum garage size for new home construction shall
be twenty feet by twenty feet (20' x 20'). (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008; amd. Ord.
2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
ARTICLE C. MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (R-3-6)
SECTION:
10-6C-1: Purpose
10-6C-2: Permitted Uses
10-6C-3: Height Regulations
10-6C-4: Area, Width And Yard Requirements
10-6C-5: Modifying Regulations
10-6C-6: Grandfathered Uses
10-6C-1: PURPOSE:
To provide appropriate location for apartment house neighborhoods on lots of
not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. The regulations permit a
variety of multiple-family dwellings and necessary public services and
activities. Residential condominiums may be allowed with a development
agreement as specified in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings.
Churches.
Dwellings; one-, two-, three-, four-family, on an individual lot. All new
construction required. Such dwellings may be separately owned under a
development agreement as described in chapter 12 of this title. In such cases
the requirements for condominiums in chapter 16 of this title shall be applied.
Home occupations.
Hospitals.
Household pets.
Mortuaries.
Parks or playgrounds.
Public buildings.
Public libraries.
Schools.
Small/open congregate living facilities. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6C-3: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall be erected to a height greater than thirty five feet (35').
No accessory building shall be erected to a height greater than twenty feet
(20') except that the City shall not impose or restrict the height of a
structure in a manner that imposes a substantial burden on the religious
exercise of a person, including a religious assembly or institution, unless the
City demonstrates that imposition of the burden on that person, assembly or
institution:
   A.   Is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and
   B.   Is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6C-4: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
         Minimum Lot Lot Width Setback In Feet
District Area In     In Feet   Front Side Rear
         Square Feet
R-3-6    6,000       60        25    10   10
 
(Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6C-5: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yard: Private garages or other accessory buildings located at
least ten feet (10') behind the main building may have a side setback of two
feet (2').
   B.   Rear Yard: Private garages and accessory buildings located at least ten
feet (10') behind the main building may have a rear setback of two feet (2').
   C.   Area: Minimum lot area shall be increased by no less than four thousand
(4,000) square feet for each additional dwelling unit above one.
   D.   Usable Open Space: A minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet per
dwelling unit of usable open space, to be used in common with all units in the
development, shall be provided for multi-family developments. Such area shall
be part of the development and maintained as private property.
   E.   Building Coverage: Building coverage may not exceed sixty percent (60%)
of the lot area.
   F.   Multi-Family Dwellings: These buildings shall be considered as one
building for the purpose of determining front, side and rear yard requirements
as required by the zoning district. No two (2) separate structures shall be
closer than ten feet (10') and the front yard on any dwelling may not be less
than twenty feet (20') from an adjacent dwelling unit.
   G.   Easement Required: All lots shall have easements on side and rear
property lines of a minimum of seven and one-half feet (71/2') and on a street
side property line of ten feet (10') minimum, to be used for utilities and
drainage. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
   H.   Garages Required: Minimum garage size for one-family new home
construction shall be twenty feet by twenty feet (20' x 20'). (Ord. 2009-06, 4-
15-2009)
   I.   Parking: Each multi-family dwelling development shall provide two (2)
enclosed parking spaces per unit for occupant use and two (2) additional off
street general parking spaces per unit for guest use. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6C-6: GRANDFATHERED USES:
Notwithstanding the restrictions set forth in the foregoing provisions of this
article, any residential development or portion thereof that:
   A.   Has been approved and constructed in a commercial zone, in accordance
with zoning provisions then in effect;
   B.   Is contiguous to a residential zone of the City;
   C.   Contains no commercial use, other than a home occupation; and
   D.   Does not divide a residential structure and associated real property
and/or private open space into more than one zone;
may, subject to the provisions and restrictions of chapter 9a of title 10, Utah
Code Annotated (1953, as amended), and the provisions of chapters 5 and 8 of
this title, be rezoned as Multiple-Family Residential (R-3-6) upon: a) request
or consent of the owner(s) of the property in the residential development or
any distinct portion thereof and b) payment of the applicable fees by the
applicant requesting such action, provided that the City Council finds:
   A.   That the proposed rezone is consistent with the intent of the General
Plan of the City;
   B.   That:
      1.   All owners of parcels and/or building structures located within such
development, or portion thereof, consent to such rezone, or, in the
alternative,
      2.   That, after public hearing, it is determined that no person will be
materially injured by the proposed rezone;
   C.   That such proposed rezone does not violate any current and enforceable:
1) covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) of the development or 2)
deed restrictions relating to the property that is subject to the application
to rezone;
   D.   That good cause exists for the rezone;
   E.   That the immediately adjacent area is or is becoming increasingly
residential in character, and there is not a current trend therein toward
increased commercialization; and
   F.   That the public interest will not be materially injured by the proposed
rezone. (Ord. 2013-04, 4-3-2013)
ARTICLE D. RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL (R-A-1)
SECTION:
10-6D-1: Purpose
10-6D-2: Permitted Uses
10-6D-2-1: Bed And Breakfast Facilities
10-6D-3: Height Regulations
10-6D-4: Area, Width And Yard Requirements
10-6D-5: Modifying Regulations
10-6D-1: PURPOSE:
To provide permanent areas for small farms, hobby farms and agricultural
development whether in conjunction with or without a residential use. (Ord.
2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings.
Agriculture, including home gardens and fruit trees.
Churches.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Livestock and fowl, the raising, care, keeping, and feeding of and associated
barns, sheds, corrals, pastures, paddocks, coops, hutches, and similar
facilities therefor, subject to the provisions of section
10-7-19 of this title.
One-family dwellings.
Parks and playgrounds.
Public schools.
Riding stables.
Small/open congregate living facilities.
Veterinarian clinics or hospitals for small or hoofed animals. Pet grooming
with inside/outside kennels. Such clinics, hospitals, grooming facilities or
kennels must not be a nuisance and must have animal control approval. Feeding,
boarding and kenneled areas must be at least fifty feet (50') from any
neighboring property line. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008; amd. Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-
2009; Ord. 2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
10-6D-2-1: BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES:
See section
10-7-20 of this title. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018; amd. Ord. 2022-10, 9-21-2022)
10-6D-3: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall be erected to a height greater than thirty five feet (35')
except that the City shall not impose or restrict the height of a structure in
a manner that imposes a substantial burden on the religious exercise of a
person, including a religious assembly or institution, unless the City
demonstrates that imposition of the burden on that person, assembly, or
institution:
   A.   Is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and
   B.   Is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6D-4: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
District Area     Width   Setback In Feet
                  In Feet Front Side Rear
R-A-1    1/2 acre 100     25    15   30
 
(Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6D-5: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yards: Accessory buildings shall have a minimum side yard of ten
feet (10'). Private garages located at least ten feet (10') behind the main
building may have a side yard of two feet (2'), except on the street side of a
corner lot, which shall be the same as the front yard setbacks.
   B.   Rear Yards: Private garages and accessory buildings located at least
ten feet (10') behind the main building may have a rear setback of two feet
(2'). (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
   C.   Easement Required: All lots shall have easements on side and rear
property lines of a minimum of seven and one-half feet (71/2') and on a street
side property line of ten feet (10') minimum, to be used for utilities and
drainage.
   D.   Garages Required: Minimum garage size for new home construction shall
be twenty feet by twenty feet (20' x 20'). (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008; amd. Ord.
2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
   E.   Lot Size: An area of not less than twenty one thousand seven hundred
ninety (21,790) square feet shall be approved and maintained for each one-
family dwelling, uses accessory thereto, and permitted uses as listed. (Ord.
2009-02, 2-18-2009; amd. Ord. 2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
ARTICLE D1. LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-1-14)
SECTION:
10-6D1-1: Purpose
10-6D1-2: Permitted Uses
10-6D1-2-1: Bed And Breakfast Facilities And Vacation Rentals
10-6D1-3: Height Regulations
10-6D1-4: Area, Width And Yard Requirements
10-6D1-5: Modifying Regulations
10-6D1-1: PURPOSE:
This residential zone is established to provide one-family housing on fourteen
thousand (14,000) square feet or larger lots, except as provided in subsection
10-6D1-5E of this article, a minimum of vehicle traffic and quiet neighborhoods
favorable for family life. The regulations are intended to prohibit those uses
that would be harmful to a low density neighborhood. (Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-2009)
10-6D1-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and buildings.
Agriculture, including home gardens and fruit trees.
Churches.
Home occupations.
Household pets.
Livestock and fowl, the raising, care, keeping, and feeding of and associated
barns, sheds, corrals, pastures, paddocks, coops, hutches, and similar
facilities therefor, subject to the provisions of section
10-7-19 of this title.
One-family dwellings.
Parks and playgrounds.
Public libraries.
Public schools.
Small/open congregate living facilities. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008; amd. Ord.
2009-02, 2-18-2009; Ord. 2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
10-6D1-2-1: BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES AND VACATION RENTALS:
See section
10-7-20 of this title. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
10-6D1-3: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No main building shall be erected to a height greater than thirty five feet
(35') and no accessory building shall be erected to a height greater than
twenty feet (20') except that the City shall not impose or restrict the height
of a structure in a manner that imposes a substantial burden on the religious
exercise of a person, including a religious assembly or institution, unless the
City demonstrates that imposition of the burden on that person, assembly, or
institution:
   A.   Is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and
   B.   Is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6D1-4: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
District Area In Square Feet Lot Width In Feet Setback In Feet
                                               Front Side      Rear
R-1-14   14,0001             100               25    10 and 10 10
 
Note:
   1.   See subsection
10-6D1-5E of this article for qualifying regulations allowing less than 14,000
square foot lots.
(Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6D1-5: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side Yard: Private garages and other accessory buildings located at
least ten feet (10') behind the main building may have a side setback of two
feet (2'), except that the street side yard of a corner lot shall be the same
as the front setback required for the zoning district.
   B.   Rear Yards: Private garages and accessory buildings located at least
ten feet (10') behind the main building may have a rear setback of two feet
(2'). (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
   C.   Easement Required: All lots shall have easements on side and rear
property lines of a minimum of seven and one-half feet (71/2') and on a street
side property line of ten feet (10') minimum, to be used for utilities and
drainage.
   D.   Accessory Buildings: No accessory building or group of accessory
buildings shall cover more than eight percent (8%) of the total lot area. (Ord.
2008-07, 5-7-2008; amd. Ord. 2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
   E.   Lot Size: An area of not less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square
feet shall be approved and maintained for each one-family dwelling and uses
accessory thereto. Exceptions shall be allowed with a development agreement as
specified in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-2009; amd. Ord.
2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
   F.   Garages Required: Minimum garage size for new home construction shall
be twenty feet by twenty feet (20' x 20'). (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008; amd. Ord.
2013-10, 8-21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
ARTICLE E. OPEN SPACE MULTIPLE USE (OSMU, OSMU-C)
SECTION:
10-6E-1: Purpose
10-6E-2: Open Space Multiple Use (OSMU)
10-6E-3: Open Space Multiple Use (OSMU-C)
10-6E-4: Modifying Regulations
10-6E-1: PURPOSE:
To permit the use of open space land in the city for grazing, forestry, mining
and other uses compatible with the protection of the natural and scenic
resources of the city for the benefit of present and future generations. (Ord.
97-02, 2-5-1997, eff. 2-25-1997)
10-6E-2: OPEN SPACE MULTIPLE USE (OSMU):
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Forestry.
Livestock grazing.
One-family residential.
Public recreation grounds and facilities, including recreational vehicle parks
but not including mobile home parks.
   B.   Conditional Uses:
Airports.
Cemeteries.
Golf courses.
Mining.
Private recreation grounds and facilities.
Public utilities and transmission lines. (Ord. 97-02, 2-5-1997, eff. 2-25-1997;
amd. Ord. 2000-11, 8-2-2000; Ord. 2001-07, 6-20-2001; Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-2009)
   C.   Height Regulations: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height except that the city shall not impose or restrict the height of a
structure in a manner that imposes a substantial burden on the religious
exercise of a person, including a religious assembly or institution, unless the
city demonstrates that imposition of the burden on that person, assembly, or
institution:
      1.   Is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and
      2.   Is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest. (Ord. 2003-08, 6-18-2003)
   D.   Area, Width And Yard Requirements:
 
                Lot Width Setback In Feet
District Area     In Feet   Front Side Rear
OSMU     20 acres 500       50    30   30
 
(Ord. 97-02, 2-5-1997, eff. 2-25-1997; amd. Ord. 2000-11, 8-2-2000; Ord. 2001-
07, 6-20-2001)
10-6E-3: OPEN SPACE MULTIPLE USE (OSMU-C):
   A.   Permitted Uses:
Forestry.
Livestock grazing.
One-family residential.
Public recreation grounds and facilities, including recreational vehicle parks
but not including mobile home parks.
   B.   Conditional Uses:
Airports.
Cemeteries.
Commercial and light industrial.
Golf courses.
Mining.
Private recreation grounds and facilities.
Public utilities and transmission lines.
   C.   Height Regulations: No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height.
   D.   Area, Width And Yard Requirements:
 
                Lot Width Setback In Feet
District Area     In Feet   Front Side Rear
OSMU-C   20 acres 500       50    30   30
 
(Ord. 97-02, 2-5-1997, eff. 2-25-1997; amd. Ord. 2000-11, 8-2-2000; Ord. 2001-
07, 6-20-2001; Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-2009)
10-6E-4: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
The following shall apply to both districts set forth in this article:
   A.   Garages Required: Minimum garage size for new home construction shall
be twenty feet by twenty feet (20' x 20'). (Ord. 2006-11, 4-5-2006)
ARTICLE F. MOBILE HOME (MH)
SECTION:
10-6F-1: Purpose
10-6F-2: Permitted Uses
10-6F-3: Height Regulations
10-6F-4: Area, Width And Yard Requirements
10-6F-5: Modifying Regulations
10-6F-1: PURPOSE:
To provide for the development of mobile home subdivisions which will permit
the location of one mobile home per lot in a quality environment. Mobile home
developments shall follow the requirements of a subdivision as in title 11 of
this Code. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-20-2008)
10-6F-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings.
Charter schools.
Churches.
Home occupations.
Household pets are allowed but kennels are not permitted.
Libraries.
Mobile homes.
Modular homes.
Mortuaries.
One-family homes.
Parking lots.
Parks and playgrounds.
Schools.
Small/open congregate living facilities. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-20-2008; amd. Ord.
2009-02, 2-18-2009)
10-6F-3: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height except that the City
shall not impose or restrict the height of a structure in a manner that imposes
a substantial burden on the religious exercise of a person, including a
religious assembly or institution, unless the City demonstrates that imposition
of the burden on that person, assembly or institution:
   A.   Is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and
   B.   Is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-20-2008)
10-6F-4: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
District Area In     Lot Width Yard In Feet
         Square Feet In Feet   Front Side Rear
MH       6,000       60        20    10   10
 
The minimum zone or district shall be five (5) acres. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-20-2008)
10-6F-5: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Development Plan Review: The Building Review Board shall review the
proposed development plan to determine its compliance with all portions of the
local zoning ordinances and building codes.
   B.   Applications: The Building Review Board shall not recommend approval of
any application for a mobile home subdivision if the developer cannot provide
required water supplies and facilities, waste disposal systems, storm drainage
facilities, access or improvements, or if it is determined there would be
unusual danger of flood or fire.
   C.   State Regulations: In addition to meeting these requirements and
conditions, and conforming to the other laws of the City, all mobile home
subdivisions shall also conform to all applicable State regulations.
   D.   HUD Sticker Required: All mobile homes to be installed, must have a HUD
sticker affixed to the exterior wall as provided by the Federal agency.
   E.   Compliance With Other Regulations: All mobile homes located in any
permitted area shall comply with and conform to all other zoning laws, rules,
regulations and Building, Plumbing, Electrical, Fire Prevention Codes and all
other codes and requirements applicable to a structure or building erected
within the Mobile Home Zone.
   F.   Side Yard: Accessory buildings shall have a minimum side yard of ten
feet (10') and the total of two (2) side yards shall be twenty feet (20').
Accessory buildings located at least ten feet (10') behind the main building
may have a side yard requirement of two feet (2'), except for the street side
of a corner lot shall be the same as the front setback.
   G.   Rear Yard: Accessory buildings located at least ten feet (10') behind
the main building may have a rear yard of two feet (2'); provided, that on a
corner lot rearing on a side yard of another lot, the minimum rear yard for all
buildings shall be ten feet (10').
   H.   Easement Required: All lots shall have easements on side and rear
property lines of a minimum of seven and one-half feet (71/2') and on street
side property lines of ten feet (10') minimum, to be used for utilities and
drainage.
   I.   Parking: Each mobile home subdivision lot shall provide for the off
street parking of at least two (2) vehicles. The parking space shall be not
less than ten feet (10') in width and twenty feet (20') deep. All required
parking spaces must be paved with two inches (2") of asphalt or four inches
(4") of concrete.
   J.   Skirting:
      1.   Within fifteen (15) days of occupancy, each mobile home shall be
skirted or if shields are used, they shall be fireproof, well painted or
otherwise preserved.
      2.   All mobile homes shall be skirted with a skirt matching or
complementing the design and color of the mobile home and all skirts shall be
kept in place and in good repair at all times.
   K.   Walls, Fences And Landscaping: Walls, fences, landscaping elements, and
requirements for clear view of intersecting streets are as described in chapter
7 of this title.
   L.   Streets: Streets shall include a fifty foot (50') right-of-way and
thirty six feet (36') of paved sections bounded by curb, gutter and sidewalk
constructed to City specifications. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-20-2008)
   M.   Rentals: Except as specifically provided in section
10-6F-2-1 of this article and section
10-7-20 of this title, for licensed vacation rentals, no mobile homes shall be
rented for a period less than thirty (30) days and occupancy shall be by
written lease. Mobile home leases shall be made available for inspection by
officials of the City upon demand. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
   N.   Inspections And Fees: Prior to installation in the City, building
permits shall be obtained for all mobile homes. Each home shall be inspected by
the building inspector for compliance with all Building, Fire and Safety Codes.
Fees shall be in accordance with the latest adopted resolutions of the City.
   O.   Placement Of Mobile Homes: No mobile home will be allowed to be placed
on any lot or acreage outside a mobile home subdivision.
   P.   Recreational Vehicles: Recreational vehicles do not meet the
requirements for mobile homes and may not be used in a mobile home subdivision
in lieu of a mobile home. (Ord. 2008-05, 2-20-2008)
ARTICLE G. GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C)
SECTION:
10-6G-1: Purpose
10-6G-2: Permitted Uses
10-6G2-2: Permitted Uses
10-6G-3: Prohibited Uses 1  (Rep. by Ord. 2007-26, 10-3-2007)
10-6G-4: Height Regulations
10-6G-5: Area, Width, And Yard Requirements
10-6G-6: Screening Requirement
10-6G-7: Commercial Design Guidelines
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 10-1-3B of this title.
10-6G-1: PURPOSE:
To provide appropriate areas where commercial activities may be established,
maintained and protected. (Ord. 2006-09, 3-1-2006)
10-6G-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following shall be permitted uses within the general commercial zone:
Accessory buildings: secondary buildings and uses customarily incidental to
permitted uses.
Animal services; includes veterinarian clinics and hospitals, pet grooming,
fish and aquarium retail shops. No outside kennels or hoofed animals.
Art dealers and galleries, including fine arts, photography, and graphic
design.
Automobiles, including rental, sales and related repair including tire sales,
glass replacement and repair; motorcycle sales, rental and service; auto repair
shops; packaged automobile parts stores. All repair facilities are inside and
in the case of sales or rental shops, repair facilities are an integral part of
the sales structure.
Banks and financial offices, including banks, ATM machines, investment and
securities agencies, tax service agencies.
Bicycles, ATVs; includes sales, rental, parts sales and service where repair
facilities are inside and are an integral part of the sales structure.
Building materials; includes lumber, brick, bagged concrete, PVC, pipe, other
yard type building material where storage is screened. Shall not include ready
mix concrete or hot mix asphalt.
Car wash, including hand and automated car wash and car vacuum facilities.
Childcare: daycare, preschool.
Clothing; includes retail sales, tailoring and clothing repair, shoes,
accessories, screen printing, t-shirt shops, cleaners, laundry, formal wear
rental and sales, costume sales and rental.
Communications; includes cable, phone, internet, satellite, and wireless
services.
Entertainment services, including recording studios/services, instrument sales/
rental/repair, talent/art studios, supplies.
Equipment: small equipment sales and rentals, including nonagricultural,
noncommercial, for residential use, lawn mowers, tractors, weed implements, and
accessories; small engine repair where repair facilities are inside.
Food; includes restaurants, ice cream parlors, cafes, juice bars, internet
cafes, coffee shops, fast food, delis, buffets, bakeries, grocery stores,
convenience marts, supermarkets, catering, patio and outdoor eateries.
Funeral houses and mortuaries.
Health and beauty; includes hair or nail salons, wig sales and styling,
barbershops, tanning facilities, consultants, fitness facilities, gyms, spas,
outpatient weight control and diet services, yoga, cosmetic sales and
production, massage.
Home improvements, including retail lighting and service, appliance sales/
rental/repair where repair facilities are inside and are an integral part of
the sales structure, decorating services, cabinetry sales, upholstery, carpet
and floor treatments, window treatments, wallpaper, paint.
Janitorial, including housecleaning, emergency cleaning services and supply.
Landscape and gardening, including pest and weed control service and supplies;
lawn, garden, yard supplies/equipment/repair; tree service; greenhouses;
nurseries; landscape supplies including rock, wall and waterfall materials;
patio furniture and supplies.
Light industrial, including mechanical contractors and supplies, insulation
contractors and supplies, carpenters and supplies, plumbing contractors and
supplies, electrical contractors and supplies, welding and sheet metal shops
where any supplies are stored inside or behind screening (not to be confused
with storage facilities).
Light manufacturing: furniture construction, cabinetry construction where work
is performed on site and the final result is a value added product.
Medical services, including doctor clinics, hospitals, laboratories,
chiropractors, dermatologists, plastic surgery, pharmacy, eye specialists -
opticians, ophthalmologists, eye corrections services, dentists, dental
specialists and laboratories, audiologists, hearing aid sales, ear specialists
and ambulance service. No oxygen storage with any medical service provided.
Museums, including art, cultural, history, science and musicology displays.
Office supplies: office supplies, office machines, computer, fax or copy
service, computer sales/service.
Outdoor storage units: except as set forth in Section
10-6G-2.2 below, facilities or yards utilized for outdoor storage use, provided
that there shall be not more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet
dedicated to said use per one-half (½) acre [on a commercial lot not smaller
than one-half (½) acre].
Parking, including areas whether underground, in parking structures or open
lots for temporary customer parking. Shall not include parking for storage as a
business.
Postal and shipping services.
Printing and publishing, including lithographic, magazines, newspapers, and
similar publications.
Professional offices, including engineering, drafting, design, real estate
brokers, accounting offices, CPAs, tax agencies, consultants, employment
agencies, attorneys, title and mortgage companies, property management,
insurance offices, offices incidental to other permitted uses.
Public or quasi-public area, including municipal buildings and offices, parks,
schools, libraries, and fountains.
Recreation facilities: hiking and biking trails.
Recreation sales, rental and service, including swimming pools; Jacuzzis; hot
tubs; saunas; watercraft; jet skis; lake and snow ski equipment; sports gear;
camping, fishing and hunting equipment; outfitters; excursions; paintballs;
trampolines; other sporting goods. Service facilities shall be located inside
and shall be an integral part of the sales structure.
Retail stores and shops: department stores, games and game supplies (except
gambling devices), trophies and awards, movie sales and rentals, book sales,
video device rental and sales, electronics, party supplies, antiques, coins,
hardware, light building supply, florists, jewelry, fabric shops including
sewing machine sales and service, stained glass, vacuum dealers, variety
stores, gifts, crafts sales and supplies, hobby shops, sunglasses, balloons,
novelties and toys, not to include pawnbrokers.
Rocks, including rock shops for retail sales and landscaping.
Schools and studios, including dance, music, art, photography, martial arts,
charter schools, business and technical schools, schools for any permitted
health and beauty services.
Security service: alarms services, locks, locksmiths.
Self-service vending facilities, including vending machines and self-service
(unmanned) business structures/facilities, subject to the conditions set forth
in chapter 7 of this title.
Special events, including wedding/reception centers, banquet halls, convention
centers, resort/meeting centers, concert halls and open air concert venues.
Tourist support, including hotels, motels, inns, lodges, tourist information,
curio and souvenir shops, camera and photo shops.
Transportation: taxis, shuttles, bus stops.
Travel agencies. (Ord. 2007-26, 10-3-2007; amd. Ord. 2008-14, 8-6-2008; Ord.
2015-04, 7-1-2015; Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018; Ord. 2018-02, 2-7-2018; Ord. 2023-
08, 6-7-2023)
10-6G-2.2: COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR STORAGE EXCEPTION AREA(S) [LIMITED PERMITTED
USE].
   A.   Subject to an approved site plan and any additional site-specific
conditions placed thereon to effectuate the purpose and intent of this Section,
an "outdoor storage units" facility/yard (not subject to the general square-
footage limitations specified in Section
10-6G-2, LVCC) may be a permitted use for and on commercial properties of or
more acres subject to special conditions limiting their safe use for other
commercial uses permitted in the zone, as determined and designated by the city
council, upon recommendation of the planning commission, and subject to the
terms, conditions, and limitations of this section.
   B.   Scope, Purpose, And Intent:
      1.   This section establishes the requirements for the outdoor storage of
goods and materials.
      2.   The purpose of these regulations is to provide adequate and
convenient areas for semi- or fully-covered storage of goods and materials;
open, uncovered storage is not allowed.
      3.   It is the intent of these regulations to minimize visual impacts to
adjacent properties and public rights-of-way and to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare.
   C.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall be defined as follows:
 
                      Areas (a) designated for the storage of boats,
                      recreational vehicles (RVs), campers, trailers, etc., but
“COVERED ONLY” ARE(b) not to be used for the storage of boxes, appliances,
                      decorations, electronics, furniture, clothing, or other
                      items that would typically be stored in an enclosed
                      storage unit.
OUTDOOR STORAGE USE:  Covered or fully enclosed area, room, or space that is
                      primarily intended for the storage of personal property.
 
   D.   Allowances:
      1.   Storage units or facilities shall not be used for manufacturing,
retail or wholesale selling, office functions, other business or service uses,
any use proscribed by law, and/or human or animal habitation.
      2.   The following shall not be stored in any storage unit or facility:
         a.   Hazardous, flammable, or explosive materials;
         b.   Hazardous or extremely hazardous waste; and
         c.   Any material which creates obnoxious dust, odor, or fumes.
   E.   Development Standards; Site And Architectural Design Standards.
      1.   Surfacing of outdoor storage areas:
         a.   All access, parking, and outdoor storage areas shall be paved
with asphalt, concrete, True Grid (an eco-friendly permeable paving alternative
to concrete and asphalt that provides stability and storm water detention), or
other product of similar quality and useful life, as approved by the director
of operations, or his or her designee.
         b.   No certificate of occupancy shall issue until all areas of the
developed site have been finished with a permanent surface or permanent
landscaping materials and irrigation.
      2.   Sufficient space:
         a.   No queuing, stacking, loading, unloading, or parking of vehicles
will be allowed on city streets.
         b.   On-site overflow areas shall be provided to provide for and
accommodate all necessary maneuvering, queuing, stacking, loading, unloading,
and parking of owner-, employee-, customer-, patron-, or guest-owned or
operated vehicles.
      3.   Parking shall be provided, installed, maintained, and regulated in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 10 of this Title.
      4.   Specific access and turnaround requirements shall be addressed in
the site plan provided to and approved by the City Council to the property
being developed for the use provided for herein.
      5.   Signage:
         a.   Directional guidance for vehicles entering and exiting the
outdoor storage facility/yard shall be provided on-site.
         b.   All other signage shall be provided, installed, maintained, and
regulated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 of this Title.
      6.   Lighting: All lighting shall conform to and be provided, installed,
maintained, and regulated in accordance with the city's night sky ordinance
(i.e., Chapter 11 of Title 4 of this Code).
      7.   Setbacks: Except as specifically required and provided for in the
approved site plan, all setbacks shall comply with Section
10-6G-5.
      8.   Residence above office space: A single residence shall be allowed
above the office to (a) accommodate access to the storage facility and (b)
provide for property security.
   F.   Screening Standards (Commercial/Residential Zone interface).
      1.   Areas abutting residential zones shall have, as a minimum, an eight-
foot (8') block wall for screening. No building erected in place of or adjacent
to this block wall shall exceed twelve feet (12') in height.
      2.   Areas abutting commercial zones can use the metal of the storage
units as the barrier if it contains a constant flow, style, and color, and does
not exceed a height of eighteen feet (18').
      3.   All buildings or structures situated on or against the property line
shall be completely enclosed to provide sufficient screening from public view
(including oblique views).
      4.   Access gates and doors may be constructed of open wrought iron if a
perforated metal screen or other durable material is incorporated into the
design that obscures views through the gate.
   G.   Landscape Standards. A landscaping strip containing a combination of
trees, shrubs, groundcover, decorative rock, and boulders for and along the
length of the property frontage (minus access points), eight feet (8') wide
from the back of sidewalk, will be required.
   H.   Maintenance.
      1.   All areas of the storage unit yard/facility shall be maintained in
good repair, and in a clean, neat, and orderly condition.
      2.   The storage area shall be kept free and clear of weeds and debris of
all kinds, both inside and outside the fence or wall.
      3.   Any graffiti shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of
occurrence.
      4.   Diseased, damaged, and/or dead shrubs and vines shall be replaced in
a timely manner. (Ord. 2023-08, 6-7-2023)
10-6G-3: PROHIBITED USES 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-26, 10-3-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 10-1-3B of this title.
10-6G-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B below, or as permitted in an
approved development agreement under the terms and conditions of Section
10-12-5 of this code, no building shall be erected to a height greater than
thirty-five feet (35') as measured from its tallest side or point, except that
facades, rooflines and other non-occupied building improvements may be
constructed to a maximum height of forty-five feet (45') inclusive of the
underlying building structure. However, the City shall not impose or restrict
the height of a structure in a manner that imposes a substantial burden on the
religious exercise of a person, including a religious assembly or institution,
unless the City demonstrates that imposition of the burden on that person,
assembly or institution:
      1.   Is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and
      2.   Is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest.
   B.   Except as permitted in an approved development agreement under the
terms and conditions of Section
10-12-5 of this Code, no hotels, motels, inns, and lodges (sometimes known as
tourist transient lodging facilities) shall be erected to a height greater than
fifty-five feet (55'), as measured from its tallest side or point, except that
facades, rooflines, and other non-occupied building improvements may be
constructed to a maximum height of sixty-six feet (66'), inclusive of the
underlying building structure. (Ord. 2006-09, 3-1-2006; amd. Ord. 2023-02, 2-5-
2023)
10-6G-5: AREA, WIDTH, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
District Area             Lot Width Setback In Feet
                          In Feet   Front           Side          Rear
                                    35 for
                                    commercial
         1/2 acre (21,780           buildings
C        square feet)2    70        abutting SR-       See note   See note 1
                                    9 and SR-17; 25
                                    when abutting
                                    City streets
 
Notes:
    1.    Side and rear setbacks shall be 10 feet where abutting a residential
zone which may be reduced, provided proper visual and sound screening, along
with construction per the applicable building related code(s), and provided
drainage is not allowed to cross property lines. Maximum height of structure
shall not exceed 18 feet.
      2.      Commercial condominium projects shall meet the 1/2 acre minimum
requirement for the project, but buildings may be divided into subunits and
platted for individual ownership within the project.
(Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
10-6G-6: SCREENING REQUIREMENT:
As a condition of any use granted under this article, an eight foot (8')
masonry or concrete wall shall be required when abutting a residential zone for
proper visual and sound screening; provided that where a masonry or concrete
wall of at least six feet (6') already exists, no new wall shall be required.
(Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6G-7: COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES:
The foregoing rules and regulations contained in Exhibit A as attached to
Ordinance 2024-17 shall be construed and interpreted in such a manner so as to
achieve the goals and objectives contained in the Commercial Design Guidelines
attached to Ordinance 2024-17 and incorporated into this Article as if fully
set forth. (Ord. 2024-17, 10-16-2024)
ARTICLE G1. RETAIL COMMERCIAL (COMM-R)
SECTION:
10-6G1-1: Purpose
10-6G1-2: Permitted Uses
10-6G1-3: Prohibited Uses 1  (Rep. by Ord. 2007-26, 10-3-2007)
10-6G1-4: Height Regulations
10-6G1-5: Area, Width, And Yard Requirements
10-6G1-6: Screening Requirement
10-6G1-7: Easement Required
10-6G1-8: Commercial Design Guidelines
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 10-1-3B of this title.
10-6G1-1: PURPOSE:
To provide appropriate areas where pedestrian oriented retail commercial
activities may be established, maintained and protected. (Ord. 2006-03, 1-18-
2006)
10-6G1-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following shall be permitted uses:
Accessory buildings: secondary buildings and uses customarily incidental to
permitted uses.
Animal services: fish and aquarium retail shops.
Art dealers and galleries, including fine arts, photography, and graphic
design.
Automobiles: packaged automobile part stores.
Banks and financial offices, including banks, ATM machines, investment and
securities agencies, tax service agencies.
Bicycles, ATVs; includes sales, rental, parts sales and service where repair
facilities are inside and are an integral part of the sales structure.
Car wash, including hand and automated car wash and car vacuum facilities.
Clothing; includes retail sales, tailoring and clothing repair, shoes,
accessories, screen printing, t-shirt shops, formal wear rental and sales,
costume sales and rental.
Communications; includes cable, phone, internet, satellite, and wireless
services.
Convenience stores; includes gas stations, gas and goodie stores.
Entertainment services, including recording studios/services, instrument sales/
rental/repair, talent/art studios, supplies.
Food; includes restaurants, ice cream parlors, cafes, juice bars, internet
cafes, coffee shops, fast food, delis, buffets, bakeries, grocery stores,
convenience marts, supermarkets, catering, patio and outdoor eateries.
Health and beauty; includes hair or nail salons, wig sales and styling,
barbershops, tanning facilities, consultants, fitness facilities, gyms, spas,
outpatient weight control and diet services, yoga, cosmetic sales and
production, massage.
Home improvements, including retail lighting and service, decorating services,
appliance sales, upholstery, carpet and floor treatments, window treatments,
wallpaper, paint.
Landscape and gardening: landscape supplies including rock, wall and waterfall
materials; patio furniture and supplies.
Medical services, including doctor clinics, hospitals, laboratories,
chiropractors, dermatologists, plastic surgery, pharmacy, eye specialists -
opticians, ophthalmologists, eye corrections services, dentists, dental
specialists and laboratories, audiologists, hearing aid sales, ear specialists
and ambulance service. No oxygen storage with any medical service provided.
Museums; includes art, cultural, history, science and musicology displays.
Office supplies: office supplies, office machines, computer, fax or copy
service, computer sales/service.
Parking, including areas whether underground, in parking structures or open
lots for temporary customer parking. Shall not include parking for storage as a
business.
Postal and shipping services.
Professional offices, including engineering, drafting, design, real estate
brokers, accounting offices, CPAs, tax agencies, consultants, employment
agencies, attorneys, title and mortgage companies, property management,
insurance offices, offices incidental to other permitted uses.
Public or quasi-public area, including Municipal buildings and offices, parks,
schools, libraries, and fountains.
Recreation facilities, including golf, minigolf, go-carts, bumper cars, laser
tag, bowling, recreation/sports center, skating rinks and parks, movie
theaters, theaters for stage productions, amusement parks, water parks,
swimming pools, billiards, arcade games, tennis, paintball game centers, hiking
and biking trails, festivals, no alcohol dance centers for recreation or
instruction.
Recreation sales, rental and service: sports gear; camping, fishing and hunting
equipment; outfitters; excursions; paintballs; trampolines; packaged sporting
goods.
Retail stores and shops: department stores, games and game supplies (except
gambling devices), trophies and awards, movie sales and rentals, book sales,
video device rental and sales, electronics, party supplies, antiques, coins,
hardware, light building supply, florists, jewelry, fabric shops including
sewing machine sales and service, stained glass, vacuum dealers, variety
stores, gifts, crafts sales and supplies, hobby shops, sunglasses, balloons,
novelties and toys, not to include pawnbrokers.
Rocks, including rock shops for retail sales and landscaping.
Schools and studios, including dance, music, art, photography, martial arts and
charter schools, business and technical schools, schools for any permitted
health and beauty services.
Security service: alarms services, locks, locksmiths.
Self-service vending facilities, including vending machines and self-service
(unmanned) business structures/facilities, subject to the conditions set forth
in chapter 7 of this title.
Special events, including wedding/reception centers, banquet halls, convention
centers, resort/meeting centers, concert halls and open air concert venues.
Tourist support, including hotels, motels, inns, lodges, tourist information,
curio and souvenir shops, camera and photo shops.
Transportation: taxis, shuttles, bus stops.
Travel agencies. (Ord. 2007-26, 10-3-2007; amd. Ord. 2008-14, 8-6-2008; Ord.
2015-04, 7-1-2015; Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018)
10-6G1-3: PROHIBITED USES 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-26, 10-3-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 10-1-3B of this title.
10-6G1-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B below, or as permitted in an
approved development agreement under the terms and conditions of Section
10-12-5 of this Code, no building shall be erected to a height greater than
thirty-five feet (35') as measured from its tallest side or point, except that
facades, rooflines and other non-occupied building improvements may be
constructed to a maximum height of forty-five feet (45') inclusive of the
underlying building structure. However, the City shall not impose or restrict
the height of a structure in a manner that imposes a substantial burden on the
religious exercise of a person, including a religious assembly or institution,
unless the City demonstrates that imposition of the burden on that person,
assembly or institution:
      1.   Is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and
      2.   Is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest.
   B.   Except as permitted in an approved development agreement under the
terms and conditions of Section
10-12-5 of this Code, no hotels, motels, inns, and lodges (sometimes known as
tourist transient lodging facilities) shall be erected to a height greater than
fifty-five feet (55'), as measured from its tallest side or point, except that
facades, rooflines, and other non-occupied building improvements may be
constructed to a maximum height of sixty-six feet (66'), inclusive of the
underlying building structure. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007; amd. Ord. 2023-02, 2-1-
2023)
10-6G1-5: AREA, WIDTH, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
District Area             Lot Width In Setback In Feet
                          Feet         Front             Side       Rear
                                       35 for commercial
                                       buildings
Comm-R   1/2 acre (21,780 70           abutting SR-9 and See note 1 See note 1
         square feet)2                 SR-17; 25 when
                                       abutting city
                                       streets
 
Notes:
   1.   Side and rear setbacks shall be 10 feet where abutting a residential
zone which may be reduced, provided proper visual and sound screening, along
with construction per the applicable building related code(s), and provided
drainage is not allowed to cross property lines.
   2.   Commercial condominium projects shall meet the 1/2 acre minimum
requirement for the project, but buildings may be divided into subunits and
platted for individual ownership within the project.
(Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
10-6G1-6: SCREENING REQUIREMENT:
As a condition of any use granted under this article, an eight foot (8')
masonry or concrete wall shall be required when abutting a residential zone for
proper visual and sound screening; provided that where a masonry or concrete
wall of at least six feet (6') already exists, no new wall shall be required.
(Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6G1-7: EASEMENT REQUIRED:
All lots shall have easements on side and rear property lines of a minimum of
seven and one-half feet (71/2') and on a street side property line of ten feet
(10') minimum, to be used for utilities and drainage. (Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6G1-8: COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES:
The foregoing rules and regulations contained in Exhibit A as attached to
Ordinance 2024-17 shall be construed and interpreted in such a manner so as to
achieve the goals and objectives contained in the Commercial Design Guidelines
attached to Ordinance 2024-17 and incorporated into this Article as if fully
set forth. (Ord. 2024-17, 10-16-2024)
ARTICLE G2. TOURIST/RESORT COMMERCIAL (COMM-T)
SECTION:
10-6G2-1: Purpose
10-6G2-2: Permitted Uses
10-6G-2.2 Commercial Outdoor Storage Exception Area(s) [Limited Permitted use]
10-6G2-3: Prohibited Uses 1  (Rep. by Ord. 2007-26, 10-3-2007)
10-6G2-4: Height Regulations
10-6G2-5: Area, Width And Yard Requirements
10-6G2-6: Screening Requirement
10-6G2-7: Easement Required
10-6G2-8: Commercial Design Guidelines
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 10-1-3B of this title.
10-6G2-1: PURPOSE:
To provide appropriate areas where tourist/resort commercial activities may be
established, maintained and protected. (Ord. 2006-04, 1-18-2006)
10-6G2-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following shall be permitted uses:
Accessory buildings: secondary buildings and uses customarily incidental to
permitted uses.
Art dealers and galleries, including fine arts, photography, and graphic
design.
Automobiles: tourism related automobile rental agencies, for the short term
rental of motor vehicles other than (and not including) recreational vehicles
(RVs), travel trailers, storage/moving vans and/or trailers, motorized
watercraft (except as provided hereinbelow).
Banks and financial offices, including banks, ATM machines, investment and
securities agencies, tax service agencies.
Bicycles, ATVs, snowmobiles, motorcycles, mopeds, motor scooters, jet skis, and
similar small/portable motorized and nonmotorized transportation, including
sales, rental, parts sales, and service and/or repair (where service/repair
facilities are conducted inside an enclosed building and constitute an integral
part of the sales structure).
Car wash, including hand and automated car wash and car vacuum facilities.
Clothing; includes retail sales/rental, shoes, accessories, screen printing, t-
shirt shops.
Communications; includes cable, phone, internet, satellite, and wireless
services.
Food; includes restaurants, ice cream parlors, cafes, juice bars, internet
cafes, coffee shops, fast food, delis, buffets, bakeries, grocery stores,
convenience marts, patio and outdoor eateries.
Health and beauty; includes hair or nail salons, wig sales and styling,
barbershops, tanning facilities, consultants, fitness facilities, gyms, spas,
outpatient weight control and diet services, yoga, cosmetic sales and
production, massage.
Museums; includes art, cultural, history, science and musicology displays.
Parking; includes areas whether underground, in parking structures or open lots
for temporary customer parking. Shall not include parking for storage as a
business.
Postal and shipping services.
Professional offices, including real estate brokers, title and mortgage
companies, property management, insurance offices, offices incident to other
permitted uses.
Public or quasi-public area; includes municipal buildings and offices, parks,
schools, libraries, and fountains.
Recreation facilities, including golf, minigolf, go-carts, bumper cars, laser
tag, bowling, recreation/sports center, skating rinks and parks, movie
theaters, theaters for stage productions, amusement parks, water parks,
swimming pools, billiards, arcade games, tennis, paintball game centers, hiking
and biking trails, festivals, no alcohol dance centers for recreation or
instruction.
Recreation sales, rental and service: sports gear; camping, fishing and hunting
equipment; outfitters; excursions.
Retail stores and shops: games and game supplies (except gambling devices),
trophies and awards, movie sales and rentals, book sales, video device rental
and sales, electronics, party supplies, antiques, coins, florists, jewelry,
stained glass, variety stores, gifts, crafts sales and supplies, hobby shops,
sunglasses, balloons, novelties and toys, not to include pawnbrokers.
Self-service vending facilities, including vending machines and self-service
(unmanned) business structures/facilities, subject to the conditions set forth
in chapter 7 of this title.
Special events, including wedding/reception centers, banquet halls, convention
centers, resort/meeting centers, concert halls and open air concert venues.
Tourist support, including:
   1.   Hotels, motels, inns, lodges, and bed and breakfast facilities.
   2.   Tourist information, curio and souvenir shops, camera and photo shops.
   3.   Recreational vehicles (RVs), and small transient living quarters not
specified hereinabove (including, but not limited to, cabins and yurts),
subject to the provisions of section
10-6G2-2-5 of this article.
   4.   Vacation rentals (VRs), subject to the following:
      a.   With an approved site plan and development agreement; and
      b.   Limited to developments:
         (1)   That are at least two (2) acres in size; and
         (2)   For which VRs and their private and limited public space do not
cumulatively occupy more than fifteen percent (15%) of the acreage of such
development; and
      c.   Within the developable area of the acreage referenced and described
in subsection 5.b. hereof:
         (1)   Landscaping: Landscaping is required in the front and sides of
the buildings, and shall follow the City's currently adopted landscaping
requirements.
         (2)   Construction and Setbacks of VRs: VRs units shall not front on
SR9 or SR17, and buildings containing such units shall be constructed in
conjunction with or after, and located behind, the development's main building
(s) fronting on SR9 and/or SR17.
         (3)   Hillside: The VR development area of 15% cannot include any
portion of a hillside as defined in the City hillside ordinance codified at
Chapter 7A of this Title.
         (4)   Parking: Parking areas shall adhere to the requirements of
Chapter 10 of this Title, and may (i) be situated totally within the fifteen
percent (15%) development area or (ii) totally or partially situated within the
remainder of the 2+ acreage referenced in subsection 5.b.(1) above. Shared
parking is allowed if the criteria in Section
10-10-5-G of this are met.
         (5)   Height: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the
contrary, the height of no VR shall exceed forty-five feet (45') in height.
Transportation: taxis, shuttles, bus stops.
Travel agencies. (Ord. 2007-26, 10-3-2007; amd. Ord. 2008-14, 8-6-2008; Ord.
2015-04, 7-1-2015; Ord. 2017-01, 2-1-2017; Ord. 2017-02, 2-15-2017; Ord. 2018-
01, 1-3-2018; Ord. 2022-10, 9-21-2022; Ord. 2023-01, 2-1-2023; Ord. 2024-11, 3-
20-2024)
10-6G2-2-5: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE RESORTS AND SMALL TRANSIENT LIVING QUARTERS:
   A.   Definitions: Unless the context requires otherwise, the following
definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this
section:
    OPEN SPACE: Any area within an RV resort and/or a development containing
"small transient living quarters" (as defined herein) that is primarily
intended for the common enjoyment and recreational use of occupants and users
of the RV resort and/or small transient living quarters. Open space is not to
include park buffers, interior roads, parking areas, service buildings or
resort offices.
   RV RESORT: A short term rental property (or “transient lodging facility”
under section
3-11-1 of this Code) in which RV pads, alone or in conjunction with small
transient living quarters such as cabins and yurts, and/or vacation rentals,
are designated for temporary/transient occupancy for recreational, camping,
travel, seasonal and/or other use of limited duration of twenty-nine (29) days
or fewer unless designated for extended occupancy in accordance with § 10-6G2-
2-5.D.8.d.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (OR RV): A vehicle which is: 1) designed to be self-
propelled or towable by a light vehicle, and 2) designed primarily for use as a
transient living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, seasonal use and/
or other use of limited duration (not to exceed 29 consecutive days).
   RESORT BUFFER: A designated space, inside and along the RV resort's
boundaries, in which no structure, parking areas or recreational equipment
shall be erected, maintained, or stored.
   SANITARY DUMP STATION: A properly designed and constructed facility intended
to receive the discharge of wastewater from any holding tank or similar device
installed in any recreational vehicle, and having a means of discharging the
contents - in an acceptable manner - to an approved wastewater disposal system.
   SERVICE BUILDING: A building or room housing utility facilities, personal
hygiene ("restroom") facilities (to include operable sinks, flush toilets,
urinals, and showers), and such other facilities as may be required for the use
of resort patrons and guests.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL PROPERTY: A parcel of property which is used by any person
or entity for hotel, inn, lodging, motel, resort, or other transient lodging
uses where the term of occupancy, possession, or tenancy of the property by the
person is for twenty nine (29) consecutive calendar days or less, for direct or
indirect remuneration. For this section, "remuneration" means compensation,
money, rent, or other consideration (including free gratis), given for
occupancy, possession or use of real property.
   SMALL TRANSIENT LIVING QUARTERS: For purposes of this section, small
permanent structures, such as cabins and yurts, that are not otherwise
specified in the definition of "tourist support" in section
10-6G2-2 of this article and that comply with the provisions of subsection B of
this section.
   VACATION RENTAL: See definition in section
10-1-6 of this title.
   WASTEWATER: Discharges from all plumbing facilities, such as restrooms,
kitchen, and laundry fixtures, either separately or in combination.
   B.   Uses: For uses provided for in this section:
      1.   Size Of Development Containing Small Transient Living Quarters/Areas
And/Or RV Resorts: Such developments or resorts:
         a.   May not be smaller than five (5) acres in size.
         b.   Shall be located not less than one thousand feet (1,000') from
the intersection of State Route (SR) 9 and SR 17, and-with respect to RV
resorts-not more than three thousand feet (3,000') from said intersection.
         c.   Shall front on or be situated within two hundred feet (200') of
SR-9 and/or SR-17.
      2.   Applicable Law: The development and/or resort, and associated
structures, infrastructure, amenities, utilities, and services, if any, shall
comply, operate and be maintained, provided, or disposed of in accordance with:
         a.   All applicable state, federal law, and local law, and
administrative code requirements, for such transient lodging; and
         b.   All applicable building related, fire, licensing, taxation,
nuisance, and zoning provisions and restrictions of the city (see titles 3, 4,
9, and 10 of this code).
      3.   Stormwater And Wastewater: Stormwater and wastewater emanating from
the development or resort shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable
federal, state, and local law and ordinance.
      4.   Caretaker And Resident Employees: An on site caretaker (and his or
her household, if any) may reside within the development or resort.
Additionally, not more than one resort employee per fifteen (15) RV pads, and/
or small transient living quarters may be permitted to reside in the
development or resort. Provided that, such longer term caretaker/employee
accommodations shall not consume more than five percent (5%) of the development
or resort property.
   C.   Small Transient Living Quarters/Areas:
      1.   Requirements: "Small transient living quarters" (as defined in
subsection A of this section) may be included as a permitted use, but only as
an ancillary use to one of the uses specifically specified in said definition,
provided that they:
         a.   Are consistent with and an integral part of the specified primary
permitted use; and
         b.   Are built upon a permanent foundation; and
         c.   Contain safe and adequate drinking water, sewer facilities, and
personal hygiene ("restroom") facilities (to include, at a minimum, operable
sinks and flush toilets); and shall contain or have reasonable and convenient
access to operational shower facilities; and
         d.   Do not exceed four hundred (400) square feet in size; and
         e.   Or the area set aside for such quarters (collectively) occupy no
more than thirty percent (30%) of the land comprising the resort development;
and
         f.   Comply, operate and are maintained in accordance with:
            (1)   All applicable state and federal law and administrative
requirements for such transient lodging; and
            (2)   All applicable building related, licensing, taxation,
nuisance, and zoning provisions and restrictions of the city, as set forth in
titles 3, 4, 9, and 10 of this code; and
            (3)   Limit occupancy to not more than twenty nine (29) consecutive
days; and
         g.   Are not advertised, let out, or otherwise made (or permitted to
be) available for occupancy for a period in excess of twenty nine (29)
consecutive days.
      2.   Kitchen Facilities: Such quarters may but need not include kitchen
facilities.
      3.   Setbacks: There shall be a minimum setback of not less than ten feet
(10') between structures containing such quarters; and
      4.   Required Open Space: Where not a part of an RV resort, one or more
common areas equal to at least fifteen percent (15%) of the land area of the
development (of which such quarters are a part) shall be set aside for the
joint use and enjoyment of occupants. Land covered by vehicular roadways,
sidewalks and off street parking shall not be included in calculating this
fifteen percent (15%) common area requirement.
   D.   RV Resort: Recreational vehicle (RV) pads may only be permitted within
a recreational vehicle (RV) resort. It is the intent of the city council that
only moderate to higher end RV parks be allowed within the city; hence they are
referred to herein as resorts, and must be maintained in a manner consistent
with the council's stated intent and shall offer multiple resort quality
amenities to their patrons. To be an allowable use herein, the development
containing RV pads, or RV pads and small transient living quarters, must comply
with the following requirements and restrictions:
      1.   Setbacks: There shall be a minimum setback of not less than:
         a.   Ten feet (10') between RV units parked side by side; and
         b.   Ten feet (10') between RV units parked end to end; and
         c.   Twenty feet (20') between RV pads and any building.
      2.   Traffic Circulation And Street Design:
         a.   Street width, circulation, exiting, fire hydrant spacing, and
district approved turnaround radii (or "radiuses") shall comply with the most
current fire code adopted by the city.
         b.   To provide for adequate emergency vehicle access and travel:
            (1)   Except as may otherwise be required by the adopted fire code
of the city, all interior roadways shall be at least:
               (A)   Thirty two feet (32') in width for two-way traffic, and
               (B)   Twenty six feet (26') for one-way traffic.
            (2)   No on street parking shall be allowed within the resort; and
            (3)   All roads shall be paved.
      3.   Parking Requirements And Restrictions:
         a.   All parking shall be confined to:
            (1)   The designated parking areas of each RV site and the parking
area(s) for the small transient living quarters (as designated or posted).
            (2)   Additional parking areas within the resort reserved for
employees, patrons and/or guests, which shall consist of individual parking
spaces measuring not less than nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') in size.
         b.   No visitor parking shall be permitted in the individual RV sites
and/or areas in the immediate vicinity of the small transient living quarters.
The resort shall provide remote parking facilities within the resort, for
visitor parking, which shall consist of not less than one parking space per
five (5) RV pads and/or small transient living quarters.
         c.   All parking areas in the resort shall be constructed of concrete
or asphalt.
         d.   No on street parking - or parking within landscaped areas of RV
pads, area(s) containing small transient living quarters, or common areas -
shall be allowed anywhere within the resort.
      4.   RV Pads:
         a.   Hookups: At least eighty percent (80%) of all RV pads ("pads")
shall be fully equipped with operable sewer, water, and electrical hookups
("utility hookups").
         b.   Pad Size:
            (1)   Pads with utility hookups shall be not less than one thousand
five hundred (1,500) square feet in size; and
            (2)   Pads without utility hookups shall be not less than nine
hundred (900) square feet in size.
         c.   Hard Surface: All pads shall be equipped with a surface area of
not less than ten feet by forty feet (10' x 40'), which shall consist of
concrete or asphalt.
         d.   Access: Sufficient access shall be provided to each pad to allow
for the safe maneuvering of RVs and any associated vehicles into position.
         e.   Identification: Each pad site shall be marked and numbered for
identification.
         f.   Water: Each pad site without hookups shall have reasonable and
convenient access to safe and adequate drinking water, sewer facilities, and
personal hygiene ("restroom") facilities (to include operable sinks, flush
toilets, urinals, and showers).
      5.   Open Space And Landscaping:
         a.   One or more common areas equal to at least fifteen percent (15%)
of the land area of the resort shall be set aside for the joint use and
enjoyment of occupants. Land covered by vehicular roadways, sidewalks and off
street parking shall not be included in calculating this fifteen percent (15%)
common area requirement.
         b.   All areas of the resort not covered by RVs, buildings,
structures, or hard surfacing, shall be landscaped. Appropriate landscaping may
include trees, shrubs, grass, and other vegetation, including xeriscape, as
well as rock and water features. Prior to approval of the resort development, a
landscape plan shall be provided to the building official of the city for
review and approval; and resort landscaping shall conform to the approved plan.
      6.   Sanitary Dump Station: One or more on site sanitary dump stations,
as approved by the Ash Creek special service district and capable of adequately
servicing the discharge needs of the RVs using the resort, shall be required
within the resort.
      7.   Amenities: The resort shall provide not less than three (3)
amenities commonly associated with RV resorts. Such amenities may include, but
are not limited to, a clubhouse, swimming pools, spas and/or hot tubs,
playgrounds, picnic tables in the common areas, tennis courts, basketball
courts, golf and/or mini-golf courses, Wi-Fi access, game rooms, enhanced RV
pads, etc.
      8.   Miscellaneous Provisions:
         a.   Structural Additions: No temporary structures - such as canvas
awnings, screened enclosures, platforms, or stairs - may be erected on RV pads,
unless such structures come attached to and are manufactured as a part of the
RV.
         b.   Storage Shed: No storage sheds shall be allowed in an RV pad.
         c.   Outside Lighting: All outside lighting shall comply with the
requirements set forth in title 4, chapter 7 of this code.
         d.   Period Of Occupancy: All RV resort rentals shall be limited to a
period of occupancy which shall not exceed twenty-nine (29) consecutive days,
unless such RV resort rental pad has been approved for extended occupancy in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   On or before May 1 of each year, the RV resort owner shall submit
an application to the LaVerkin City Council, requesting that specified RV
resort pads be designated for extended occupancy.
      (2)   If, after review by the LaVerkin City Council, the application is
approved, the period of extended occupancy shall be limited to a maximum of six
(6) months, commencing on October 1 and ending on March 31.
      (3)   The number of RV resort pads approved for extended occupancy shall
be limited to twenty-five percent (25%) of a development's RV rental pads or
twenty-one (21) RV resort rental pads, whichever is less.
      (4)   The use of small transient living quarters, cabins or yurts for
extended stay is strictly prohibited.
      (5)   Within five (5) days of the end of each month of the extended
occupancy period, the RV resort owner shall provide a written report to the
city stating:
         (i)   The total number of RV resort pads being used for extended
occupancy;
         (ii)   The name, RV resort pad number and date of check in/check out
for each extended occupancy guest; and
         (iii)   The make, model and license plate number of each guest's RV or
trailer used for extended occupancy.
      (6)   In the event that the RV resort owner fails or refuses to submit to
the city on a timely basis the report required by (5) above, all use of RV
resort rental pads for extended stay shall, at the election of the city, be
terminated.
      (7)   At the end of the extended use period on March 31, all RV resort
rental pads used for extended stay shall revert to a period of occupancy not
exceeding twenty-nine (29) consecutive days.
      (8)   The RV resort owner shall take all steps necessary to ensure that
at the end of the extended occupancy period all RV resort rental pads used for
extended stay shall revert to a period of occupancy not exceeding twenty-nine
(29) days. (Ord. 2017-02, 2-15-2017; amd. Ord. 2017-05, 4-19-2017; Ord. 2022-
02, 3-2-2022; Ord. 2024-20, 10-16-2024)
10-6G2-3: PROHIBITED USES 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-26, 10-3-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 10-1-3B of this title.
10-6G2-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Except as provided in subsections B and C below, no building or
structure shall be erected to a height greater than thirty-five feet (35') as
measured from its tallest side or point, except that facades, rooflines and
other non-occupied building improvements or structures may be constructed to
height of forty-five feet (45') inclusive of the underlying building structure.
However, the City shall not impose or restrict the height of a building or
structure in a manner that imposes a substantial hardship on the religious
exercise of a person, including a religious assembly or institution, unless the
City demonstrates that imposition of the burden on that person, assembly or
institution: (i) is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest, and
(ii) is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental
interest.
   B.   Hotels, motels, inns, lodges or other tourist transient lodging
facilities approved pursuant to a development agreement in accordance with
Section
10-12-5 of this Code shall be erected to a height not to exceed fifty-five feet
(55'), as measured from its tallest side or point, except that facades,
rooflines, and flagpoles may be constructed to a maximum height of sixty-six
feet (66'), inclusive of the underlying building.
   C.   Nothwithstanding the foregoing, a flag pole exceeding sixty-six feet
(66') feet in height may be approved by the City Council on a case by case
basis; provided that: (i) such flagpole is in compliance with Title
10-11-1 et. seq. of the LaVerkin City Code, and (ii) the terms and conditions
of such approval are contained in a development agreement. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-
2007; amd. Ord. 2023-02, 2-1-2023; Ord. 2023-05, 4-5-2023; Ord. 2024-08, 3-6-
2024)
10-6G2-5: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
District Area             Lot Width In Setback In Feet
                          Feet         Front             Side       Rear
                                       35 for commercial
                                       buildings
Comm-T   1/2 acre (21,780 70           abutting SR-9 and See note 1 See note 1
         square feet)2                 SR-17; 25 when
                                       abutting city
                                       streets
 
Notes:
   1.   Side and rear setbacks shall be 10 feet where abutting a residential
zone which may be reduced, provided proper visual and sound screening, along
with construction per the applicable building related code(s), and provided
drainage is not allowed to cross property lines.
   2.   Commercial condominium projects shall meet the 1/2 acre minimum
requirement for the project, but buildings may be divided into subunits and
platted for individual ownership within the project.
(Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007; amd. Ord. 2007-24, 8-15-2007)
10-6G2-6: SCREENING REQUIREMENT:
As a condition of any use granted under this article, an eight foot (8')
masonry or concrete wall shall be required when abutting a residential zone for
proper visual and sound screening; provided that where a masonry or concrete
wall of at least six feet (6') already exists, no new wall shall be required.
(Ord. 2008-07, 5-7-2008)
10-6G2-7: EASEMENT REQUIRED:
All lots shall have easements on side and rear property lines of a minimum of
seven and one-half feet (71/2') and on a street side property line of ten feet
(10') minimum, to be used for utilities and drainage. (Ord. 2006-04, 1-18-2006)
10-6G2-8: COMMERCIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES:
The foregoing rules and regulations contained in Exhibit A as attached to
Ordinance 2024-17 shall be construed and interpreted in such a manner so as to
achieve the goals and objectives contained in the Commercial Design Guidelines
attached to Ordinance 2024-17 and incorporated into this Article as if fully
set forth. (Ord. 2024-17, 10-16-2024)
ARTICLE G3. LUXURY RESORT ZONE (LR ZONE)
SECTION:
10-6G3-1: Zone Change Approval Process
10-6G3-2: Short Title
10-6G3-3: Purpose
10-6G3-4: Permitted Uses
10-6G3-5: Prohibited Uses
10-6G3-6: Definitions
10-6G3-7: Development Agreement Requirements
10-6G3-8: Height Regulations
10-6G3-9: Area, Width and Yard Requirements
10-6G3-10: Miscellaneous Regulations
10-6G3-11: Fencing Requirement
10-6G3-12: Screening Requirement
10-6G3-13: Easement Required
10-6G3-14: Landscaping Requirements
10-6G3-1: ZONE CHANGE APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Application. To apply for a zone change to the LR Zone, an application
containing the information set forth in 10-6G3-1(B) must be submitted to the
city staff. All applicants are encouraged to meet with the city staff prior to
submitting an application for LR Zone approval to discuss the development
concept, the review and approval process, and submission requirements.
   B.   Information Required. An applicant must submit ten (10) copies of an
application which contains the following information to the city staff:
      1.   Written Statement. A written statement providing the following
information:
         a.   Proposed name of the development;
         b.   Location and legal description of property to be developed;
         c.   Name and address of the owners of the property to be developed;
         d.   A copy of the current title policy on the property;
         e.   Name, address, and qualifications of the design team;
         f.   Type and number of permitted uses;
         g.   A description of any buildings that will be associated with each
permitted use;
         h.   Tentative operation and maintenance data (landscaping, etc.);
         i.   Existing and proposed utilities;
         j.   Existing and proposed public and private streets;
         k.   Anticipated timeline for completion of the development; and
         l.   Density per acre.
      2.   Schematic Drawings. Schematic drawings must be provided. Schematic
drawings must be drawn to a minimum scale of one hundred feet per inch (1" =
100') and must include information concerning the following:
         a.   Existing natural features, such as watercourses, rock
outcroppings, wetlands, wood areas and greenways;
         b.   Location of existing utilities and drainageways;
         c.   Location and names of all prior platted streets, parks and
utility rights of way;
         d.   General location of existing and/or proposed buildings and
structures and their uses, parking, open space and ownership pattern; and
         e.   A traffic flow map showing circulation patterns within and
adjacent to the proposed development, including trails, sidewalks, streets,
parking lots, loading areas, etc. A traffic study, performed by a registered
professional, may also be required.
   C.   Application Conference. Upon receiving a complete application, the city
staff shall schedule an application conference with the applicant to review the
application. At the application conference, the city staff shall also provide
written comments to the applicant concerning the application.
   D.   Recommendation of Planning Commission. After reviewing the comments
made by the city staff, the planning commission may recommend approval,
approval with modifications, or may recommend denial of the application to the
city council.
   E.   City Council Decision. Following a public hearing, and after receiving
and reviewing the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council
may approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application for zone
change for the proposed luxury resort development. (Ord. 2024-03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-2: SHORT TITLE:
This Luxury Resort Zone shall be referred to herein as the “LR Zone”. (Ord.
2024-03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-3: PURPOSE:
To provide appropriate areas where luxury resort development may be
established, maintained and protected. (Ord. 2024-03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-4: PERMITTED USES:
The following shall be permitted uses within the LR Zone:
   Art galleries.
   Food: includes restaurants, confectionary shop, bakeries, ice cream parlors,
cafes, juice bars, internet cafes, coffee shops, delis, buffets, grocery
stores, catering, patio and outdoor eateries. (No drive throughs are
permitted.)
   Health and beauty: includes spas, nutrition stores, and saunas.
   Luxury hotels: includes hotels that satisfy the definition provided in
10-6G3-6 .
   Outdoor activity center.
   Retail stores and shops: gift shop, leather goods shop, flower shop, bicycle
shop, games and game supplies (except gambling devices), trophies and awards,
movie sales and rentals, book sales, video device rental and sales,
electronics, party supplies, antiques, coins, florists, jewelry, stained glass,
variety stores, gifts, crafts sales and supplies, hobby shops, sunglasses,
balloons, novelties and toys, not to include pawnbrokers.
   Studio: includes art or music studio. (Ord. 2024-03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-5: PROHIBITED USES:
See subsection
10-1-3 B of this title. (Ord. 2024-03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-6: DEFINITIONS:
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A binding contract between the city and an applicant
wherein the detailed terms and conditions upon which a luxury resort
development will proceed are agreed upon. The development agreement shall
specify any vested rights granted to the applicant or its successors or
assigns.
LUXURY HOTEL: A hotel facility whose standards of operation and physical
characteristics would provide substantially equal to or higher than the
standard of operation and physical characteristics of a so-called four (4) star
hotel or equivalent rating (based on the criteria employed by primary national
hospitality industry rating services, including, but not limited to, Forbes
Travel Guide, the Automobile Association of America, and Conde Naste Traveler).
MONUMENT SIGN: A low-profile sign, with an area that does not exceed 48 square
feet and a height of less than six feet, that is used to display a building
address and name, identify the building tenants, or to mark the building
entrance.
UNDER-CANOPY SIGN: An under-canopy sign means a sign suspended over a sidewalk
or pedestrian way by attachment to the underside of a canopy, marquee, awning,
or similar structure, perpendicular to the wall. (Ord. 2024-03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-7: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Development Agreement. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, a
development agreement must be submitted for review and approval by the city
council.
      1.   Information Required. A development agreement entered into pursuant
to this article must:
         a.   Specify the duration of the development agreement;
         b.   Specify the permitted uses of the property;
         c.   Specify the permitted density of use or development;
         d.   Specify the maximum height, dimensions, building materials, and
design of the proposed buildings or structures;
         e.   Set forth the provisions for the reservation or dedication of
lands for public purposes, including, without limitation: parks, roadways,
trails, and utility easements, as applicable;
         f.   Set forth the provisions for the reservation or dedication of
lands for public purposes, including, without limitation: parks, roadways,
trails, and utility easements, as applicable;
         g.   Provide that construction shall be commenced within a specified
timeframe and that the project or any phase thereof shall be completed within a
specified timeframe;
         h.   Include a provision which allows the parties to amend the
expected timeframe for completion of the project or any phase thereof (if the
city reasonably determines that such a provision is necessary);
         i.   Provide for periodic review of the status of performance under
the development agreement;
         j.   Include a site plan that satisfies the requirements set forth in
this article, as an exhibit that is incorporated by reference into the
development agreement;
         k.   Contain other exhibits or attachments that are incorporated into
the development agreement by reference, including, but not limited to: (a)
traffic, soil or any other studies deemed necessary by city staff; (b) a title
report which shows that ownership of the property is vested in the developer or
an owner who has contracted with the developer to transfer title to the
property upon the approval of the development by the city; (c) any other
document, study or requirement the city staff deems reasonably necessary for
the particular development.
      2.   The city council may approve, approve with modifications, or deny
the development agreement.
      3.   After receiving approval from the city council, the city and the
applicant must execute the development agreement. The development agreement
must be recorded in the office of the county recorder within ten (10) days
after it is fully executed.
      4.   The city council may waive any of the above-listed requirements upon
making a determination that such requirements are unnecessary due to the scope
and nature of the proposed development.
   B.   Site Plan. A site plan must be submitted by the applicant and reviewed
by the zoning administrator. After the zoning administrator has reviewed the
site plan, said site plan must be submitted for approval by the city council as
an exhibit to the development agreement. Six (6) copies of the site plan, drawn
to a scale of twenty feet per inch (20' = 1"), or such other scale as the
zoning administrator deems appropriate, must be provided. The site plan must
contain the following information:
      1.   Information Required.
         a.   The applicant’s name, address, telephone number and interest in
the property;
         b.   The owner’s name, address and telephone number, if different than
the applicant, and the owner’s signed consent to the filing of the application;
         c.   The street address, tax parcel number and legal description of
the subject property;
         d.   The zoning classification, zoning district boundaries and present
use of the subject property;
         e.   A vicinity map with north arrow, scale and date, indicating the
zoning classifications and current uses of properties within one hundred feet
(100') of the subject property;
         f.   The proposed title of the project and the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of the architect, landscape architect, planner or engineer on
the project;
         g.   A signature panel for the zoning administrator to sign to certify
that a review of the site plan has been completed by the zoning administrator;
         h.   The boundaries of the subject property, all existing property
lines, setback lines, existing streets, buildings, watercourses, waterways or
lakes, wetlands, and other existing physical features in or adjoining the
project;
         i.   Topographic survey, showing the elevation of streets, alleys,
buildings, structures, watercourses and their names. The topography shall be
shown by adequate spot elevations. The finished grade for the entire site shall
be shown as well as the first floor elevation of all buildings;
         j.   Significant topographical or physical features of the site,
including existing trees;
         k.   The elevation of the curb (if existing or proposed) in front of
each lot;
         l.   Elevations of the top of bank and toe of slope, slope ratio of
fill, and limits of fill, including access;
         m.   The location and size of sanitary and storm sewers, water, gas,
telephone, electric and other utility lines, culverts and other underground
structures in or affecting the project, including existing and proposed
facilities and easements for these facilities. In the case of city owned
utilities, such information shall be provided to the applicant by the
department of public utilities;
         n.   The location, dimensions and character of construction of
proposed streets, alleys, loading areas including numbers of parking and
loading spaces, outdoor lighting systems, storm drainage and sanitary
facilities, sidewalks, curbs and gutters and all curb cuts. Additional area may
also be required to indicate connections or proposed connections to major
utilities;
         o.   The location of all proposed buildings and structures, accessory
and principal, showing the number of stories and height, dwelling type if
applicable, major elevations and the total square footage of the floor area by
proposed use;
         p.   The location, height, type and material of all fences and walls;
         q.   The location, character, size, height and orientation of proposed
signs, to be erected in accordance with chapter 11 and any limitations set
forth in this article, and elevations of buildings showing signs to be placed
on exterior walls;
         r.   The proposed nature and manner of grading of the site, in
accordance with soils engineering studies to prevent soil erosion and excessive
runoff;
         s.   The location of dumpsters or other outdoor trash receptacles;
         t.   The location and dimensions of proposed recreation areas, open
spaces and other required amenities and improvements;
         u.   A tabulation of the total number of acres in the project and the
percentage and acreage thereof proposed to be allocated to off street parking,
open space, parks and other reservations;
         v.   A tabulation of the total number of hotel units or commercial
spaces in the project and the overall project density in hotel units or
commercial spaces per gross acre;
         w.   The proposed and required off street parking and loading areas,
including parking and access for the handicapped, as specified in the most
current version of the International Building Code, and in accordance with any
other specifications provided in this article:
         x.   Landscaping plans which comply with Title 8, Chapter 8;
         y.   A proposed architectural plan which provides the colors,
textures, and design elements to be used within the project, each of which must
be in harmony with the natural environment;
         z.   Studies required to analyze the impact of the project, as
determined by the zoning administrator, including, but not limited to, a
traffic impact study, studies relating to noise, drainage, or any other study
the zoning administrator determines is required to adequately analyze the
impact of the project;
         aa.   If the project will require placement of a temporary office or
construction trailer on the site, the site plan must address any parking,
fencing, lighting, and signage that will be required for said temporary office
or construction trailer. The site plan must also specify the duration of time
for which the temporary office or construction trailer will be present on the
site.
      2.   Waiver Of Requirements. The zoning administrator may waive any of
the above listed requirements upon making a determination that such
requirements are unnecessary due to the scope and nature of the proposed
development.
   B.   Zoning Administrator Review. The zoning administrator shall review the
site plan, and may provide written comments to the applicant. The authority of
the zoning administrator through the review process to require modification of
a proposed site plan shall include the following elements in order to achieve
the objectives set forth below:
      1.   Traffic And Parking.
         a.   Minimizing dangerous traffic movements.
         b.   Promoting the smooth and efficient flow of traffic in accordance
with standards in the Institute of Traffic Engineers’ “Transportation And
Traffic Engineering Handbook”, and other local sources of authority as adopted
by ordinance.
         c.   Optimizing the efficient use of parking facilities through
provisions for adequate interior circulation, parking stalls and travel aisles.
      2.   Site Layout.
         a.   Promoting compatibility with adjacent and nearby properties.
         b.   Preserving and protecting valuable natural features and amenities
to the greatest extent practical.
         c.   Promoting the efficient provision of public services.
      3.   Environmental Protection.
         a.   Preserving existing healthy and long lived trees wherever
economically feasible.
         b.   Designing drainage facilities to promote the use and preservation
of natural watercourse and patterns of drainage.
         c.   Minimizing alterations to existing topography.
         d.   Protecting important views and vistas as identified in adopted
plans.
      4.   Landscaping.
         a.   Promoting the use of plant material compatible with the climate
of the region and microclimate conditions on the site.
         b.   Ensuring that plant material can be maintained for long term
health and continued growth.
         c.   Maximizing water and energy conservation through the appropriate
use of plant materials.
         d.   Ensuring that the arrangement of required landscaping produces
the optimal visual effect.
      5.   Signage.
         a.   Ensuring that the location, size and orientation of signage do
not impair the visibility of or distract motorists.
         b.   Ensuring that the location, size and orientation of signage
minimize obstructions and hazards to pedestrians. (Ord. 2024-03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-8: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Maximum building height shall not exceed two stories or forty (40) feet.
Accessory buildings shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height. (Ord. 2024-
03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-9: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
District            Maximum Building    Hotel Unit Density Setback in Feet
                    Coverage Per Parcel                    Front  Side   Rear
                    The total square
                    footage of          Maximum hotel unit
Luxury Resort Zone  buildings on any    density shall not
(LR Zone)           given parcel shall  exceed four hotel  25 Ft. 10 Ft. 10 Ft.
                    not exceed 75% of   units per acre
                    the total parcel
                    area
 
(Ord. 2024-03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-10: MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Parking Requirements. Parking requirements shall be as follows:
      1.   Any luxury hotel must have a paved driveway leading into the
designated parking lot for the luxury hotel that originates from a paved
portion of a street owned by the city. Points of vehicular ingress and egress,
as well as the location of the designated parking lot for any luxury hotel,
shall be determined by the city.
      2.   For the following uses, one parking space shall be required for
every 250 square feet of building square footage: any permitted use which is
categorized as health and beauty, an art gallery, an outdoor activity center,
or a retail store and shop.
      3.   For the following uses, one parking space shall be required for
every 100 square feet of restaurant floor area: any permitted use which is
categorized as food.
      4.   Each luxury hotel must have a minimum of one parking space dedicated
to each hotel unit, and at least three parking spaces to accommodate staff
parking. One additional parking space shall be required for every three hotel
units to accommodate additional guests.
      5.   Any parking for electric bicycles must be approved by the zoning
administrator. Proposed parking for electric bicycles must be shown on the site
plan.
   B.   Loading Areas. Loading areas must be provided at a ratio of one per
every 15,000 square feet of building square footage, or as determined by the
city. Each loading area must be 10 feet by 40 feet. One 10 foot by 20 foot
loading area shall be required for each luxury hotel.
   C.   Minimum Hotel Unit Size. The minimum hotel unit size is 270 square
feet.
   D.   Storage Areas. Up to 250 square feet of enclosed storage is allowed per
hotel unit or for any retail store or shops. This storage is in addition to
room closets, coat closets, water heater closets, etc. No outdoor storage is
permitted.
   E.   Trash Enclosures. One trash dumpster bin (with a four yard minimum)
located in an enclosure shall be provided for each permitted use. Additional
trash enclosures may be required as determined by the city.
   F.   Specific Signage Requirements and Limitations. All signage must comply
with chapter 11 of this title, to the extent that this article does not
conflict with chapter 11. To the extent that any provisions of this article
conflict with chapter 11, the provisions contained in this article shall
govern. All proposed signage must be submitted to and approved by the city
prior to installation. Only the following types of signs may be approved within
the LR Zone: building signs, under-canopy signs, monument signs, and temporary
signs. Further, all signage must comply with the following requirements, as
applicable:
      1.   Design of Sign. The design of each sign, regardless of the type,
must be harmonious with the theme, materials, colors, and elements of the
building that it is intended to correspond with.
      2.   Building Signs. Building signs are permitted so long as a ratio of
1.25 square feet of sign area for each linear foot of building space frontage
is maintained. This ratio shall be calculated by taking into account only the
side of the building which provides frontage.
      3.   Under-Canopy Signs. Under-canopy signs may be used for hotel unit
identification. An under-canopy sign may not exceed a size of eight square feet
and must be consistent with the design theme of the building.
      4.   Monument Signs. One monument sign is allowed for each building which
provides any of the following permitted uses: a retail stores or shop, a luxury
hotel, or a restaurant. Monument signs must be located adjacent to a public
street and must be spaced at least 300 feet apart. All monument signs must
comply with §
10-7-6 .
      5.   Temporary Signs. All temporary signs must be approved by the city
prior to installation. Temporary signs must be consistent with the design
standards of the approved signage plan.
   G.   Lighting. All lighting must conform to and be provided, installed,
maintained, and regulated in accordance with applicable provisions of the city
code, including, but not limited to, Title 4, Chapter 7, et seq. (Ord. 2024-03,
2-21-2024)
10-6G3-11: FENCING REQUIREMENT:
All fencing must conform to the design of the luxury resort development and
must be approved by the city prior to installation. (Ord. 2024-03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-12: SCREENING REQUIREMENT:
As a condition of any use granted under this article, an eight foot (8')
masonry or concrete wall shall be required when abutting a residential zone for
proper visual and sound screening; provided that where a masonry or concrete
wall of at least six feet (6') already exists, no new wall shall be required.
(Ord. 2024-03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-13: EASEMENT REQUIRED:
All lots shall have easements on side and rear property lines of a minimum of
seven and one-half feet (71/2') and on a street side property line of ten feet
(10') minimum, to be used for utilities and drainage. (Ord. 2024-03, 2-21-2024)
10-6G3-14: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
A landscaping plan must be submitted and approved by the city prior to issuance
of a building permit for any structure in the LR Zone. All landscaping plans
must comply with Title 8, Chapter 8. (Ord. 2024-03, 2-21-2024)
ARTICLE H. INDUSTRIAL (I)
SECTION:
10-6H-1: Purpose
10-6H-2: Permitted Uses
10-6H-1: PURPOSE:
To provide areas where industries necessary and beneficial to the local economy
may locate and operate. The industrial zone is intended to provide for the
development of industrial uses which do not, in their maintenance, assembly,
manufacture or planned operation, create smoke, gas, odor, dust, sound
vibration or lighting to any degree which might be obnoxious or offensive to
persons residing in or conducting business in either this or any other zone.
The intent is not to provide areas for retail commercial businesses, but rather
for technology office and manufacturing assembly, minimal warehouse and
distribution uses, and accessory uses thereof. (Ord. 2008-04, 2-20-2008)
10-6H-2: PERMITTED USES:
None until otherwise specified herein. (Ord. 2008-04, 2-20-2008)
ARTICLE I. RESERVED
(Ord. 2013-03, 4-3-2013)
ARTICLE J. STATE STREET LANDSCAPING OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
10-6J-1: Purpose And Establishment Of Overlay Zone
10-6J-2: Definitions
10-6J-3: Design Standards
10-6J-4: Landscape Review
10-6J-5: Noncomplying Lots
10-6J-1: PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT OF OVERLAY ZONE:
The city finds that the general public welfare of the citizens will be promoted
by establishing standards of beautification of SR9 and SR17. These standards
will address design standards including, but not limited to, landscaping
materials, structural components and atmosphere. To this end, a State Street
landscaping overlay zone is established for all commercially zoned real
property currently or hereafter located within two hundred feet (200') of SR9
and SR17. The provisions of this article (as set forth herein) shall supplement
(and where in conflict, supersede) all other applicable provisions of this
title with respect to such real property and the uses thereof. (Ord. 2007-29,
10-17-2007)
10-6J-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
BUFFERING: The use of landscaping other than grass on flat terrain, or the use
of landscaping along with berms, walls or decorative fences that at least
partially obstruct the view from the street, in a continuous manner, of
vehicular use areas, parking lots and parked cars, and detention ponds.
DESIGN PLAN: The preparation of graphic and written criteria, specifications,
and detailed plans to describe and define materials, structural components,
atmosphere, pedestrian areas, and all design elements for compliance with the
provisions of this article.
DETENTION AREA, DETENTION BASIN OR RETENTION BASIN: A temporary storage of
determined quantity of water with a release rate that is either fixed or
variable.
FOUNDATION AREA: The ground area immediately adjacent to a building on all
sides thereof.
GROUND COVER: A prostrate plant less than two feet (2') in height at maturity
and used for ornamental purposes.
HARDSCAPE: Landscaping which may include interior decorative walkways, curbing
or patio areas.
ISLAND: A raised planting area, usually curbed, and placed to guide traffic,
separate lanes, limit paving surface, preserve existing vegetation and increase
aesthetic quality in parking lots and other areas.
LANDSCAPE AREA: That portion of a lot devoted exclusively to landscaping,
except that streets, drives and sidewalks may be located within such area to
provide reasonable access.
LANDSCAPE BUFFER: A landscape area adjoining or surrounding a land use and
unoccupied in its entirety by any building, structure, paving or portion of
such land use, for the purposes of screening and softening the effects of the
land use.
LANDSCAPE PLAN: The preparation of graphic and written criteria,
specifications, and detailed plans to arrange and modify the effects of natural
features such as plantings, ground and water forms circulation, walks, and
other features to comply with the provisions of this article.
LANDSCAPE YARD: That portion of a lot required to be maintained in landscape
area.
LANDSCAPING: The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land in any
combination of living and high quality nonliving plants, such as trees, shrubs,
vines, ground covers, flowers or grass; natural features such as rock, stone,
bark chips or shavings; and structural features, including, but not limited to,
fountains, reflecting pools, outdoor artwork, screen walls, fences, benches or
pedestrian walks, designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing
effect.
OVERLAY REVIEW: A review of all development in the overlay area as to
conformity to the standards set herein.
PARKING LOT PLANTINGS: A planting area, within or adjacent to a parking area,
designed to shade and improve the attractiveness of large areas of pavement.
PARK STRIP: The landscape area within a public way located between the back of
street curb and the sidewalk.
PARK STRIP LANDSCAPING: The improvement of property within the park strip area.
Park strip landscaping includes such "landscaping" as hereinabove defined that
is both appropriate and consistent with the use of the property as a park
strip, but which is not inconsistent with or hazardous to the use of adjacent
roadways, pedestrian strips, sidewalks and/or trails by pedestrians or
vehicular traffic.
PLANTING AREA: The area prepared for the purpose of accommodating the planting
of trees, shrubs, and ground covers.
SHRUB: A small, medium, or large upright plant growing less than five feet (5')
to twenty feet (20') in height at maturity that is planted for ornamental or
screen purposes.
SITE ANALYSIS PLAN: A plan drawn with sufficient detail to show existing site
conditions including slopes, existing vegetation, drainage areas, fences,
easements, and other existing conditions pertaining to the proposed site.
STREET YARD: A planting area parallel to a public street designed to provide
continuity of vegetation along the right of way and to soften the impact of
development by providing a pleasing view from the street.
TREE: A woody plant with a distinct central trunk.
TREE, ORNAMENTAL: A small to medium tree, growing fifteen feet (15') to forty
feet (40') in height at maturity that is planted for aesthetic purposes such as
colorful flowers, interesting bark, or fall foliage.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE: The area around a tree corresponding to the drip line or
ten feet (10') in all directions from the trunk.
TREE, SHADE: A large tree growing to over forty feet (40') in height at
maturity, planted to provide canopy cover shade.
XERISCAPE: A reduced water usage landscape achieved by good planning and
design, limited turf areas, soil improvements, efficient irrigation, mulching,
low water use plants, and appropriate trees, shrubs, and ground cover. (Ord.
2006-27, 7-19-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-29, 10-17-2007)
10-6J-3: DESIGN STANDARDS:
All new development within the State Street landscaping overlay zone shall be
required to install landscaping encompassing an area equal to twenty percent
(20%) of the total square footage of the setback area between the back of the
curb to the structure. All landscaping shall be attractive in style and
consistent with other new landscaping in the overlay zone, and with preexisting
landscaping at Farmer's Market, LaVerkin Chevron, or the 200 North Cross Creek
building to the extent the landscaping in these locations remains similar to
what existed at the date of passage hereof, and is in a good state of repair.
(Ord. 2007-29, 10-17-2007)
10-6J-4: LANDSCAPE REVIEW:
Any new business or development within the State Street landscaping overlay
zone shall schedule a landscape review with the LaVerkin City parks director,
whose approval must be obtained prior to commencing installation of the
proposed landscaping. The petitioner shall present all design and landscape
plans, including plant variety, expected mature heights and widths, placement
of all plants, grading, berming, hardscaping, islands, parking, and any other
landscape details. Plans shall also include total landscaped square footage.
(Ord. 2007-29, 10-17-2007)
10-6J-5: NONCOMPLYING LOTS:
The requirements of this article shall not apply to existing lots which are
smaller than one-half (1/2) acre, as those requirements could conflict with
parking requirements, be incompatible to the design of existing buildings, or
impair ingress or egress to existing buildings or parking area. (Ord. 2006-27,
7-19-2006)
ARTICLE K. PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONE (PF)
SECTION:
10-6K-1: Purpose And Intent; Definitions
10-6K-2: Permitted Uses
10-6K-3: Approval Procedure
10-6K-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT; DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The public facilities (PF) zone is established to
provide areas for the location and establishment of facilities owned and
maintained by public and quasi-public entities. It is the intent of this zone
to provide for effective regulation in the placement and construction of major
public systems and facilities within the city in order to ensure that said
facilities will: 1) be consistent with applicable state and local law, and with
the purposes of the general plan and 2) be located, constructed and maintained
in a manner that will further the interest(s) of the city and its residents,
businesses, patrons, and guests.
   B.   Public Entities: For purposes of this chapter, "public entities" shall
include federal, state, and local government entities, agencies, and
subdivisions, including school, local, and special service districts.
   C.   Quasi-Public Entities: For purposes of this chapter, "quasi-public
entities" shall include, but not be limited to, public service corporations and
quasi-public corporations, as defined below:
    PUBLIC SERVICE CORPORATION: A corporation whose operations serve a need of
the general public, such as public transportation, gas, water, or electricity,
and which is typically subject to extensive governmental regulation. (See
"Black's Law Dictionary" [8th edition, 2004].)
   QUASI-PUBLIC CORPORATION: A for profit or not for profit corporation
providing an essential public service, including, e.g., an electric company,
gas company, or other utility. (Compare "Black's Law Dictionary" [8th edition,
2004].) (Ord. 2011-08, 7-6-2011)
10-6K-2: PERMITTED USES:
Public, quasi-public, or governmental uses of land and associated buildings,
structures and facilities (including associated parking facilities) shall be
permitted in the PF zone, upon compliance with all applicable requirements of
the state and federal law, and the provisions of this code; and shall include:
   A.   Government office, meeting, work area, and storage buildings,
structures and yards including, but not limited to, city offices; public works
facilities; public safety buildings (including police, fire and rescue
facilities); motor pools; and public equipment and/or material storage and
maintenance facilities;
   B.   Parks, public playgrounds, ball fields, rest stops, dedicated open
space, and/or trails;
   C.   Public recreation facilities, including recreation centers and swimming
pools;
   D.   Cemeteries;
   E.   Public libraries, museums, and historical preservation sites;
   F.   Public schools;
   G.   Churches and associated private school facilities;
   H.   Water reservoirs and/or storage tanks;
   I.   Major electric transmission lines (above 45 kV capacity); and public
utility substations, collection and distribution facilities, and transmission
lines, and supporting structures;
   J.   Community gardens, public tree farms, and agricultural uses typically
permitted in R-1-8 zones;
   K.   Temporary and permanent animal shelters, animal control facilities, and
associated or related parking lots, buildings, structures, dog runs, kennels,
and infrastructure, provided that:
      1.   Animals may be euthanized on the premises, but any remains thereof
not frozen and temporarily stored in a functioning freezer must be promptly
removed and disposed of off site; and
      2.   Such shelters, facilities, and related improvements shall be
maintained in a neat and orderly state, and located such that unless the city
obtains and maintains easements to the contrary from surrounding landowners
such facilities may not violate the city's noise and nuisance ordinances nor
cause, constitute or be the source of a public nuisance;
   L.   The following, subject to the size limitations provided herein:
      1.   For property that is at least twenty (20) acres in size, forestry,
farming, and livestock grazing, and associated structures (but not to include
feedlots, dairies, or similar high density or odor offensive agricultural
uses); and
      2.   For property that is one-half (1/2) acre in size or larger:
         a.   The housing and/or grazing of livestock, subject to: 1) the
limits and setbacks that apply in the R-A-1 zone, and 2) a setback in the
location and accessibility of the livestock of not less than fifty feet (50')
from the property line except in such areas where the property adjoins other
public property within the PF zone or property zoned R-A-1, OSMU, or OSMU-C,
where no such setback shall be required; and
         b.   Sewer lagoons and/or treatment facilities, subject to a setback
of at least fifty feet (50') from the property line and an odor and noise
easement from any properties situated within two hundred feet (200') of such
facility; and
      3.   For property that is at least one-fourth (1/4) acre in size, sewer
pump and/or lift stations, subject to a setback of at least twenty five feet
(25') from the property line and an odor and noise easement from any properties
situated within fifty feet (50') of such facility; and
   M.   Publicly sponsored carnivals; fireworks; parades; concerts; infrequent
commercial activities of limited size (such as publicly sponsored bazaars,
craft shows, tool shows, and boutiques); and city sponsored or approved
celebrations and observances, and activities associated therewith. (Ord. 2011-
08, 7-6-2011)
10-6K-3: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Approval for the placement of the PF zone designation on lands within
the city shall be obtained from the city council, following recommendation of
the planning commission.
   B.   Except for: 1) temporary animal shelters, animal control facilities,
and related improvements (see subsection 10-6K-2K of this article), and 2) uses
identified in subsection 10-6K-2M of this article, approval for the location
and layout of uses within the PF zone shall be obtained from the city council
(following recommendation of the planning commission).
   C.   Approval for the location and layout: 1) of temporary animal shelters,
animal control facilities, and related improvements (see subsection 10-6K-2K of
this article), and 2) of uses identified in subsection 10-6K-2M of this article
may be granted by the city administrator or mayor.
   D.   To facilitate evaluation of the potential impact from the zoning of the
property and/or the placement of proposed use(s) thereon, the planning
commission and/or the city council may require the submittal of a site plan
showing the area proposed to be included in the zone and the proposed placement
of major buildings and facilities to be located on the site, and reports and/or
actions intended to minimize any known or potential adverse impacts resulting
from the construction, installation, maintenance, and/or operation of said use.
(Ord. 2011-08, 7-6-2011)
CHAPTER 7
SUPPLEMENTAL AND QUALIFYING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-7-1: Scope
10-7-2: Lot Standards
10-7-3: Dwelling Structures Per Lot
10-7-4: Space Requirements
10-7-5: Minimum Height Regulations
10-7-6: Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
10-7-7: Fences, Walls And Hedges
10-7-8: Water And Sewage Requirements
10-7-9: Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks And Street Improvements
10-7-10: Floodplain Use
10-7-11: Road Standards And Width Requirements; Exceptions
10-7-12: Flag Lots
10-7-13: Dedication Of Private Streets
10-7-14: Recreational Vehicle Storage And Temporary Occupancy
10-7-15: Allowance For Mobile Sales Offices And Model Homes
10-7-16: Underground Power Required
10-7-17: Home Occupations
10-7-18: Self-Service Vending Facilities
10-7-19: Animals In Residential Zones, Where Permitted
10-7-20: Bed And Breakfast Facilities And Vacation Rentals
10-7-21: Internal Accessory Dwelling Units
10-7-22 Detached Accessory Dwelling Units
10-7-1: SCOPE:
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter and chapter 7A of this
title qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the zone regulations appearing
elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 2013-03, 4-3-2013)
10-7-2: LOT STANDARDS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every lot (unless located within
a commercial planned unit development, shopping center plaza, or other similar
large scale commercial or business development ["commercial development"]),
existing or intended to be created, shall have such area, width and depth as is
required by this title for the district in which such lot is located and shall
have frontage upon a dedicated street approved by the Planning Commission and
City Council. (Ord. 2011-05, 4-20-2011)
10-7-3: DWELLING STRUCTURES PER LOT:
Every dwelling structure shall be located and maintained on a separate lot
having no less than the minimum areas, width, depth, and frontage required by
this title for the zoning district in which the dwelling structure is located;
except, that multistructural dwelling complexes under a single ownership and
management, or condominiums as provided in chapter 16 of this title, may occupy
one lot for the entire complex in the zoning districts where such is allowed,
and two (2) one-family units or two (2) two-family units on separate lots may
have zero side yards formed at a line through the common wall and extended to
the lot lines, provided each unit meets all building codes and all other zoning
requirements within the zoning district. For such dwelling units divided by a
common wall, a utility easement through the common wall shall be recorded with
the County Recorder prior to certificate of occupancy, where all utility lines
shall run, serving each unit separately. It shall be mutually agreed upon by
the owners of each unit that any required repair or maintenance of any wall or
structure which is part of the common wall or structure will be shared equally
between the owners of the adjoining units. (Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-2009)
10-7-4: SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Yard Space For One Building: No required yard or other open space
around an existing building or which is hereafter provided around any building
for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; nor shall
any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as
providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected or
established.
   B.   Sale Or Lease Of Required Space: No space needed to meet the width,
yard, area, coverage, parking or other requirements of this title for any lot
or building may be sold or leased away from such lot or building.
   C.   Below Minimum Requirements: No parcel of land which has less than the
minimum width and area requirements for the district in which it is located may
be cut off from a larger parcel of land for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of building or development as a lot. (Ord. 2008-12, 7-16-2008)
10-7-5: MINIMUM HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No dwelling shall be erected to a height of less than one story above grade,
unless the structure has been designed for energy conservation as an earth berm
or underground home. (Ord. 2005-14, 4-20-2005)
10-7-6: CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS:
On corner lots, no obstruction to view in excess of three feet (3') in height
shall be placed within a triangular area formed by lines running along the back
side of each street side sidewalk easement, thirty feet (30') in length, and a
line connecting those points, except for pedestal type identification signs, or
a reasonable number of trees pruned high enough to permit unobstructed vision
of the intersection for automobile drivers. (Ord. 2008-03, 2-20-2008)
10-7-7: FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES:
   A.   Interior Yards: Fences, walls and hedges may not exceed six feet (6')
in height within any interior yard except for sports courts on interior lots.
      1.   Sports court fences on interior lots may not exceed twelve feet
(12') unless granted by the planning commission and city council as a
conditional use.
      2.   Sports court fences may not be screened above six feet (6').
   B.   Grade Difference: Where a fence, wall or hedge is located along a
property line separating two (2) lots and there is a difference in the grade of
the properties on the two (2) sides of the property line, the fence, wall or
hedge may be erected or allowed to the maximum height permitted on either side
of the property line.
   C.   Street Side Enclosure: The height of the fence, wall or hedge enclosing
any street side of a residentially zoned property shall not exceed three feet
(3') in height within a setback area ten feet (10') from the back of existing
or proposed curb according to the LaVerkin City master road plan. Corner lots
must follow the requirements for clear view of intersecting streets as provided
above.
   D.   Subdivision Walls: Boundary and privacy walls, fences or hedges may be
erected as part of residential subdivision construction, up to six feet (6')
high within the ten foot (10') street side setback area, provided that:
      1.   The clear view of intersecting streets as above is provided for; and
      2.   There are no driveways or accesses into the abutting properties or
residences along the walled streets.
   E.   Fences With An Unobstructive View: Notwithstanding any other provisions
herein, a chainlink or other similar fence which does not create a sight
obstruction may be erected within any residentially zoned street side setback
area, to a height of five feet (5'); provided, that the fence is in no way
closed in with adjacent plant materials or strips of material inserted into or
attached to the fence to obstruct the view. (Ord. 2008-03, 2-20-2008)
   F.   Retaining Walls:
      1.   Elevation Change: For purposes of this section, an "elevation
change" is defined as the height difference between the pad elevation and the
property line elevation of a developable or developed parcel of property.
      2.   Hydrology Study: The submission of hydrology studies by qualified
engineers or hydrologists, and/or the installation of retaining walls, may be
required prior to the development or redevelopment of property within the city
if elevation change on the parcel is an issue.
         a.   Such submission and/or installation, where required, shall occur
prior to final subdivision approval for resubdivided and previously
unsubdivided parcels.
         b.   For other parcels of property, where such is or may be required,
the hydrology report shall be required at the time of issuance of a building
permit and the wall installation shall be required prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the structure(s) constructed on the property.
      3.   Conditions And Requirements:
         a.   Elevation changes of less than two feet (2') shall not require
any study or wall installation.
         b.   Elevation changes from two feet (2') to four feet (4') shall
require a hydrology study to determine the need for a retaining wall. The slope
must be maintained at two to one (2:1) or less if the study does not support
the need for a wall.
         c.   Elevation changes of four feet (4') and up shall require a
hydrology study with a retaining wall required.
         d.   Walls installed shorter than the slope height must be constructed
and installed so as to protect the toe of the slope. Grade above the wall shall
be maintained at two to one (2:1) slope.
         e.   The finished product shall include a three foot (3') to five foot
(5') flat, compacted surface behind and immediately adjacent to the sidewalk as
determined by a soils engineer, subject to approval by the city engineer.
         f.   Materials shall be: 1) at the discretion and with the approval of
the city engineer, and 2) in accordance with the conclusions and
recommendations of the hydrology study.
      4.   Specifications And Standards: Specifications and standards for
retaining walls in subdivisions are outlined in title 11, chapter 4 of this
code.
      5.   Alternatives: Alternatives to a wall may be permitted by the city
where the toe is held in place and the slope is protected from erosion, subject
to the approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 2007-31, 12-5-2007)
   G.   Walls, Fences, Hedges In Commercial Zones: The height of walls, fences,
or hedges enclosing any front area of commercially zoned properties shall not
exceed three feet (3') within any area from the property line to the required
front setback line as called out in the requirements of such commercial zone.
Corner lots must follow the requirements for clear view of intersecting streets
as above. (Ord. 2008-03, 2-20-2008)
10-7-8: WATER AND SEWAGE REQUIREMENTS:
In all cases where sewage facilities and a connection to a public sewer system
as defined by the Utah state division of environmental health and in all cases
where a connection to a public water system approved by the Utah state division
of environmental health are not available for a proposed building or use, the
proposed sewage disposal and the domestic water supply shall comply with the
requirements of such division and the application for a building permit shall
be accompanied by a certificate of approval of such proposal from said division
of environmental health. (Ord. 2008-12, 7-16-2008)
10-7-9: CURBS, GUTTERS, SIDEWALKS AND STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
The installation of curbs, gutters and sidewalks, and improvement of streets to
centerline, if street is already improved with asphalt, or centerline plus ten
feet (10') where the street is not improved with asphalt, as approved by the
city in accordance with its ordinances and specifications, shall be required on
any existing or proposed street adjoining a lot on which a building permit
application for new home construction is made. Such curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
and street improvements shall be required as a condition of obtaining approval
of the building permit. The city may require a property owner to make an
equivalent payment for the labor and materials necessary to install curb,
gutter, sidewalk and asphalt, as calculated by the city engineer, in lieu of
requiring the property owner to install the requisite amount of curb, gutter,
sidewalk and asphalt, when in the city's judgment it would not be cost
effective for the city to require actual installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk
or asphalt because the adjoining streets have not yet been improved to current
city standards, and/or requiring such improvements would of necessity result in
the destruction or removal of said improvements within the near future when
adjoining streets are improved to city standards. Under this scenario, the city
shall require payment by a property owner equal in amount to the actual costs
for labor and materials necessary to install the required amount of curb,
gutter, sidewalk and asphalt as of the date the property owner requests
approval of a building permit. Prior to receiving approval of the building
permit where improvements are required, a property owner must also convey to
the city by quitclaim deed, the amount of property necessary to install curb,
gutter, sidewalk and asphalt whether for immediate installation or for such
future time as it becomes prudent for the city to install the said
improvements. (Ord. 2008-12, 7-16-2008)
10-7-10: FLOODPLAIN USE:
No residential construction shall be permitted where the lowest occupied floor
is below the 100-year flood level, and all construction with nonoccupied levels
(garage, etc.) shall be of construction which will withstand rapidly flowing
water. No construction on the lower floodplains of the Virgin River or on
LaVerkin and Ash Creeks can be made without first showing that it meets the
above requirements through competent engineering studies. (Ord. 2008-12, 7-16-
2008)
10-7-11: ROAD STANDARDS AND WIDTH REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Road Widths:
      1.   Collector Streets: Collector streets shall be sixty feet (60') wide
with the following minimum standard requirements:
         a.   Thirty inches (30") for curb and gutter on each side of the
pavement;
         b.   Four feet (4') of sidewalk on each side of the pavement;
         c.   Two feet (2') of easement back of curb on each side of the
pavement; and
         d.   Forty three feet (43') of pavement.
      2.   Local Streets: Local streets shall be fifty feet (50') wide with the
following minimum standard requirements:
         a.   Thirty inches (30") for curb and gutter on each side of the
pavement;
         b.   Four feet (4') of sidewalk on each side of the pavement;
         c.   Two feet (2') of easement back of curb on each side of the
pavement; and
         d.   Thirty three feet (33') of pavement.
   B.   Hourglassing: The public works director may approve street widths to
prevent hourglassing on existing streets.
   C.   Exceptions: Planning commission may recommend and city council may
allow road exceptions with the approval of the fire department and city
engineer in the following cases. Such exceptions may require studies as listed
in this title for dedicated private streets.
      1.   Flag lots as outlined in this title.
      2.   One-way streets with the recommendation of city staff and approval
of the city engineer, fire and police departments. Must be posted "one way
entrance" and "one way - do not enter".
      3.   Dedicated private streets as outlined in this title.
   D.   Utilities: All required street side utility easements must be met.
   E.   Landscaping: Landscaping of medians and park strips may be approved by
city council.
   F.   Road Specification Modifications: Due to constraints relating to
topography and natural obstacles along with constraints due to utility
placement, such as overhead transmission lines, variations of road
specifications and utility placement may be permitted as determined by the city
engineer. (Ord. 2008-12, 7-16-2008)
10-7-12: FLAG LOTS:
Flag lots are subject to subdivision requirements in title 11 of this code, and
are allowed only upon the recommendation of the planning commission and
approval of the city council, subject to the following:
   A.   Right Of Way Or Access Strip:
      1.   The right of way or access strip shall have a minimum width of
twenty five feet (25') and a maximum grade of not more than fifteen percent
(15%).
      2.   The right of way or access strip shall not be included in the
calculation of the required minimum lot area.
      3.   No building, structure or parking shall be allowed in the right of
way or access strip; and the right of way or access strip is to be used solely
as access to the flag lot.
      4.   The right of way or access strip shall be constructed of an all
weather surface, with a concrete or asphalt apron of not less than twenty five
feet (25') in length that extends from the entrance along the width of the
access strip.
      5.   If the right of way or access strip is to be used for drainage of
the flag lot, it may require approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 2008-12, 7-
16-2008)
   B.   Dwelling Unit Number: Only one one-family dwelling unit shall be
allowed on a flag lot. (Ord. 2009-02, 2-18-2009)
   C.   Vehicle Turnaround: Any flag lot with an access one hundred fifty feet
(150') or more in length shall require an emergency vehicle turnaround with a
minimum radius per the applicable building related codes and the approval of
the fire chief.
   D.   Address Display: The lot address shall be prominently displayed in a
visible location at the street entrance to the right of way or access strip.
   E.   Setback: The setback of any residence or accessory buildings shall be
that required for the zoning district and shall not obstruct emergency vehicle
access.
   F.   Fire Hydrants: If the main building or structure is located more than
two hundred fifty feet (250') from a fire hydrant, measured along approved
vehicular routes, the property owner shall be required, at said owner's expense
and on his or her private property, to install a fire hydrant that is serviced
by a minimum six inch (6") class 900 PVC line. The location of the hydrant
shall be determined by the building inspector, the public works director and/or
the fire chief. (Ord. 2008-12, 7-16-2008)
10-7-13: DEDICATION OF PRIVATE STREETS:
Subject to the limitations in this section, the city may accept as dedicated
public streets any existing and improved private streets.
   A.   The street or lane shall have an existing hard surface travel area of
not less than twenty six feet (26') in width.
   B.   The person or party requesting acceptance of the proposed dedication
shall submit a written application on a form produced by the city, which must
be accompanied by a petition signed by all parties owning property adjoining
the street for which application is being made. In addition, the city shall
require as part of the application, and at the applicant's sole expense in a
form acceptable to the city, the following:
      1.   Traffic Study: A traffic impact study shall be performed by a
licensed engineer or other professional qualified to conduct such a study,
which study shall cover such issues as the adequacy of the street width to
service the needs of property owners fronting on the street, overall traffic
flow including future traffic in light of projected city growth, fire and
emergency access, and pedestrian and other safety issues. The planning
commission shall review the study and make recommendation to the city council.
The city council may refuse to accept the dedication of the street if the study
shows that the street width, the design, or the manner of construction is not
adequate to meet the needs of the public.
      2.   Utility Service Study: A utility service study shall be performed by
a licensed engineer or other professional qualified to conduct such a study,
showing the location and identifying the condition of all utility lines lying
within the street to be dedicated. The planning commission shall review the
study and any city staff recommendations with respect to utility services that
would be dedicated as lying within the proposed street dedication, and make
recommendation to the city council. The city council may refuse the application
for dedication if the utility study or the staff recommendation shows that the
location and/or condition of the utility service lines are such that by
accepting the dedication of the utility service lines, the city would be
incurring a substantial expense to ameliorate or provide ongoing maintenance of
the same.
   C.   The city council may also refuse the application for dedication if the
street fails to meet all other city specifications and requirements for
grading, construction, surfacing and quality, including sidewalks, curbs and
gutters and the width of the street, and/or if the city would be incurring a
substantial expense to ameliorate or provide ongoing maintenance of the street.
   D.   In addition to the conditions set forth above and prior to final
approval of the application for dedication of a private street or streets, the
applicant must agree in writing to pay for all costs associated with bringing
all street improvements, including curb, gutter and sidewalk, utility services,
and utility service lines underlying the street, to then prevailing city
standards exclusive of street width. The petitioner shall have one year from
the time of approval of the application to complete requirements of this
section, including the payment of the costs referred to. Upon such payment,
completion, and acceptance of the improvements by the city engineer, the city
council shall accept the street. (Ord. 2008-12, 7-16-2008)
10-7-14: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE AND TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY:
Recreational vehicles may not be used for permanent living quarters and storage
or temporary occupancy must comply with the following regulations:
   A.   Any RV, which is stored on a lot where an existing dwelling is
occupied, may be used as temporary housing for no more than a cumulative total
of thirty (30) days within any consecutive twelve (12) month period for
immediate family members or guests with the following conditions:
      1.   Placement of the RV must meet the setback requirements of the zoned
area;
      2.   There must be no impact to the neighborhood which could create
traffic or parking hazards;
      3.   The RV must be owned by the property owner or occupant of the
existing dwelling;
      4.   There are no verified noise or nuisance violations or complaints on
the property where the RV will be occupied; and
      5.   Adequate and lawful provisions for waste disposal, including sewer
or trash, must be made.
Under no conditions will the thirty (30) day occupancy be extended.
   B.   A conditional use permit for temporary occupancy of an RV while a home
is constructed on the lot where the RV will be located may be granted upon
recommendation of the planning commission and approval of the city council.
Such conditional use may be approved for up to a six (6) month time period by
the city council and extended by the building official for one additional six
(6) month period of time. The conditional use permit shall be granted if the RV
meets the setback requirements for the zoned area, if there is an adequate and
lawful provision for waste disposal including sewer or trash, and the ability
to connect to other utility services exists.
   C.   It is not permitted to install or use on or adjacent to any
recreational vehicle, whether stored or temporarily occupied as allowed above,
any decks, skirting, extra propane tanks, private garages, household appliances
which extend or protrude from the unit, or external stairs beyond the
manufactured steps provided.
   D.   A resident's RV may be stored on property where an occupiable dwelling
is located and such storage is in compliance with all provisions of city
ordinances. No RV shall be stored on a vacant lot or parked on any vacant
property to be used as temporary housing, except as allowed with a conditional
use permit in conjunction with an approved building permit. (Ord. 2008-12, 7-
16-2008)
10-7-15: ALLOWANCE FOR MOBILE SALES OFFICES AND MODEL HOMES:
A single mobile sales office set up to sell subdivision properties, or a model
home for the purpose of showing newly developed subdivision residences to the
public for sale, shall be allowed with a temporary occupancy permit issued by
the LaVerkin building department. Such mobile sales office or model home shall
be located in the subdivision for which sales will be made. When twenty five
percent (25%) of the lots in the subdivision are sold or no later than one year
following the recording of the subdivision or phase thereof, the mobile office
shall be removed. The model home may be offered for sale as a subdivision
residence at any time so long as a permanent certificate of occupancy has been
obtained from the building department. (Ord. 2008-12, 7-16-2008)
10-7-16: UNDERGROUND POWER REQUIRED:
Any new development in LaVerkin City whether by metes and bounds or in a
platted subdivision shall be required to install underground power connections
unless otherwise requested by the power company. Nothing in this requirement
shall disallow the power company to maintain, repair, or replace existing pole
hung power lines. (Ord. 2005-17, 5-4-2005; amd. Ord. 2008-12, 7-16-2008)
10-7-17: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Home occupations as defined in section
10-1-6 of this title shall be permitted only upon compliance with the following
criteria:
      1.   Must not involve any use of any outside yard area about the premises
where the dwelling unit or accessory building is located unless the use or
activity is of the type that is customarily found in a residential
neighborhood;
      2.   Any accessory building used in a home occupation shall meet
requirements of the zone in which the home occupation is located;
      3.   Reasonable inventory related to the home occupation shall be
allowed, so long as such inventory is stored entirely within the dwelling unit
or accessory building on the premises;
      4.   No exterior architectural modifications of the dwelling or accessory
building shall be made to accommodate the home occupation use;
      5.   Must not create a nuisance;
      6.   Shall specifically exclude automobile work of any kind, commercial
stables, animal boarding, auctions, restaurants, funeral houses or any activity
which unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, including,
but not limited to, interference of radio, television, or other electronic
reception by reason of design, materials, construction, lighting, odor, dust,
sounds, vibrations, vehicles, parking and general operation of business. No
smoke, odor, liquid or solid waste shall be emitted which is not usual and
customary to the use of the property for residential purposes;
      7.   Combustible materials shall not be stored in the home;
      8.   Shall be without advertising by way of signs, and shall otherwise
meet the requirements of chapter 11 of this title;
      9.   The home occupation shall not cause a demand for city or utility
services in excess of those usual and customary to the use of the property for
residential purposes;
      10.   The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond
the normal flow to the residence.
   B.   Home occupations may include the following:
      1.   Artists, authors, musicians - not studios.
      2.   Bakeries, catering, and home kitchens with no commercial equipment.
      3.   Barber and beauty shops.
      4.   Computer/internet sales/programming.
      5.   Consulting services.
      6.   Daycare, preschool.
      7.   Handyman, contractor offices.
      8.   Home crafts, not sold out of the home.
      9.   Janitorial, housekeeping.
      10.   Mobile services.
      11.   Music lessons, tutoring - one student at a time.
      12.   Off site auto repair, product installation.
      13.   Professional offices.
      14.   Small open congregate living facilities as described in this code.
      15.   Yard care.
   C.   Home occupations are a temporary privilege which can be revoked if
disruption of the residential neighborhood occurs. If at any time the home
occupation "outgrows" the residence it may be required to cut back, move to a
commercial zone where the use is allowed, or shut down. (Ord. 2007-26, 10-3-
2007; amd. Ord. 2008-12, 7-16-2008; Ord. 2015-04, 7-1-2015)
10-7-18: SELF-SERVICE VENDING FACILITIES:
A self-service vending facility may be situated within commercial zones of the
city provided:
   A.   It only sells or dispenses items or commodities that are allowed to be
sold or dispensed within the zone (including, but not limited to, food,
beverages, and ice); and
   B.   If owned and operated by a person or entity other than the owner/
operator of the primary business on the parcel, a separate business license (as
required by title 3 of this code) is obtained therefor and kept current; and
   C.   If not housed within, or within ten feet (10') of, the building
containing the primary business on the parcel:
      1.   Site plan approval is first sought and obtained from the land use
authority of the city. Such plan shall provide for such accesses, drop off
zones, parking, landscaping, and utilities (including, but not limited to,
water, sewer, gas, and/or power) as may be required to safely and lawfully
provide the intended vending services and protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the public.
      2.   Such facility shall be separately serviced and metered for
utilities. (Ord. 2008-14, 8-6-2008)
10-7-19: ANIMALS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES, WHERE PERMITTED:
The raising, care, keeping, and feeding of livestock, domesticated animals that
do not constitute household pets, and fowl, in residential zones, as provided
in chapter 6, articles A, B, D, and D1 of this title, shall be subject to the
following requirements and criteria:
   A.   Prohibitions And Restrictions:
      1.   The following animals may not be maintained on the property: wild
animals, dangerous animals, pigs (porcine), mink, and peacocks.
      2.   No nuisance, nuisance animals, or animal/fowl related nuisance
conditions as defined by State and/or local law and ordinance, including, but
not limited to, title 4, chapters 1, 2, and 8, and title 5, chapter 1 of this
Code (including, without limitation, vicious and/or loud or noisy animals,
animal related fouling of the air by odors, water contamination, flies and
other insects and rodents attracted by the animals, etc.) may be maintained on
the property.
         a.   The presence of the animals, or the housing or feeding thereof,
may not compromise the safety nor result in a degradation of the air quality,
ground/surface water quality, or soils stability enjoyed by owners, tenants,
guests, and patrons of adjacent properties within a residential zone of this
City; and are not allowed within well protection zones, within twenty feet
(20') of streams, in areas having a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater,
or within regulatory floodways, natural drainages, or protected wetlands.
         b.   Animals and fowl allowed under the provisions of this section
including fowl, e.g., chickens, turkeys, ducks, and geese, must be maintained
on the property wherein they reside, and may not be allowed to run or wander at
large in the community, defecate on the property of the public or another
property owner, or trespass upon the property of another (whether to traverse,
feed, etc.).
         c.   Animals and fowl shall be for recreational and family production
use only; provided, that: 1) sales of animals, fowl, or eggs therefrom, limited
commercial sales of animals, fowl, and/or eggs, milk, or other dairy products,
are permissible if the handling and sales comply with applicable Federal, State
and local agricultural, business license, and health and safety laws and
ordinances, and 2) total cumulative gross sales receipts for any and all such
sales during the calendar year do not exceed the total gross sales receipts
exempted from licensing under section
3-1-5-1 of this Code.
         d.   Property owners and tenants keeping domesticated animals on their
residential property shall cooperate with law enforcement personnel, and take
affirmative action, to eliminate and/or prevent the attraction of rodents and
predators to the neighborhood as a result of the keeping of said animals.
         e.   No animal or fowl infected with avian flu, West Nile virus,
hantavirus, or other like disease or condition may be maintained on the
property; and any animal or fowl that becomes or appears to become so infected
must, upon request of the City and/or the Health Department, be removed from
the property and examined, treated, and, if deemed necessary, disposed of under
applicable Health Department regulations and procedures. The animal or fowl may
not be returned until it is determined by the Health Department or a licensed
veterinarian (that certifies in writing) that the animal or fowl is not or no
longer infected, and is safe to return to the property.
   B.   Number:
      1.   The number of domesticated animals which may be maintained on the
property shall be determined on the basis of point. No parcel of property shall
exceed one hundred (100) points per acre (or a fractional share thereof) based
on the following or a proportionate combination thereof, considering the size
of the parcel or set of parcels concerned (e.g., 0.25 acre x 100 = 25 animal
points).
      2.   Type of animal or fowl/number of points per animal:
         a.   Cow (bovine), horse (equine), donkey, mule, or similar large
animal (25 points).
         b.   Miniature horses, ponies, goats, llamas, alpacas, and/or similar
medium size animals (12 points).
         c.   Ostriches or other similar large fowl (12 points).
         d.   Turkeys, geese, pheasants, and similar medium size fowl (4
points).
         e.   Chickens, ducks, pigeons, doves, or similar small fowl (3
points).
         f.   Rabbits or similar small domesticated or farm animals (3 points).
         g.   For animals not specified above, the Zoning Administrator shall
determine the type and number of points per animal. A property owner
dissatisfied with the determination or interpretation of the Zoning
Administrator may appeal that determination and/or interpretation of this Code
to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the procedures and provisions of
chapter 4 of this title.
      3.   The unweaned offspring of a residing animal or fowl, under six (6)
months of age, shall be excluded from consideration for the purpose of
determining compliance with this section.
      4.   Roosters are included within the term "chicken" herein; however, no
more than one rooster per: a) twenty five (25) chickens or b) half acre (1/
2 acre) of property may be maintained on residentially zoned property.
      5.   No bees shall be maintained on any property that consists of less
than an acre; and no more than two (2) beehives per acre of property shall be
allowed.
      6.   For residentially zoned properties (1 or more adjacent lots under
the same ownership or tenancy):
         a.   That are less than one-half (1/2) acre in size, no large or
medium size animals or fowl shall be allowed.
         b.   That are ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size, or smaller, a
maximum number of animals and/or fowl equivalent to a total of twelve (12)
points under the terms of this section are allowed, subject to the following:
            (1)   No medium size animals or fowl shall be allowed on the
property; and
            (2)   No animals other than household pets shall be allowed on
properties that are six thousand (6,000) square feet or smaller in size.
   C.   Structures And Premises:
      1.   Corrals, stalls, pens, and paddocks, for the enclosure of livestock
(not meaning or including any fence erected along or adjacent to the property
line separating that property from the property of another owner or tenant),
and all barns, stables, coops, sheds, hutches and similar buildings, for the
housing or confinement of livestock and fowl, and all water troughs and areas
used for the feeding of livestock and fowl, which congregate or tend to
congregate animals and/or fowl to a specific area of the property:
         a.   Shall not be located:
            (1)   In the front yard of the property.
            (2)   Within the greater of any setback or easement requirements
set forth in this Code for such property in the residential zone.
            (3)   For residentially zoned properties (1 or more adjacent lots
under the same ownership or tenancy) that are:
               (A)   One-half (1/2) acre or more in size: Within fifty feet
(50') of any existing dwelling or occupied structure located on an adjacent
lot, or thirty feet (30') from a dwelling or occupied structure on the same
lot.
               (B)   Smaller than one-half (1/2) acre in size: Within twenty
five feet (25') of any existing dwelling or occupied structure located on an
adjacent lot, or fifteen feet (15') from a dwelling or occupied structure on
the same lot.
         b.   Shall be maintained in good repair, and shall not be allowed to
deteriorate and: 1) become a nuisance; 2) become rundown, unsightly, or
hazardous; and/or 3) impair surrounding property values of residential
properties due to their appearance, condition, and/or state of repair.
      2.   The property shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and
manure and urine shall not be allowed to collect, accumulate, and remain
thereon. Associated ponds shall be kept clean and sanitary, to prevent the
accumulation and hydration/saturation of feces, urine, and other biological
waste, and to prevent the attraction of flies and mosquitoes. (Ord. 2013-10, 8-
21-2013, eff. 2-17-2014)
10-7-20: BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES AND VACATION RENTALS:
   A.   In any zone provided for in this title, where bed and breakfast
facilities (BnBs) and/or vacation rentals (VRs) are allowed as permitted uses
(or permitted uses, with conditions), such BnBs and/or VRs are subject to and
shall fully comply with the applicable provisions and conditions of: 1) title
3, chapters 1, 8, and 11, of this Code, 2) title 4, “Public Health And Safety”,
of this Code (including noise, odor, and nuisance restrictions), 3) title 9,
chapter 1, “Building Related Codes”, of this Code, 4) section
10-7-17, “Home Occupations”, of this chapter, 5) chapter 10, “Off Street
Parking”, of this title, and 6) chapter 11, “Sign Regulations”, of this title,
except as otherwise specifically provided herein.
   B.   Licensed BnBs and/or VRs shall be permitted, in the below- designated
zones, as follows, subject to the provisions, conditions, and restrictions
provided herein:
 
Zone                               BnB VR Specific Limitations
R-1-8 (One-Family Residential)     X       
R-1-10 (One- and Two-Family        X      (single-family dwellings only)
Residential)
R-A-1 (Residential-Agricultural)   X       
R-1-14 (Low-Density Residential)   X       
MH (Mobile Home)                           
                                          (with an approved site plan,
Comm-T (Tourist/Resort Commercial) X   X  development agreement, and as limited
                                          in Section
                                          10-6G2-2)
 
   C   In order to: 1) maintain neighborhood aesthetics, stability, safety, and
cohesion, 2) limit commercial creep, and 3) mitigate the potential negative
impacts of transient lodging on residential neighborhoods: VRs (grandfathered
under prior law) and/or BnBs may be allowed in existing single-family dwellings
in the above-referenced residential and mobile home zones of the City to the
extent that:
      1.   They are properly licensed under title 3 of this Code.
      2.   The use of a dwelling as a BnB or VR does not:
         a.   Change the appearance of the dwelling or property for residential
purposes; or
         b.   Allow for, facilitate, or otherwise permit the occupancy load
(under section
3-11-12 of this Code and this section) or the dwelling limitations of the
underlying zone (under this title) to be exceeded.
      3.   The BnB or VR facility is properly maintained, painted and kept in
good repair - and associated grounds and landscaped areas are properly
maintained and watered - in order that the use does not detract from the
general appearance of the neighborhood.
      4.   All parking is provided for off-street, and is not to be allowed on
the public rights-of-way.
         a.   Required parking areas and access to parking areas shall be
maintained and available for use at all times.
         b.   Parking may not consume or otherwise impact more than forty
percent (40%) of a front yard.
         c.   The required number of off-street parking spaces shall be as
follows:
            (1)   BnBs shall require two (2) parking spaces for the resident
family, plus 1.1 spaces for each non-resident living or sleeping unit, plus
adequate parking for accessory uses pertaining to the use of the property for a
bed and breakfast facility.
            (2)   VRs shall require 1.1 spaces for each living or sleeping unit
(defined, for purposes of this subsection, to mean each room in the facility
designated for sleeping purposes and offered for such use by guests or
patrons), plus adequate parking for accessory uses pertaining to the use of the
property for a vacation rental.
      5.   The occupancy load of the BnB or VR structure, as established or
amended (before use by the City’s building official), is not to be exceeded,
and in no case shall be greater than fifteen (15) (not counting the resident
household in a BnB).
      6.   With regards to VRs (where permitted or are grandfathered as
nonconforming uses):
         a.   Those who license their residential structures as a VR, but fail
to use their structure for that purpose and to collect the applicable taxes
thereon (including the Transient Tax), at least once before the end of the
following calendar year following licensing, or during any subsequent calendar
year thereafter, may lose their right to continue said use after the end of
that period of nonuse: it shall be considered lapsed and the use abandoned.
         b.   A purchaser or grantee of a residential structure, that was
properly licensed by the seller or grantor as a VR immediately prior to the
purchase or conveyance, may continue to license and operate the residential
structure as a VR to the same extent as his or her predecessor in interest,
provided that:
            (1)    The residential unit was licensed as a VR through the date
of the sale (in or under the name of the seller); and
            (2)   The purchaser or grantee, not later than forty-five days
following the later of the closing on the purchase or recording the deed on the
property containing the residential structure that had been licensed as a VR,
provides the City’s Business License Clerk or City Recorder with a written
Notice of Intent (letter), indicating the purchaser’s or grantee’s intent to
license and use the residential unit as a VR; and
            (3)   The purchaser applies for and receives, within six months of
the date of the above- referenced closing or recording, a business license to
operate the residential unit as a VR.
      7.   Notwithstanding the prohibition of signs in subsection
10-7-17A8 of this chapter, one unlighted wall identification sign measuring not
more than twenty (20) square feet shall be permitted. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-3-2018;
amd. Ord. 2022-10, 9-21-2022)
10-7-21: INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   A Permitted Use in Residential Zones: In any area zoned primarily for
residential use:
      1.   The use of an internal accessory dwelling unit ("IADU") is a
permitted use; and
      2.   Except as provided herein, the City does not establish any
restrictions or requirements for the construction or use of one IADU within a
primary dwelling, including a restriction or requirement governing:
         a.   The size of the internal accessory dwelling unit in relation to
the primary dwelling;
         b.   Total lot size; or
         c.   Street frontage.
   B.   Minimal Requirements for Internal Accessory Dwelling Units (IADUs):
      1.   An IADU shall comply with all applicable building, health, and fire
codes.
      2.   The City:
         a.   Prohibits the installation of a separate utility meter for an
IADU;
         b.   Requires that an IADU be designed in a manner that does not
change the appearance of the primary dwelling as a single-family dwelling;
         c.   Requires a primary dwelling:
            (1)   To include one additional on-site parking space for an IADU,
regardless of whether the primary dwelling is existing or new construction; and
            (2)   To replace any parking spaces contained within a garage or
carport if an IADU is created within the garage or carport;
         d.   Prohibits the creation of an IADU within a mobile home as defined
in Section 57-16-3, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended) and Section
10-1-6 of this Code;
         e.   To the extent any may exist within the City, prohibits the
creation of an IADU if the primary dwelling is served by a failing septic tank;
         f.   Prohibits the creation of an IADU if the lot containing the
primary dwelling is six thousand (6,000) square feet or less in size;
         g.   Except in accordance with the provisions of Section
10-7-20 of this Code relative to Bed and Breakfast facilities, prohibits the
rental or offering the rental of an IADU for a period of less than thirty (30)
consecutive days; and
         h.   Prohibits the rental of an IADU if the IADU is located in a
dwelling that is not occupied as the owner's primary residence. (Ord. 2021-07,
10-6-2021)
10-7-22: DETACHED ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Purpose: Detached Accessory Dwelling Units ("DADUs”) can be a valuable
tool in addressing housing needs, allowing for alternative and flexible housing
options for owner-occupied single-family residences, and broadening the range
of affordable housing opportunities within and throughout the City. They:
      1.    Create new housing units while respecting the appearance,
neighborhood character, and scale of single-family residential development.
      2.    Provide more housing choices in residential zones.
      3.    Allow more efficient use of existing housing and large
underutilized yards.
      4.    Provide housing options for family caregivers, adult children,
aging parents, and families seeking smaller households.
      5.    Offer a means for residents, particularly seniors, single parents,
and families with grown children, to remain in their homes and neighborhoods,
and to obtain extra income, security, companionship, and services.
   B.   A Permitted Use in Residential Zones: In any area zoned primarily for
residential use, except mobile home subdivisions, the use of a detached
accessory dwelling unit ("DADU") is a permitted    use on any lot or parcel of
property that is at least ten thousand square feet (10,000 sq. ft.) in size and
contains a single-family dwelling or residence, subject to the conditions,
restrictions, limitations, and regulations established by this Section and by
other applicable provisions of this Code and State and Federal law.
   C.   Minimal Requirements for Detached Accessory Dwelling Units (DADUs):
      1.   A DADU shall comply with the International Residential Code ("IRC")
and all other applicable City, State or Federal building, health, fire,
nuisance, and business license codes (including but not limited to Chapters 3,
4, and 9 of this Code).
      2.   The City:
         a.   Prohibits the severance, sale, or subdivision of the DADU from
the lot or parcel of property on which the primary dwelling or residence is
situated.
         b.   Prohibits the rental of any part of the residential dwelling or
DADU if the lot or parcel of property on which the DADU is located is not
occupied as the owner's primary dwelling or residence.
            (1)   Subject to the provisions of subsection b(2) below, "owner
occupancy" or "owner occupied" means that any one or more of the following
individuals are residing on the subject property for the entire time during
which a DADU or primary dwelling or residence on the lot or parcel of property
is rented or otherwise occupied:
               (a)   An individual who is listed in a recorded deed as an owner
of the property.
               (b)    An individual who is a trustor of a family trust who
possesses legal ownership of the property.
            (2)   When an owner of the lot or parcel of property has a bona
fide, temporary absence of not more than three (3) consecutive years, for
activities, assignments, or work, such as a temporary job assignment,
sabbatical, or voluntary humanitarian or church service, and another record
owner of said lot or parcel of property cannot reside on the property as his or
her primary residence: the requirements of this subsection shall be satisfied
if a person residing on the lot or parcel of property possesses legal authority
to make decisions, and enforce judgments and legal determinations, concerning
the property or structures thereon, including but not limited to a holder of a
Durable General Power of Attorney, a Trustee of a Family Trust, or court-
ordered representative or designee. Indefinite periods of absence and absences
for more than three (3) years from the dwelling do not qualify under this
subsection.
            (3)   To be considered "owner occupied," an owner may live in
either the principal dwelling or the DADU on the lot or parcel of property.
         c.   Requires compliance with the following size, height, and setback
requirements:
            (1)   The DADU must meet the setback requirements for the
applicable zone, as well as the required separation from the primary dwelling
unit for an accessory structure, and may not encroach upon or interfere with
any public easement or right-of-way on or across the lot or parcel of property.
            (2)   The DADU shall not be less than two hundred fifty square feet
(250 sq. ft.) in size, but not shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of square
footage of the footprint of the primary dwelling or residence (structure).
            (3)   DADUs are limited to a height not in excess of (a) the
roofline of the primary dwelling residence and (b) twenty feet (20'), whichever
is smaller.
            (4)   The total square footage of all accessory structures,
including those containing a DADUs, is limited to a maximum of eight percent
(8%) of the total square footage of the lot or parcel of property.
         d.   Prohibits the installation of a separate electric, water, and/or
sewer utility meter for an DADU; but it may assess applicable and legally-
supportable impact fees, as may be established and imposed from time to time.
         e.   Requires that an DADU be designed in a manner that does not
substantially change the appearance of the lot or parcel of property as a
single-family residence.
         f.   Requires the installation of two (2) additional on-site parking
spaces for an DADU, regardless of whether the primary dwelling or residence on
the property is "existing" or "new construction".
            (1)   Parking spaces shall be not less than nine feet (9') wide and
eighteen feet (18') long.
            (2)   Parked vehicles shall not be allowed to encroach upon the
City's sidewalks.
            (3)   Parking surfacing shall consist of either asphalt or cement.
         g.   To the extent any may exist within the City, prohibits the
creation of an DADU if the primary dwelling is served by a failing septic tank.
         h.   Establishes the following design standards and criteria with
regards to DADUs:
            (1)   Architectural design, materials, and construction shall be
consistent with and reasonably match the existing primary residential
structure.
            (2)   All submitted building plans shall be accompanied by an
engineer's stamp.
            (3)   Plan shall be submitted through the City's online building
permit process.
            (4)   All structures containing or comprising DADUs shall follow
the provisions and requirements of the current IRC as well as any other
applicable code.
            (5)   No existing nonresidential structures (except detached
garages), including but not limited to sheds and metal structures, may be
converted to DADUs.
            (6)   All DADUs must be "slab on grade"-meaning that they are
attached to a slab on grade, with footings, as required by the IRC; no
basements shall be allowed.
            (7)   An outside entrance shall be required.
            (8)   A landscaping plan of the lot or parcel of property,
including that portion fronting on a city street, shall be submitted to and
approved by the director of operations, or his or her designee, and shall be
complied with and adhered to, and the property maintained in accordance
therewith, in order (1) to minimize potential negative impacts on neighboring
properties, (2) to retain the residential character of the lot or parcel of
property, and (3) to provide a visual buffer for onsite parking in relation to
adjacent properties and the street.
            (9)   Addressing:
               (a)   The primary dwelling or residence and the DADU shall have
the same address, except for the use of lettering to differentiate between the
primary dwelling or residence and the DADU for mail or emergency-response
purposes.
               (b)   The address identification shall be legible, attached to a
permanently-fixed structure, and positioned to be visible from the street
fronting the property.
               (c)   Address identification characters shall contrast with
their background and shall contain Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters,
provided that numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not
smaller than four inches (4") (or 102 mm) in height and one-half inch (1/2")
(or 12.7 mm) in width.
               (d)   Additional mailboxes will only be allowed for the
principal dwelling.
      3.   DADU Application Requirements:
         a.   Generally: Any property owner of property who meets the
requirements of this Section and desires to construct, expand, renovate, or
convert a structure to contain a DADU on his or her lot or parcel of property
shall first obtain a DADU permit, which shall be acquired in addition to any
other building permits that may be necessary to create the DADU.
         b.   The applicant shall submit the following as part of the
application for a DADU:
            (1)   A site plan drawn accurately to scale-showing showing the
property lines and dimensions; the location of and entrances to any existing
buildings or structures, and entrances; any proposed building or structure, its
dimensions, and its distance from other buildings and structures, and property
lines; and the location of parking stalls (current and proposed).
            (2)   Detailed floor plans, drawn to scale, with labels on rooms
indicating current and proposed uses.
            (3)   To be provided to the City prior to the issuance of the
building permit: written verification (e.g., a copy of a warranty deed,
affidavit, a recorded deed restriction, etc.) showing (a) that the applicant is
the owner of the property, (b) that he or she has or intends to have permanent
residency on the lot or parcel of property where the request is being made, and
(c) that either the primary dwelling or residence or the DADU will remain
owner-occupied if structure is to be or remain rented out.
            (4)   A rental dwelling business license, if and to the extent that
such is or shall be required by law. (Ord. 2023-07, 5-3-2023)
CHAPTER 7A
SUPPLEMENTAL AND QUALIFYING REGULATIONS - HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
10-7A-1: Purpose And Intent
10-7A-2: Definitions
10-7A-3: Applicability
10-7A-4: Application Procedure
10-7A-5: Development Standards
10-7A-6: Figures
10-7A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: The purposes of the provisions of this chapter are: 1) to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents while
protecting and preserving significant scenic resources for the long term
benefit of LaVerkin City as a whole; and 2) to further the goals and policies
of the general plan in relation to land use, densities, open space and
community image.
   B.   Intent: The standards set forth herein are intended to achieve the
following objectives:
      1.   Minimize adverse soil and slope instability; decrease the potential
for erosion; and prohibit activities and uses that would result in the
degradation of fragile soils and steep slopes.
      2.   Protect and preserve the visual resources which are of significant
value to the community. Such resources include, but are not limited to, major
hillsides, hilltops, ridges and ridgelines, knolls, mesas, cuestas and
escarpments, boulder outcroppings and large boulders, canyons and natural
drainage areas, and other areas of historical or visual significance. Retain
the integrity of significant on site and off site views to or from these
resources.
      3.   Minimize the adverse effects of grading and cut and fill operations;
avoid highly visible scarring of hillsides; and protect natural vegetation,
sensitive hydrologic features, and visually prominent landforms.
      4.   Discourage mass grading and terracing of large pads but permit
flexibility for reasonable development practices as appropriate.
      5.   Establish a hillside development process that requires applicants to
select suitable development sites on their property through the use of slope
calculations, maximum land holding capacity, or development agreements to
determine the appropriate density, intensity, design and location of structures
and improvements.
      6.   Provide hillside development standards that maximize the positive
impacts of site sensitive design, grading, landscape architecture, and building
architecture, that will protect the inherent scenic value in the proposed
projects subject to this chapter.
      7.   Permit the flexibility to modify or remove relatively small
topographic features which have slopes distinctly different from surrounding
property in order to facilitate reasonably efficient development in a
particular area. The exclusion of such features or areas shall not be contrary
to the overall purpose of this chapter.
      8.   Encourage the appropriate location, design and development of
proposed projects which provide enhanced human enjoyment, while protecting
people and property from hazardous conditions, including rockfalls, rolling
boulders, unstable slopes, landslides, mudslides, flooding, and erosion.
      9.   Minimize the impacts of development to the surrounding natural
environment by controlling the location, intensity, pattern, design,
construction techniques, and materials of development. (Ord. 2013-03, 4-3-2013)
10-7A-2: DEFINITIONS:
AS GRADED: The surface configuration upon completion of grading.
BENCH: A relatively level step excavated into earth on which fill material is
to be placed for an intermediate drainage area.
BERM: A low mound of earth graded in a linear or undulating form; often used as
a noise or visual barrier.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the ground level grade to
the top of the building.
CLUSTERING: A land planning technique appropriate for large subdivisions in
which some areas are reserved as open space. This allows the permitted units in
an area to be grouped more densely in the most developable parts of a site.
CONTOUR: A line drawn on a plan that connects all points of equal elevation.
CONTOUR GRADING: A grading concept designed to result in earth forms that
resemble natural terrain characteristics. Horizontal and vertical curve
variations are often used for slope banks. Contour grading is not necessarily
minimal grading.
CUESTA: A landform that has a steep ascent in one direction and a gentle
descent in the opposite direction. The steep slope is the cuesta face and
erosion escarpment, and the gentle descent is the back slope of the cuesta. The
crest of the cuesta forms a ridgeline.
CUT: The mechanical removal of soil, rock or other earth material.
CUT AND FILL: The excavating of earth material in one place as cut and
depositing of it as fill in an adjacent place.
DEVELOPMENT: The carrying out of any building activity or clearing of land as
an adjunct of construction. "Major development" shall be considered to be
subdivision platting, including various land uses and/or housing types.
DEVELOPMENT PARCEL: Any quantity of land capable of being described with such
definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, which is
designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit
or which has been used or developed as a unit.
EROSION: The process by which the soil and rock components of the earth's crust
are worn away and moved from one place to another by natural forces such as
weathering, solution and transportation.
ESCARPMENT: A long cliff or steep slope resulting from erosion or faulting,
separating two (2) comparatively level or more gently sloping surfaces.
EXCAVATION, MAJOR/MINOR: Any disturbance to the ground, including, but not
limited to, clearing, grubbing, rock removal, cutting, tunneling, drilling or
any other activity which alters the natural ground. "Minor excavation" shall
mean a vertical cut of four feet (4') or less, or a disturbance of less than
one acre of surface area. "Major excavation" shall mean a vertical cut of more
than four feet (4'), or a disturbance of more than one acre of surface area.
EXISTING GRADE: The grade of land prior to grading.
EXPORT: Excess cut material that is removed from a grading project and
deposited off site.
FILL: A deposit of rock, soil or other earth material placed by artificial
means.
FINISH GRADE: The final elevation of the ground surface after development that
conforms to the development's approved plan.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER: A person with a four (4) year degree in civil
engineering or engineering geology from an accredited university who, through
training and experience, is able to assure that geological factors affecting
engineering works are recognized, adequately interpreted and presented for use
in engineering practice and for the protection of the public.
GRADING: To bring an existing surface to a designed form by excavating, filling
or smoothing operations.
HILL: A small area of land that is higher than the larger area of land around
it.
HILLSIDE: The sloping side of a hill. Also used, in the collective sense, to
apply to ridgelines, ledges, cliffs, hillsides, and slopes, and similar
topographic conditions.
HILLSIDE ADAPTIVE ARCHITECTURE: Various techniques such as split foundations,
walk out basements, roof slopes parallel to ground slope, and subdivision of
building mass used to enhance the visual harmony of the building and the
existing slope.
HILLSIDE CONDITIONS: Used, in the collective sense, to apply to ridgelines,
ledges, cliffs, hillsides, and slopes, and similar topographic conditions.
HILLTOP: The area on the top of a hill where the hillside transitions from
ascension to the highest portion of the hill, and then to descending the hill
on the opposite side.
IMPORT: Fill material obtained off site to complete a grading project.
IMPROVEMENT: An object, facility or structure generally constructed as part of
development.
KNOLL: A small, round hill or mound.
MASS GRADING: The movement of large quantities of earth over large areas.
Disruption of surface terrain in this manner often results in a successive pad/
terrace configuration. Modification or elimination of natural landforms may
result.
MESA: A typically flat topped landform with generally steep sides.
MINIMAL GRADING: A grading technique designed to minimize excavation and fill.
Allows the movement of earth for projects such as individual building
foundations, driveways, local roads, and utility excavation. It is often
associated with roads conforming closely to natural contours and structures
being integrated into the natural terrain.
NATIVE VEGETATION: The natural vegetation commonly found in the area.
NATURAL OPEN SPACE: Landforms created by nature or subsequently modified to
meet fuel modification fire standards, including existing trees, riparian
vegetation and native plant communities. Manmade water bodies and trails
through natural open spaces may be considered as natural open space.
NATURAL SLOPE (Also NATURAL GRADE): The existing natural condition of the land;
a slope that is not manmade.
OPEN SPACE: Land not covered by buildings, roads or vehicular accessways, and
including areas that are open to view such as landscaped areas, slopes, natural
areas, agricultural areas and orchards, common areas, greenbelts, parks, etc.
OUTCROPPING: The part of a rock formation that appears above the surface of the
surrounding land.
PAD: A generally flat or stepped area created by grading to accommodate
development.
PLATEAU: A flat or predominantly flat area of land that is raised sharply above
adjacent land on at least one side.
PROMINENT RIDGE: A ridge or hilltop that is highly visible from a significant
portion of the community, or that forms an important part of the skyline.
RIDGE: A long, narrow, or sharply defined conspicuous elevation of land.
RIDGELINE: The junction of a rising steep slope on one side and descending
slope that may either be gentle or steep on the other side.
SCAR: A highly visible cut in a hillside or ridge in which topsoil has been
removed such that vegetation will be unable to establish itself within a
reasonable period of time. A deposit of earth or manmade materials not removed
upon finish grade completion is also considered a scar.
SITE: Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the
same ownership.
SLOPE: An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a
ratio of the vertical distance (rise), or change in elevation, divided by the
horizontal distance (run), and expressed as a percentage.
SLOPE TRANSITION: The area where a slope bank meets the natural terrain or a
level graded area either vertically or horizontally.
TOE OF SLOPE: The lowest elevation of a slope that transitions to a flatter
area or pad.
TOP OF SLOPE: The highest elevation of a slope that transitions to a flatter
area or pad.
TOPOGRAPHY: A general term to include the characteristics of the ground
surface, such as plains, hills, mountains, degree of relief, steepness of
slope, and other physiographic features.
UTAH LICENSED PROFESSIONAL: A Utah registered or licensed civil engineer,
geologist, land surveyor, architect, or landscape architect.
VEGETATION: Growing native or nonnative plants.
VIEWSHED: Views to prominent visual features such as ridgelines. (Ord. 2013-03,
4-3-2013)
10-7A-3: APPLICABILITY:
The standards and procedures established by this chapter shall apply to all
lands lying within the city limits of the city of LaVerkin, where hilltop or
hillside conditions (as addressed herein) exist. In addition, all properties
seeking annexation or preapproval of projects pending annexation to the city
will be evaluated according to the standards and procedures outlined in this
chapter.
   A.   Most Restrictive Provisions Apply: Except for any clustering provisions
that are a part of this chapter, in cases of conflict between the provisions of
this chapter and other established regulations, the most restrictive provisions
shall apply.
   B.   Exemptions: The following actions and activities are exempt from the
application procedure of this chapter. However, while these actions are exempt
from specific requirements, the development standards necessary to accomplish
the purpose and intent of this chapter shall be met (e.g., the mitigation of
disturbed areas that are not planned for development in the foreseeable
future). Development plans shall be submitted to city staff for review to
determine possible mitigation requirements prior to any actions or activities
taking place.
      1.   Construction or minor excavation that does not require a grading
permit or a building permit.
      2.   The construction and installation (trenching, utility construction
and backfilling) of underground utility systems.
      3.   The regrading of existing lots for landscape installation provided
such regraded area is within the buildable area of the development.
      4.   Pool/spa construction that does not involve the construction of any
retaining walls over four feet (4') in height, whether or not such retaining
walls are part of the pool structure.
      5.   Additions to existing structures and/or construction of accessory
structures within the buildable area of a lot unless a grading permit for
establishment of same is required.
      6.   Any project that has received final city approval prior to the
effective date of this chapter, provided that such permit or approval has not
expired, is not otherwise revoked, and is in compliance with any requirements
that this chapter supersedes.
      7.   The construction of a public street identified in the LaVerkin City
general plan and/or transportation master plan that is not part of any overall
development project (e.g., a street proposed primarily for improved circulation
within the city and not to provide access to any particular parcel or
development).
   C.   Hillside Classification Standards: Each slope category range delineates
the relative suitability of land for development.
      1.   The slope categories are described as follows:
         a.   0% to 20%; flat to gently rolling land: Development with grading
is permitted in this slope category. Padded building sites are permitted;
however, on slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%), techniques such as
contour grading, split level architectural prototypes where feasible, or
grading for the structure pad only, shall be used to reduce cut and fill.
         b.   20.01% to 25%; moderate hillside: Special hillside architectural
and design techniques that minimize grading and harmonize with the built and
natural environments are required in this slope category. Architectural
prototypes and infrastructure elements are expected to complement the natural
landform by using techniques required herein. Impact of streets and trails is
to be minimized by following natural contours where practicable.
         c.   25.01% to 30%; hillside: Development within this slope category
shall be limited to slopes where it can be demonstrated that safety,
environmental, and aesthetic impacts can be minimized. The use of planning, and
design techniques such as larger lots, and appropriate building structural
techniques (e.g., stepped slabs, pole foundations, etc.) are expected.
Structures shall blend with the natural environment through their shape,
materials, and colors. Impact of streets and trails are to be minimized by
following natural contours where practicable.
         d.   30.01% to 40%; steep hillside: This is a sensitive slope
condition and development is prohibited.
         e.   Greater than 40%; mountainous: This is a severe slope condition
and development is prohibited.
      2.   Both restrictions on and incentives for potential development apply
in order to preserve the character of the natural terrain as much as possible.
(Ord. 2013-03, 4-3-2013)
10-7A-4: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Applicable Provisions: The application procedure for subdivision
developments shall follow the requirements in this chapter and the subdivision
procedure as outlined in title 11 of this code. Subdivision plats shall adhere
to requirements as described in the underlying zoning district. Development on
individual lots may require only review by staff with recommendation of
planning commission and approval of city council.
   B.   Permits Required: No person shall grade or construct upon property that
constitutes a hilltop or hillside condition subject to this chapter without
first obtaining proper permits issued by LaVerkin City unless listed as an
exemption in subsection 10-7A-3B of this chapter. This includes a hillside
conditions permit, which shall be issued upon completion of a hillside
conditions plan review and approval by the planning commission and the city
council. Development plans may be approved subject to conditions as may be
required by engineering recommendations and other studies as outlined below.
Plans shall demonstrate compliance with adopted building and grading codes in
addition to this code.
   C.   Application And Cost Recovery: Application shall be made for hillside
conditions plan review upon the forms provided by the city. The application
shall be accompanied by the required reports described below. Costs for city
staff review and approval of required documents under this section shall be
recovered through a fee established by resolution of the city council.
   D.   Required Documents: The following documents are required to be
submitted at the time of application. Conditions of approval may be established
based on the findings of such documents. These conditions shall become a part
of the record and be considered binding upon the applicant as part of the
approved plan. City staff shall review the submittal and provide a
recommendation of denial, approval or conditional approval to the planning
commission who will subsequently provide a recommendation of denial, approval
or conditional approval to the city council who shall deny, approve or give
conditional approval.
      1.   Slope Analysis Exhibit: A detailed slope analysis exhibit shall be
prepared for all parcels containing "hilltop" and/or "hillside conditions",
defined herein.
         a.   For the slope analysis, the applicant shall use a base
topographical map of the subject site, prepared and signed by a Utah licensed
civil engineer or land surveyor. This base topographical map shall include all
adjoining properties within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the site
boundaries to portray the site's context.
         b.   The slope analysis calculations shall be prepared by a Utah
licensed professional who is proficient in creating the exhibits with the use
of computer software designed for preparing said exhibits. This slope analysis
shall be prepared using CAD based or GIS based software specifically designed
for such purpose. Contours on the exhibits shall be prepared using no greater
than two foot (2') contour intervals at a scale of not less than one inch
equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'). The slope analysis exhibit shall delineate
slope bands, with contrasting colors, for the following slope ranges:
0% to 20%,
20.01% to 25%,
25.01% to 30%,
30.01% to 40%, and
40.01% or greater.
         c.   The slope analysis exhibit shall include a tabulation chart
indicating the land area in acres within each slope category as identified
herein.
         d.   Also included in the slope analysis exhibit shall be a sufficient
number of slope cross sections to clearly illustrate the extent of the proposed
grading. The slope cross sections shall:
            (1)   Be drawn at the same scale and indexed, or keyed, to the
existing topography, grading plan, and project site map. Both vertical and
horizontal scales shall be indicated and be of the same scale. The slope cross
sections shall extend at least one hundred fifty feet (150') outside the
project site boundaries to clearly show impact on adjacent property. Slopes
shall be calculated in intervals no greater than forty feet (40') along the
cross sections.
            (2)   At a minimum, be drawn along those locations of the project
site where:
               (A)   The greatest alteration of existing topography is
proposed.
               (B)   The most intense or massive development is proposed.
               (C)   The site is most visible from surrounding land uses.
               (D)   Grading will impact natural drainage conditions.
            (3)   At least two (2) of the cross sections shall be roughly
parallel to each other and roughly perpendicular to existing contour lines.
            (4)   The slope cross sections shall be stamped and signed by a
Utah licensed professional proficient in creating such cross sections
indicating the datum, source, and scale of topographic data used in the cross
sections. The signer shall attest to the fact that the cross sections have been
accurately calculated and identified.
            (5)   The slope cross sections shall show existing and proposed
topography, structures, and roadways. Proposed topography and features shall be
drawn with a dashed line. Existing topography and features shall be drawn with
a solid line.
      2.   Concept Plan: The concept plan shall be reviewed by the individual
or body designated to recommend or grant approval. Any application for a use on
property containing a hilltop or hillside condition shall include a conceptual
plan of the proposed development which includes the following:
         a.   General Information:
            (1)   Name, address and telephone number of applicant.
            (2)   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the persons
responsible for the preparation of any required reports.
            (3)   Date of application.
            (4)   Signatures of the owners of the site or of an authorized
representative.
         b.   Vicinity Map: A vicinity map showing the location of the site in
relationship to the surrounding area, watercourses, hillsides, prominent
geographic features, roads and other significant features and structures.
         c.   Proposed Development Plan: A plan of the proposed development at
a scale of not less than one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200')
illustrating:
            (1)   Boundary Lines: Boundary lines of the site and development to
be made thereon.
            (2)   Preservation Areas: Any identified preservation areas within
which development shall be prohibited.
            (3)   Improvements: All existing and proposed improvements.
            (4)   Location Of Hilltop Or Hillside Conditions: The portion of
the property containing a hilltop and/or hillside conditions.
         d.   Type; Nature: The type and nature of the development.
         e.   Goals; Objectives: The goals and objectives of the developer.
         f.   General Plan: The development's relationship to and compatibility
with the general plan and other city master plans.
         g.   Existing Conditions Photographs: Digital photographs of the site
as it exists at time of application. The photographs shall include the number
of views adequate to depict the visual character of the entire site and any
special features, especially prominent ridgelines or landforms and any
topographical areas with steep slopes and/or unique topographical features
planned for disturbance. A minimum of three (3) views of the area of the
proposed development as seen from surrounding properties shall be included.
      3.   Technical Reports:
         a.   Grading Plan: A grading plan, at a scale of not less than one
inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'), shall show the existing and proposed
contours and cross sections, and proposed areas of cut and fill. A legend with
appropriate symbols which shall include, but not be limited to, the following
items: top of wall, top of curb, high point, low point, elevation of
significant trees, spot elevations, and pad and finished floor elevations.
Accurate contours, at no greater than two foot (2') contour intervals, showing
the topography of the existing ground extending at least one hundred fifty feet
(150') outside all boundary lines of the site, or more if needed to
sufficiently show on and off site drainage, shall also be included. The grading
plan shall include a description of the import and export methods to be
employed in acquisition or disposal of soil and other material, including the
location of the disposal site. A schedule shall be included showing when each
stage of the project will be completed, including the estimated starting and
completion dates.
         b.   Drainage Report And Plan: A drainage control plan and report
shall be prepared by a Utah licensed professional civil engineer, and must be
consistent with all other reports required in this section or other reports
required in applicable sections of the building code.
            (1)   The drainage plan and report shall show all surface and
subsurface natural drainage systems and facilities, walls, curbing or other
erosion protection devices to be constructed in connection with or as part of
the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and estimated
runoff of the area to be served by any drainage systems or facilities.
            (2)   Each lot or parcel shall be designed in such a manner that
stormwater or nuisance water shall not adversely impact other properties in the
area. Property development shall not unnecessarily cause a natural drainage
channel to be filled in, obstructed or diverted. When modification to a natural
drainage channel is proposed within the development, such changes will be
addressed in the drainage study and shown on the improvement plans, and the
developer may be required to dedicate rights of way or record drainage
easements for structures and/or improvements needed to carry storm runoff in
the event approval is given for the proposed modifications.
            (3)   All drainage systems shall be separate and independent from
the sanitary sewer system.
            (4)   Drainage and flood control shall be designed in conformance
with applicable city and state drainage, flood control and engineering
standards, and shall comply with the city's stormwater master plan.
            (5)   Underground pipe systems shall be designed to carry a 10-year
storm at a minimum. Major hydraulic structures shall be designed to carry a 25-
year storm at a minimum. The minimum storm drain size shall be eighteen inches
(18") or as required by a hydrology study.
         c.   Improvements Plan: This plan shall show any existing and proposed
buildings or structures and cross sections of the areas where they are or will
be located, and all proposed roads, utilities, easements and drainage channels
on the property where the work is to be performed. Also, the location of any
buildings or structures on adjacent property which may be affected by grading
operations shall be shown.
         d.   Geotechnical Report: The most current "Geologic Hazard And
Adverse Conditions, St. George - Hurricane Metropolitan Area" document and maps
prepared by the Utah geological survey shall be reviewed when considering a
site for development. A Utah licensed professional engineering geologist or a
Utah licensed professional engineer who is trained and experienced in the
practice of geotechnical engineering shall prepare the geotechnical report. The
geotechnical report shall include the following:
            (1)   A general description of the topography, drainage conditions,
surface vegetation, and surface features such as rock outcroppings, existing
structures, debris, and unstable or wet conditions.
            (2)   A location map showing the footprints of the planned
improvements and the exploration locations with elevations.
            (3)   An evaluation of the subsurface conditions, including a
complete record of the explorations, laboratory test results, and the elevation
of the water table, if encountered.
            (4)   Identification of potential geotechnical constraints on the
project site (such as expansive rock and soil, collapsible soil, shallow
bedrock and caliche, gypsiferous rock and soil, potentially unstable rock or
soil units, shallow groundwater, and windblown sand), and recommendations for
their mitigation.
            (5)   The locations of any springs and seeps on the project site,
and recommendations concerning the effects of the springs and seeps on the
proposed development.
            (6)   Specific geotechnical recommendations for the design and
construction of the proposed project, which shall include the following:
               (A)   A general assessment of the requirements needing to be met
to develop the proposed site.
               (B)   Site preparation and grading, and the suitability of the
on site soils for use as structural fill.
               (C)   Stable cut and fill slopes, including recommendations
concerning the effects of material removal and the introduction of water, both
on and off site.
               (D)   Recommendations for foundation type and design criteria,
including, but not limited to, bearing capacity of natural or compacted soils,
provisions to mitigate the effects of expansive, compressible or collapsible
soils, differential settlement and varying soil strength, and the effects of
adjacent loads.
               (E)   Anticipated total and differential settlement.
               (F)   Special design and construction considerations, as
necessary, such as the excavation and replacement of unsuitable materials,
excavation difficulties, stabilization, or special foundation provisions for
problem soil conditions.
               (G)   Design criteria for restrained and unrestrained retaining
walls.
               (H)   Soil corrosion.
               (I)   Moisture protection and surface drainage.
            (7)   Detailed design recommendations for any planned rockery
walls, mechanically stabilized earth (MSE) walls, and/or reinforced fill
slopes.
            (8)   A detailed slope stability analysis may be required if
potentially unstable rock or soil units or slope creep have been identified on
the site. The analysis shall include, but not be limited to, a determination of
residual shear strength, soil saturation and treatment methods required to
provide a minimum safety factor of 1.5 for any identified slope within the
project boundary.
         e.   Geology Report: The most current "Geologic Hazard And Adverse
Conditions, St. George - Hurricane Metropolitan Area" document and maps
prepared by the Utah geological survey shall be reviewed when considering a
site for development. A Utah licensed professional engineering geologist or a
Utah licensed professional engineer who is trained and experienced in the
practice of geotechnical engineering shall prepare the geology report. The
geology report may be included in the geotechnical report, and shall include
the following:
            (1)   The location and boundaries of the project site and its
general geologic setting.
            (2)   A description of the specific geologic conditions at the
site.
            (3)   Identification of potential geologic hazards (such as faults,
landslides, rockfall, flooding and liquefaction).
            (4)   Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effects of the
geologic conditions and any potential hazards on the proposed development, and
recommendations to minimize any hazard to life or property, or any adverse
impact on the natural environment.
         f.   Landscape Plan: A landscape plan and report shall be prepared by
a Utah licensed professional landscape architect. The report shall include a
description of existing vegetation, a plan of any proposed revegetation of the
site or modifications to existing vegetation, and a plan for the preservation
of existing vegetation during construction activities.
         g.   Other Reports: Other reports deemed necessary by the individual
or body designated to recommend or grant approval to assure the health, safety
and welfare of the project residents or general public may be requested from
the applicant by written specification. These may include phase I or phase II
environmental hazardous materials studies, biological resources reports, or
other reports. Such reports shall be submitted with other application
materials.
         h.   Grading Limit Monuments: Permanent monuments shall be installed
to permit monitoring and enforcement of the grading limits during and after
construction activities. The monuments shall be installed at locations
determined by the individual or body designated to recommend or grant approval
in accordance with the specifications included in the latest construction
standards included in this code. Monuments shall be installed and preserved
during construction at the sole expense of the applicant.
      4.   Additional Information: The individual or body designated to
recommend or grant approval may require additional visual analysis exhibits or
other reports to adequately address unique circumstances and comprehend the
full impact of any proposed development in the property containing hilltop and/
or hillside conditions.
         a.   The city may, at its discretion, require additional information
such as line of sight view analysis for particular features or analysis of
views to/from specific locations. City staff shall determine the number of any
additional exhibits required and their locations and perspectives by visiting
the site with the developer's representative.
         b.   Furthermore, in some cases the city may require the preparation
of computer generated three-dimensional imaging or photo embedded visual
simulations to adequately depict the postdevelopment conditions and their
impact on the visual character of the site. Included shall be depictions of any
topographical areas with steep slopes and/or unique topographical features
planned for disturbance, illustrated at a distance and perspective that will
adequately illustrate postdevelopment conditions along with the proposed
mitigation for development. In tandem with these exhibits, predevelopment
digital photographs of the site, showing identical views utilized in the
postdevelopment computer generated three-dimensional imaging exhibits or photo
embedded visual simulations, shall be included for comparison. City staff shall
determine the number of computer generated exhibits and their locations and
perspective by visiting the site with the developer's representative.
   E.   Approval Required Before Excavation: It shall be unlawful to excavate
or grade any hilltop, hillside, or areas containing hillside conditions, within
the city, prior to final approval of the site plan for permitted uses and
approval of the preliminary plat or minor subdivision plat for subdivisions by
the planning commission and city council, and prior to final approval of the
required construction drawings for said site plans and subdivisions by city
staff, and prior to the installation of the grading limit monuments as
required. Any hillside excavation, or cutting which is done without the
property hillside development permit shall be a class B misdemeanor and shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
   F.   Penalties: The director of operations or his designee shall have the
right to order a halt to construction of any improvements within a hillside
development where, in his opinion, there exists a condition which violates or
threatens to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Such suspension of
construction activities shall continue until the director of operations or his
designee is satisfied that measures have been implemented for substantial
compliance with this chapter.
   G.   Bonding, Easement, And Restoration:
      1.   A surety bond, cash bond, or irrevocable letter of credit to assure
hillside restoration shall be provided prior to issuance of a hillside
development permit, along with a temporary travel, access, and construction
easement ("temporary easement") to and upon the property to be developed.
         a.   Financial Guarantee:
            (1)   Such financial guarantee shall be provided in an amount
sufficient to ensure necessary removal of dumped materials, completion of
revegetation projects, soil stabilization, the construction of stormwater
drainage facilities, other hazard mitigation measures including grading,
planting and maintenance, in the event the developer fails to complete the
hillside restoration in accordance with the approved plan within two (2) years
from the issuance of the permit; provided, that the city council may grant such
additional time extension as may be necessary to allow completion of the
restoration work in the event significant progress toward completion of the
project is underway.
            (2)   The financial guarantee shall cover and be in force for a
period of three (3) years from the issuance of the hillside development permit;
provided, however, that any extension in time for performance granted by the
city shall require and be conditioned on the granting, by the developer, of an
extension in the duration of the financial guarantee that at least equals the
amount of the duration of time for performance requested and granted.
            (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection G1a(2) of this
section, the city shall release its interest in the financial guarantee (or
portion thereof remaining), for restoration purposes, at any time that the
excavated or affected area of the development property is restored and accepted
as complete by the mayor, city administrator, or designee thereof.
            (4)   The surety bond, cash bond, or letter of credit shall cover
the cost, as estimated by an approved landscape architect, or a geotechnical
engineer and approved by the city engineer, to restore the hillside to an
acceptable level of appearance and stability. In the case of a dispute over
what constitutes an acceptable level of restoration, the decision of the city
administrator shall be determinative.
         b.   Temporary Easement:
            (1)   Such temporary travel, access, and construction easement
("temporary easement") shall: a) be granted by the property owner(s) of the
property subject to the development request, b) run with the land, c) be in
writing, d) be recorded in the office of the county recorder, e) apply to and
cover the property subject to development approval, and f) be in force for a
period of three (3) years from the issuance of the hillside development permit;
provided, that:
               (A)   Any extension in time to perform under subsection G1b(1)
of this section shall require and be subject to the granting by the property
owner(s) of an additional and similar temporary easement to the city in the
amount of time requested and granted, to run and continue from the end of time
covered and granted under any such current temporary easement to the city from
the property owner(s); and
               (B)   The city may release its interest in such temporary
easement prior to the expiration of such documented easement, upon request, if
and when the hillside restoration has been accepted as complete by the city and
the restoration bond has been released.
            (2)   The temporary easement shall be granted to allow the city and
its officials, employees, and contracted personnel to enter and remain upon the
development property for purpose of: a) performing required unperformed
hillside restoration, and removal and disposition of soils, vegetation and
other debris that are deemed necessary by the city to complete such hillside
restoration; b) traveling in, out, and upon said property for the duration of
such hillside restoration related surveying, engineering, construction, and
removal of soils, vegetation, and debris; and c) parking city and other
construction vehicles thereon, as needed for such hillside restoration, for the
duration of such restoration efforts of the city and those contracted
therewith.
            (3)   The rights granted pursuant to the temporary easement shall
only be exercised by the city, and those taking thereunder, in the event that
the hillside is not restored according to the approved restoration plan during
the two (2) years following issuance of the hillside development permit.
      2.   In the event the developer fails to complete the hillside
restoration to the satisfaction of the city, within two (2) years following the
issuance of the hillside development permit, the city shall have the right to
exercise its rights under the temporary easement and call upon and use the
proceeds of the financial guarantee (provided for hereinabove) to:
         a.   Restore all cuts with existing soil to approximate the natural
lay of the land. If safety issues remain, brick, rock, block, stone, other
natural materials may be used to create a safe slope.
         b.   Revegetate all disturbed earth with grasses such as perennial
rye, blue or fescue and/or shrubs like creosote, Apache plume, or Mormon tea.
Other appropriate grasses and shrubs may also be approved by the city council.
   H.   Enforcement: The city may enter legal proceedings to require any person
who violates this chapter to fund and return a site to the condition found
prior to any disturbance. The city administrator, or his designee, shall
determine when this natural state has been achieved, or shall set specific
requirements necessary to achieve the natural and restored state. Legal
proceedings may also seek to impose and collect a fine in order to recover
staff costs incurred through addressing any violation of this section.
   I.   Plan Certification: City staff designated to grant approval shall
certify the concept plan and issue a hillside development permit following
approval by the planning commission and city council. The following technical
reports and plans shall be certified as described prior to final plat approval,
certification of the concept plan and issuance of a hillside development permit
or building permit.
      1.   Grading Plan Certification: Upon completion of rough grading work
and prior to any excavation for foundations or structures, an as graded plan
prepared and certified by the Utah licensed civil engineer who prepared the
approved grading plans shall be submitted to the operations department for
review and approval. The as graded plans shall include original ground surface
elevations, as graded surface elevations and all other features that were a
part of the approved grading plan. The engineer shall provide certification on
the as graded plan that the work was done in accordance with the approved
grading plan and the city's grading requirements.
      2.   Landscape Plan Certification: Landscape and irrigation plans shall
be prepared by a licensed landscape architect and shall be submitted to and
approved by the operations department. A Utah licensed landscape architect
shall certify that the plans comply with the city's water conservation and
landscape requirements.
      3.   Drainage Plan Certification: The drainage plan shall be approved by
the city engineer. The plan shall be prepared in conformance with guidelines
available in the city engineer's office. The point of location where the
natural drainage channel enters and leaves the property may not be changed
without approval of the city engineer.
      4.   Construction Drawings And Improvements Plan Certification: The
construction drawings and improvements plan shall be reviewed and approved by
the city engineer. The city engineer shall verify that any existing buildings
or structures, and all roads, easements and drainage channels on the property
where the work is to be performed or on adjacent properties is accurately
illustrated and described.
      5.   Other Certification: Other reports deemed necessary by the
individual or body designated to grant approval may require certification. If
necessary, any requirements for approval will be described at the time of the
initial written request for additional technical reports, and certification
will depend on the procedure, conditions, or terms described therein.
   J.   Engineer Review:
      1.   The city engineer shall:
         a.   Review the plans, reports, and certifications (PR&C) required by
the city in accordance with the provisions of subsections D and I of this
section; and
         b.   Identify any portions of such PR&C which: 1) are incomplete, 2)
require greater specificity, and/or 3) inadequately address the relevant
requirements of this code; and
         c.   After such review, identify any conditions, on or related to the
property to be developed, which prohibit or limit development (e.g., high water
table, blue clay conditions, etc.) and should be noted or otherwise included on
the plat and made a matter for public notice, to protect subsequent owners,
builders, caretakers, and/or developers of said property (e.g., plats;
covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs); deed restrictions and
covenants; and/or notices of interest filed with the county recorder); and
         d.   After consultation with the city attorney, as needed, recommend:
            (1)   Prohibitions and/or limitations on development, and
            (2)   Reasonable mitigation and notification requirements to
effectuate the purposes and concerns of subsection J1c of this section,
regardless of whether such requirement is specifically set forth in this code.
      2.   The recommendations of the city engineer, under subsection J1d of
this section, shall:
         a.   Supplement the specific requirements of this code; and
         b.   Carry a rebuttable presumption of reasonableness, and, unless
successfully rebutted under subsection J3 of this section, shall constitute
requirements of the city with regards to the proposed development of the
property.
      3.   A developer who disagrees with the recommendation of the city
engineer may challenge such recommendation as unreasonable, unnecessary, and/or
unduly burdensome; or on the basis that the condition or restriction to which
the recommendation can, through proper and legitimate engineering and/or
architectural/landscape design, be adequately and appropriately addressed and/
or mitigated through a reasonable and more affordable alternative, approach, or
solution. To do so, the developer shall submit, in writing: a) the developer's
disagreement and the factual and legal basis therefor; b) an alternative
method, approach, or solution, if any; and c) the desired resolution of the
disagreement.
         a.   Informal: If the city engineer is persuaded by the submittal(s),
the city engineer may: 1) withdraw, alter, or alter with conditions said
recommendation; and/or 2) adopt or suggest the submitted, or another
reasonable, alternative recommendation.
         b.   Formal:
            (1)   If the city engineer disagrees with the developer and does
not alter said recommendation, the developer may:
               (A)   Accept the determination of the city engineer as final; or
               (B)   Contest the recommendation; and submit proposed
engineering plans and/or architectural designs (stamped by a licensed engineer
and/or architect [as appropriate]), for consideration by the city engineer, in
support of the developer's claim, dispute, or suggested alternative.
            (2)   If the city engineer still disagrees with the developer's
claim, dispute, or suggested alternative, the developer may:
               (A)   Retain the services of a second qualified engineer or
architect, to study the matter and submit his or her opinions, findings, and
recommendations to the city engineer for consideration;
               (B)   Request that the city and the developer (at the city's
option) secure the services of another qualified engineer or architect, as
appropriate, with the expenses thereof to be shared, as agreed, by and among
the parties to the dispute or controversy (including the city), to study the
matter and to submit his or her opinions, findings, and recommendations to the
city engineer for consideration;
               (C)   Request that the city's land use authority consider the
matter and waive, or waive with conditions, required compliance with the
recommendation of the city engineer; and/or
               (D)   Appeal in accordance with the terms and provisions of
subsection L of this section.
   K.   Notice And Liability Issues:
      1.   Where the city engineer, planning commission, and/or city council
has identified any condition(s), on or related to the property to be developed,
which do(es) or should prohibit or limit development (e.g., high water table,
blue clay conditions, etc.), the city may, as appropriate:
         a.   Deny development; or
         b.   Approve the development, with or without conditions.
      2.   Where a development is approved under or in accordance with the
provisions of subsection K1b of this section, the city, in order to limit its
own liability and to afford reasonable notice to subsequent owners, builders,
caretakers, and/or developers of the property to be developed (and those
providing financing therefor), may require the developer to:
         a.   Provide the city with a release, waiver, hold harmless, and
covenant not to sue (document), acceptable to the city attorney, assuming
responsibility and liability for the development and any harm that may be
occasioned to themselves or others, for a period of ten (10) years from the
date thereof, as a result of such condition(s) as are identified by the city
engineer under the provisions of subsection J of this section. (This shall be
required when the city engineer has recommended against construction on or
development of the land, and the city determines to grant approval.);
         b.   Note such condition(s) on the subdivision plat(s) and site plan
(s) to be approved (if any);
         c.   Make such condition(s), and any required restriction(s) to
address such condition(s) (such as a prohibition against basements, certain
types of water intensive activities which may lead to drainage problems or
soils instability, etc.), a matter of public record through one or more of the
following methods, as determined reasonable and appropriate by the city:
covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs); deed restrictions and
covenants; and/or notices of interest filed with the county recorder; and/or
         d.   Note on the documents referenced in subsections K2b and K2c of
this section that there is one or more specified conditions on the property
which may restrict or prohibit development, and that a property owner, in
purchasing and/or taking ownership in the property, assumes liability for the
specified condition and for making financiers of the property and the owner's
successors in interest aware of the condition on the property when financing,
refinancing, or conveying his or her interest in the property.
   L.   Appeals:
      1.   In the event of a disagreement with the requirements imposed by city
staff, the city engineer, the planning commission, or city council in
connection with this chapter, an applicant may appeal the matter to the
appropriate and relevant administrative appeals body of the city for relief
(e.g., the board of adjustment, for land use and zoning matters; or the board
of appeals, for building related code matters).
      2.   In the event the applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the
board of adjustment pertaining to a hillside development permit, the applicant
may appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by
section 10-9a-704, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended).
   M.   Verification Of Compliance: For developments on a "development parcel"
to which this chapter applies, as defined in section
10-7A-2 of this chapter, certification by a Utah licensed engineer that the
development has been completed in compliance with the approved hillside
development permit, including satisfaction of any conditions contained in the
permit, shall be required. Restoration bonds shall not be released, and
certificates of occupancy shall be withheld for such a development, until such
certification has been received by the city engineer. (Ord. 2013-03, 4-3-2013)
10-7A-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All proposed development and improvements subject to the provisions of this
chapter are subject to the following required development standards. These
standards are intended to provide a framework for development that is sensitive
to the unique characteristics of hillside properties. Their purpose is not to
discourage proposals for innovative or alternative methods of design in a
hillside area; innovation is encouraged as long as the end result is one which
respects significant landform features and is consistent with the purposes
expressed in this chapter and in the goals and objectives of the LaVerkin City
general plan (chapters 2 and 3).
   A.   Disturbance Limitations: The following criteria shall be applied in
establishing the limits of disturbance for a site:
      1.   Adverse visual impacts shall be minimized as much as possible. The
screening of cuts and fills, and the visual protection of prominent ridgelines,
rock outcroppings, scenic views, and as much of the natural terrain as
practicable is required.
      2.   Disturbed slopes shall be treated to minimize erosion, and natural
drainageways shall be protected as much as possible.
      3.   The clearing of trees, shrubs and other native vegetation shall be
limited to: the approved locations for streets, driveways and easements; the
approved locations for building pads for structures, main buildings and
accessory structures; and the minimum distance between structures and
surrounding vegetation for established fire prevention and safety standards or
recommendations.
      4.   Significant trees, shrubs and other native vegetation shall be
preserved in the design of the development. Significant vegetation is to be
identified on a map with the application submittals and city staff will review
the submittals and visit the site to determine the significance of existing
vegetation.
      5.   The limits of disturbance may have borders or edges as long as the
significant features of the natural terrain are being preserved.
      6.   All topsoil from any disturbed portion of the site shall be
preserved and utilized in revegetation areas. The soil in the upper portion of
fill areas shall be of a sufficient quality to support native plant growth.
      7.   The maximum limits of disturbance shall be identified on each lot or
parcel of the approved site plans and subdivision plats and shall include all
graded, excavated, and filled areas, the areas occupied by main and accessory
structures, hard surface areas that include driveways, walkways, patios and
parking areas, and all other areas of disturbance or nonnative vegetation.
   B.   Grading Design: Grading for all developments shall be designed to blend
with the contours of the adjacent natural terrain.
      1.   Limits Of Grading: No grading, cutting, filling, excavating,
benching or terracing of any proposed lot or parcel shall go beyond the maximum
limits of disturbance for each lot or parcel as provided herein.
      2.   Cuts And Fills: All cuts and fills shall be minimized as much as
practicable and shall be included within the maximum limits of disturbance for
each lot or parcel. All cut and fill areas shall be recontoured to the natural,
varied contours of the surrounding terrain with a maximum slope transition back
to the natural grade no greater than two to one (2:1). Slope ratios greater
than two to one (2:1) are prohibited except for approved cuts into solid rock
only. Any such proposed cut into rock shall be reviewed by planning commission
with recommendation to city council for appropriateness, suitability, and
visual impact in order to grant approval if warranted. For approved cuts into
solid rock, the slope may be as steep as one-half to one (1/2:1) if recommended
by a Utah licensed professional engineer who is trained and experienced in the
practice of geotechnical engineering and if the visual impact of the cut can be
adequately mitigated. All areas of cut and fill shall be protected from erosion
during the period of construction and shall be permanently planted or otherwise
protected from erosion within twenty (20) days of the completion of grading and
excavation as identified by the approved landscape plan.
Where cut or fill conditions are created, slopes shall be varied where feasible
rather than left at a constant angle which may be unstable or create an
unnatural, rigid, engineered appearance. (See section
10-7A-6, figure 1 of this chapter.)
      3.   Cuts And Fills Visual Mitigation: The visual impact of cuts and
fills shall be mitigated by methods approved by the city engineer. This
mitigation may include, but is not limited to, the placement of buildings in
front of the cuts and/or the placement of retaining walls designed to blend
with the surrounding terrain to stabilize the cut. Mitigation shall
predominantly be contour grading along with plantings as identified on the
approved landscape plan that will stabilize the cut or fill slope and blend
with the surrounding vegetation. The use of retaining walls is to be as limited
in scope and height as feasible to ensure the visual predominance of
vegetation. Contour grading techniques shall be used to provide a natural
appearing variety of slope transitions, slope percentage and slope direction in
a three- dimensional, undulating pattern similar to existing, adjacent terrain.
         a.   Hard edges left by cut and fill operations shall be given a
rounded appearance that closely resembles the natural contours of the land.
(See section
10-7A-6, figure 2 of this chapter.)
         b.   Manmade slopes adjacent to roadways shall be softened where
feasible by sufficient berms, contour grading, and/or landscaping to create
visually interesting and pleasing streetscapes. (See section
10-7A-6, figure 3 of this chapter.)
      4.   Street And Driveway Alignment: Street alignments shall run generally
parallel along the contours of the natural terrain as much as practicable.
Short sections of streets that run perpendicular to natural contours and serve
the purpose of connecting main parallel sections of streets are permitted and
shall follow the natural curves of drainageways where practicable. Streets
shall not greatly alter the physical and visual character of a hillside by
creating large notches in ridgelines or by defining wide straight alignments.
Contour grading techniques shall be employed on all streets and associated cut
and fill areas to minimize any adverse impacts. The portions of driveways that
run perpendicular to natural contours and serve the purpose of accessing
building lots and parcels shall be as short as practicable. (See section
10-7A-6, figure 4 of this chapter.)
      5.   Open Space Trails: Where permitted, trails through open space shall
be located such that cuts and fills are minimized and visual character is
preserved. Where cuts and fills are required, cut conditions uphill from the
trail typically have less of an overall visual impact than an exposed downhill
fill area.
      6.   Structure Location: Design of building sites shall be sensitive to
the natural terrain. Structures shall be located in such a way as to minimize
grading and to preserve natural features. Careful consideration shall be given
to the general orientation of the slope when locating structures. (See section
10-7A-6, figure 5 of this chapter.)
      7.   Building Sites: On each building site, careful consideration shall
be given to the cut and fill conditions such that a balance is achieved where
feasible and consistent with the intent of this chapter to minimize the visual
impact of grading. Different slope conditions call for corresponding typical
cut and fill solutions such that the structure fits well into the topography as
illustrated below. Impacts to natural drainageways shall be avoided where
possible. (See section
10-7A-6, figures 6 and 6A of this chapter.)
   C.   Viewshed Protection: To minimize the adverse visual impacts that
development may potentially have on prominent ridgelines, mesas, and other site
features, the following setbacks shall apply: Reserved.
   D.   Architectural Standards: The purpose of establishing architectural
design standards in improvements and developments subject to this chapter is to
ensure quality development that blends with the hillside environment and to
create neighborhoods that display harmonious and complementary architectural
styles. To achieve hillside compatible development, the city recognizes the
importance of having architectural design that incorporates rooflines and other
building elements that reflect the naturally occurring ridgeline silhouettes
and topographical variations.
      1.   Building Orientation: A variety of building and lot orientations
shall be provided in order to encourage development suitable with the hillside
character of the site.
         a.   Structures shall be designed so the slope angle of the roof pitch
is generally less than or equal to the angle of the natural hillside or manmade
slope. (See section
10-7A-6, figure 8 of this chapter.)
         b.   Site planning shall emphasize the preservation of views to
prominent visual features such as ridgelines. This includes building
orientation to allow view opportunities and lot development on the least
sensitive portions of the site to preserve landforms, vegetation and
topographical features.
         c.   Hillside adaptive architecture shall be terraced to follow the
contours of the slope. Exterior structural supports and undersides of floors
and decks not enclosed by walls are discouraged but may be permitted with fire
safety and architectural considerations adequately addressed to the
satisfaction of the city individual or body designated to grant approval.
      2.   Building Style: The use of hillside adaptive architecture as needed
shall be incorporated into the design of individual lots. Step building
foundations may be required to minimize grading. (See section
10-7A-6, figures 9, 10, and 11 of this chapter.)
         a.   Architectural styles shall be compatible with the hillside
character, topography, and look of the community.
         b.   The dimensions of a building, measured in the direction of the
slope, shall be minimized in order to limit the amount of cut and fill and to
better incorporate the structure to the natural terrain.
      3.   Fencing And Privacy Walls: All fences and privacy walls adjacent to
or clearly visible from public roads or parks shall be constructed of
decorative masonry or other approved materials which have a natural appearance
and shall be a color that blends with the surrounding environment and is
complementary to the landscape. The applicant shall present illustrations and
descriptions of fencing and wall materials as required by this section.
All walls and fences which are adjacent to or visible from public roads shall
be set back from the right of way a minimum of ten feet (10') and landscaped on
the street side of the wall or fence. A minimum flat area from top or toe of
slope of three feet (3') or more as required by the adopted building codes of
the city shall be maintained to face of wall on common area maintenance slopes
with slope heights of thirty feet (30') or greater. (See section
10-7A-6, figure 12 of this chapter.)
   E.   Landscape Design Standards: Landscape materials and stabilization of
graded slopes shall be designed to be compatible with surrounding natural
vegetation. Plant material shall be selected according to compatible climatic,
soil and ecological characteristics of the region.
   F.   Retaining Walls: The purpose and intent of establishing development
standards for retaining walls is to ensure that the application of retaining
walls are aesthetically pleasing elements within the subject property and
limited in quantity throughout a development. The location of all retaining
walls, privacy walls and fences shall be identified along with their proposed
heights, materials and colors, and shown on the grading plan and concept plan.
All retaining walls, privacy walls and fences shall be located within the
maximum limits of disturbance for each lot or parcel.
      1.   General Standards:
         a.   Retaining walls shall be used for the purpose of containing fill
material or for minimizing cut or fill slopes. The retaining wall may only
extend six inches (6") above the material it is retaining.
         b.   A retaining wall shall not be constructed in such a manner so as
to block or restrict vehicular access to a dedicated or implied dedicated
alley, accessway, pedestrian access, trail, sidewalk, easement, or right of
way.
         c.   All retaining walls and all privacy walls and fences surrounding
a development's perimeter shall be faced with stone or earth colored materials
complementary to the surrounding natural landscape.
         d.   Retaining walls shall follow the natural contours of the slope
where feasible. Curved walls that follow the natural contours are recommended
but not required.
         e.   All retaining walls as well as all freestanding walls and fences
shall comply with the adopted building codes of the city.
      2.   Height Standards:
         a.   No retaining wall for a cut or fill area shall exceed ten feet
(10') in height as measured from the immediately adjacent lowest natural or
finished grade to the top of wall unless it can be demonstrated in the overall
mitigation plan for cuts and fills that taller walls will not detract from the
surrounding terrain and there is a predominance of vegetation in the fill
areas. Retaining walls shall not be stacked or terraced in any manner that
increases their combined height beyond ten feet (10'). If desired, two (2)
subwalls may be stacked or terraced to a maximum combined height of ten feet
(10'). A minimum separation of six feet (6') is required between subwalls as
measured from face of wall. (See section
10-7A-6, figure 13 of this chapter.)
         b.   For purposes of this subsection, retaining walls are not
considered stacked or terraced if there is a minimum horizontal separation of
ten feet (10') between sets of retaining walls. With the minimum ten foot (10')
separation, each retaining wall set may be constructed to the maximum allowed
height; either the ten foot (10') height or the taller height demonstrated that
would not detract from the surrounding terrain. The separation area between the
sets of retaining walls shall be planted with low water use/low maintenance
shrubs or other vegetation as approved in the landscape plan. Trees are not to
be planted in the zone between terraced walls unless the distance between walls
is a minimum of twenty feet (20'). This vegetation will help reduce the
apparent visual height of the wall or walls.
         c.   Retaining walls may be constructed to varying heights throughout
a development.
            (1)   Retaining walls constructed in the side yard area of a lot
shall maintain a maximum retaining wall height of four feet (4'); provided that
such wall does not extend into a required front yard adjacent to a street.
            (2)   Retaining walls constructed in the rear yard area of a lot
shall maintain a maximum retaining wall height of eight feet (8').
            (3)   All planting areas between and adjacent to retaining walls
shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system suitable for low water
use vegetation. Such irrigation system shall be approved and inspected prior to
the construction of any wall.
            (4)   Where a retaining wall contains fill above the natural grade
and is located within a required setback yard, the height of the retaining wall
shall be considered as contributing to the permissible height of a fence or
wall at that location. A non- view obscuring fence up to three and one-half
feet (3.5') in height may be erected at the top of the retaining wall for
safety.
         d.   Retaining walls not exceeding six feet (6') in height are
permitted adjacent to structures in order to provide a private outdoor area.
         e.   To the extent that there is an inconsistency or discrepancy
between a requirement and/or provision of subsection 10-7-7F of this title and
this chapter, the stricter requirement/provision shall apply.
   G.   Corrective Work: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the individual
or body designated to grant approval from authorizing grading deemed necessary
to correct previously disturbed natural areas or existing hazardous conditions
that are on site but not a part of the proposed development area and that are
brought to the city's attention. In such case, the applicant will investigate
possible alternatives with subsequent review by the individual or body
designated to grant approval. (Ord. 2013-03, 4-3-2013)
10-7A-6: FIGURES:
   FIGURE 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1730.gif]
   FIGURE 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1732.gif]
   FIGURE 3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1734.gif]
   FIGURE 4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1736.gif]
   FIGURE 5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1738.gif]
   FIGURE 6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1740.gif]
   FIGURE 6A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1742.gif]
   FIGURE 7
   Reserved
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1744.gif]
   FIGURE 8
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1746.gif]
   FIGURE 9
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1748.gif]
   FIGURE 10
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1748.gif]
   FIGURE 11
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1750.gif]
   FIGURE 12
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1754.gif]
   FIGURE 13
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/d7d811705d2c18077a5c016b17699a8d6b927746/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1756.gif]
(Ord. 2013-03, 4-3-2013)
CHAPTER 8
NONCOMPLYING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS; NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
10-8-1: Repairs And Alterations
10-8-2: Insufficient Parking
10-8-3: One Year Vacancy
10-8-4: Occupancy Within One Year
10-8-5: Change Of Use
10-8-6: Recreational Vehicles Occupied For More Than Thirty Days
10-8-1: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
   A.   Maintenance repairs are allowed on noncomplying buildings or
structures, or to a building or structure housing a nonconforming use, so long
as such repairs do not enlarge nor extend such nonconforming use.
   B.   Buildings or structures on commercial or residential lots, which have
become noncomplying or whose uses have become nonconforming because of LaVerkin
City action, i.e., rezoning or ordinance changes, may be torn down and
reconstructed if: 1) they are involuntarily destroyed in whole or in part due
to fire or other calamity, and their use has not been abandoned, or 2) all
other zoning, beautification, and building requirements are met. In such cases
where current zoning requirements would create an unreasonable hardship, the
city council may approve reconstruction maintaining the existing noncomplying
or nonconforming conditions. Requests for such reconstruction may be made in
conjunction with conditional use requests through planning commission and city
council. (Ord. 2011-05, 4-20-2011)
10-8-2: INSUFFICIENT PARKING:
A building or structure that is nonconforming because of a lack of sufficient
automobile parking space in connection therewith, as required by this title,
may be altered or enlarged only after additional automobile parking space is
supplied to bring the building or structure and addition into compliance. (Ord.
2004-28, 10-20-2004; amd. Ord. 2005-33, 9-21-2005)
10-8-3: ONE YEAR VACANCY:
A building or structure or portion thereof occupied by a nonconforming use
which is or hereinafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied by a
nonconforming use for a continuous period of one year, shall not thereafter be
occupied except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district
in which it is located. (Ord. 2004-28, 10-20-2004; amd. Ord. 2005-33, 9-21-
2005)
10-8-4: OCCUPANCY WITHIN ONE YEAR:
A vacant building or structure may be occupied by a use for which the building
or structure was designed if occupied within a period of one year after the use
became nonconforming. (Ord. 2004-28, 10-20-2004; amd. Ord. 2005-33, 9-21-2005)
10-8-5: CHANGE OF USE:
The nonconforming use of a building or structure may not be changed, except to
a conforming use. The use shall not thereafter be changed back to a
nonconforming use. (Ord. 2004-28, 10-20-2004; amd. Ord. 2005-33, 9-21-2005)
10-8-6: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES OCCUPIED FOR MORE THAN THIRTY DAYS:
The provisions of sections
10-8-3 and
10-8-4 of this chapter shall not apply to recreational vehicles. In the case of
recreational vehicles occupied consecutively for more than thirty (30) days
prior to the passage date hereof, the continued, uninterrupted occupancy of
said vehicles shall be considered a nonconforming use. However, if such a
recreational vehicle becomes unoccupied and remains dormant for a period of
twenty one (21) consecutive days, or if it is removed at all from the lot where
it has rested to any other locations, even if later returned to the same lot,
the nonconforming status of the recreational vehicle shall be considered
terminated, and the city may enforce the provisions of this section. A lot or
parcel of property on which a nonconforming recreational vehicle has rested
shall not itself be considered nonconforming, and once the recreational vehicle
is removed or loses its nonconforming status, use of the lot or portion must
thereafter be consistent with all provisions of this zoning ordinance, and
consequently, later use of the lot or portion for temporary recreational
vehicles may only be for thirty (30) days or less. (Ord. 2004-28, 10-20-2004;
amd. Ord. 2005-33, 9-21-2005)
CHAPTER 9
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purposes
10-9-2: Permit Required
10-9-3: Classification
10-9-4: Application
10-9-5: Staff Investigation
10-9-6: Public Hearing
10-9-7: Determination
10-9-8: Inspection
10-9-9: Expiration
10-9-10: Modification Or Revocation
10-9-11: Appeal Of Decision
10-9-1: PURPOSES:
The purpose of a conditional use permit is to allow proper integration of uses
into the community which may only be suitable in specific locations, may be
consistent with the purpose of a zone district only under certain
circumstances, and/or may have potentially detrimental effects to surrounding
properties if not properly designed, located and conditioned. (Ord. 2004-12, 5-
19-2004)
10-9-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A conditional use permit shall be required for all uses listed as conditional
uses in the district regulations or elsewhere in this title. No building permit
or other permit or license shall be issued for a use requiring conditional use
without first being reviewed and/or approved by the planning commission and the
city council. (Ord. 2004-12, 5-19-2004)
10-9-3: CLASSIFICATION:
Conditional use permits shall fall into three (3) classifications:
   A.   Class A: No inspection required. No notification required.
   B.   Class B: May require one inspection. May require notification.
   C.   Class C: Will require inspections and notification. (Ord. 2004-12, 5-
19-2004)
10-9-4: APPLICATION:
Application for conditional use permit shall be made by the property owner,
developer or certified agent on a form authorized by the city. Application
shall be filed with the planning commission with proper fee, maps, drawings,
statements, other documents as required and the following information:
   A.   Name and address of applicant;
   B.   Title report showing that applicant is the owner or the certified agent
for property on which proposed use will be located, except for proposed utility
right of way;
   C.   Address and legal description of the property;
   D.   Statement indicating the nature of the proposed use with any other data
pertinent to the granting of a use permit;
   E.   Current property ownership information necessary to satisfy
notification requirements, which shall include names and mailing addresses of
all owners of property located within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior
boundaries of the subject property, and a copy of the plat map on which
property locations are keyed to ownership information. (Ord. 2004-12, 5-19-
2004)
10-9-5: STAFF INVESTIGATION:
The zoning official or his designate shall make an investigation of the
application, subject to the standards set forth herein and shall report to the
planning commission, with a recommendation to grant, conditionally grant, or
deny an application for a conditional use permit. Such report shall be
available to applicant prior to the public meeting. (Ord. 2004-12, 5-19-2004)
10-9-6: PUBLIC HEARING:
No public hearing shall be required; however, a hearing may be held when the
planning commission or city council shall determine that a hearing would serve
the public interest. During the public meeting where the conditional use is
heard, the planning commission may recommend to grant, grant with conditions,
or deny the conditional use to the city council. Such recommendation shall not
be heard by city council less than fourteen (14) days following the planning
commission public meeting. Upon such hearing by the city council, that body may
grant, grant with conditions or deny the conditional use request. Recommended
conditions by planning commission shall be considered part of the conditional
use unless specifically changed by the conditions stated by the city council. A
conditional use permit may also be made revocable, may be granted for a limited
time period based on factors calling for a temporary permit, or may be granted
subject to such conditions as the city council may prescribe. (Ord. 2004-12, 5-
19-2004)
10-9-7: DETERMINATION:
A conditional use may be located within any district in which the particular
conditional use is permitted by the use regulations of this title. In
authorizing any conditional use, the city council shall impose such
requirements and conditions as are necessary for the protection of adjacent
properties and the public welfare. The city council shall not authorize a
conditional use permit, unless the evidence presented is such as to establish:
   A.   That the proposed use of the particular location is necessary or
desirable to provide a service or facility which will contribute to the general
well being of the community and the neighborhood; and
   B.   That such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case,
be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvements in the
vicinity; and
   C.   The purposed use will comply with regulations and conditions specified
in this title for such use.
Conditions imposed by the city council may include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Drainage;
      2.   Sewer;
      3.   Water and other utility requirements;
      4.   Special yards;
      5.   Open spaces;
      6.   Buffers;
      7.   Fences and walls;
      8.   Installation and maintenance of landscaping;
      9.   Street dedications and improvements;
      10.   Vehicular ingress and egress;
      11.   Traffic circulation and regulation;
      12.   Signs;
      13.   Hours of operation;
      14.   Methods of operation;
      15.   Potential nuisances;
      16.   Building and yard maintenance;
      17.   Development standards;
      18.   Development schedules;
      19.   A variance from board of adjustment if applicable;
      20.   Such other conditions as the council may deem necessary to ensure
compatibility of the use with surrounding developments and uses and to preserve
the public health safety and welfare. The city council may require that the
applicant prepare and record covenants running with the land which under the
conditions are binding upon the applicants and their successors. (Ord. 2004-12,
5-19-2004)
10-9-8: INSPECTION:
Following the issuance of a conditional use permit, the building inspector
shall approve an application for a building permit and shall ensure that
development is undertaken and completed in compliance with said conditional use
and building permit. (Ord. 2004-12, 5-19-2004)
10-9-9: EXPIRATION:
Unless otherwise specified in the action granting a conditional use permit, a
permit which has not been utilized within twelve (12) months from its effective
date shall become null and void. Once any portion of the conditional use permit
is utilized, the other portions and conditions related thereto become
immediately operative and must be strictly observed. Utilization shall be
construed to mean pouring of concrete, or commencement of framing on
construction, or commencement of the use or uses for which the permit was
granted, and reasonable progress thereafter toward full completion of the
contemplated project.
A conditional use permit for a temporary use may be issued for a maximum period
of six (6) months. The building official may grant an extension of six (6)
months when deemed in the public interest with renewals at his discretion, for
not more than three (3) successive periods thereafter. The permit shall be
nontransferable. (Ord. 2004-12, 5-19-2004)
10-9-10: MODIFICATION OR REVOCATION:
The city council may modify or revoke a conditional use permit, following
notice and a hearing. A conditional use permit may be modified or revoked if
the city council finds one or more of the following:
   A.   The permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud,
   B.   The specific use for which the permit was granted is not being
exercised; or
   C.   Noncompliance with conditions imposed upon said use permit. (Ord. 2004-
12, 5-19-2004)
10-9-11: APPEAL OF DECISION:
Any person shall have the right to appeal the decision to grant, grant with
conditions or deny a conditional use permit. Such appeal shall be made to the
board of adjustment.
Any person or entity desiring a special exception may apply to the board of
adjustment in the terms of this title as applied to zoning districts; providing
a landowner relief in extraordinary cases where the board of adjustment finds
the existing special fact and circumstances specified therein as sufficient to
warrant a diversion from the general rule. Special exceptions are not to be
granted liberally. (Ord. 2004-12, 5-19-2004)
CHAPTER 10
OFF STREET PARKING
SECTION:
10-10-1: Required
10-10-2: Size
10-10-3: Access To Individual Spaces
10-10-4: Number Of Spaces
10-10-5: Specifications
10-10-6: Vehicle Condition
10-10-7: Location Of Gasoline Pumps
10-10-8: Maintenance Of Lots
10-10-1: REQUIRED:
At the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in
capacity or any use is established, there shall be provided off street parking
spaces for automobiles in accordance with the following requirements. (Ord. 99-
07, 6-16-1999)
10-10-2: SIZE:
The dimensions of each off street parking space shall be at least nine feet by
eighteen feet (9' x 18'). Handicap spaces will meet ADA requirements and other
local, state, and federal laws designed to accommodate persons with physical
disabilities. (Ord. 99-07, 6-16-1999; amd. Ord. 2002-08, 7-17-2002)
10-10-3: ACCESS TO INDIVIDUAL SPACES:
Except for one-family and two-family dwellings, access to each parking space
shall be from a private driveway and not from a public street. (Ord. 2009-02,
2-18-2009)
10-10-4: NUMBER OF SPACES:
The number of off street parking spaces required shall be as follows:
Automotive repair                       1 parking space for each 150 square
                                        feet of floor area
Business or professional offices        1 parking space for each 200 square
                                        feet of floor area
                                        1 parking space for each 3.5 fixed
Churches with fixed seating             seats, or 1 parking space for each 7
                                        feet of linear pew, whichever is
                                        greater
Churches without fixed seats, sports    1 parking space for each 3.5 seats of
arenas, auditoriums, theaters,          maximum seating capacity
assembly halls, meeting rooms
Day nurseries in commercial zones,      1 parking space for each staff member
including preschools and nursery        plus 1 parking space for each 10
schools                                 children
Dwellings                               2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit
Facility with auditorium                1 parking space for each 200 square
                                        feet of floor area
Furniture and appliance stores          1 parking space for each 600 square
                                        feet of floor area
Hospitals                               2 parking spaces for each bed
                                        1 space for each employee working on
Nursing homes                           the highest employment shift, plus 1
                                        space for each 5 beds
Restaurants, taverns, private clubs,    1 parking space for each 3.5 seats or 1
and all other similar dining and/or     parking space for 100 square feet of
drinking establishments                 floor area (excluding kitchen, storage,
                                        etc.), whichever is greater
Retail stores, shops, except as         1 parking space for each 200 square
provided for furniture and appliance    feet of retail floor space
stores above
                                        As determined by conditional use permit
Shopping centers and other groups of    or planned unit development procedure,
uses not listed above                   if applicable, or by planning
                                        commission
                                        See sections
                                        10-6A-2-1,
                                        10-6B-2-1,
Transient lodging facilities (BnB/VR)   10-6D-2-1, and 10-6D1-2-1 of this
(pertaining to bed and breakfast (BnB)  title, summarized as 1.1 spaces for
and vacation rental (VR) facilities)    each living or sleeping unit, plus not
                                        less than 2 additional parking spaces
                                        for resident family in BnB facilities,
                                        plus parking space for all accessory
                                        uses as herein specified
Transient lodging facilities (non-BnB/  1.1 spaces for each living or sleeping
VR) (including, but not limited to,     unit, plus not less than 3 additional
hotels, motels, motor hotels, lodges,   parking spaces for employee parking,
inns, etc., but not including bed and   plus parking space for all accessory
breakfast and vacation rental           uses as herein specified
facilities)
                                        As determined by conditional use permit
                                        or by planned unit development
Wholesale establishments, warehouses,   requirements, if applicable, or by the
manufacturing establishments and all    planning commission, but in no case
industrial uses                         fewer than 1 space for each employee
                                        projected for the highest employment
                                        shift
                                        As determined by the building
All other uses not listed above         inspector, based on the nearest
                                        comparable use standards
 
(Ord. 99-07, 6-16-1999; amd. Ord. 2015-07, 8-19-2015)
10-10-5: SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Driveways Required: Building permits for new home construction and new
garage construction shall specify and require a driveway from the main or front
entrance of each garage to the point where the lot line abuts a public or
private street. Each driveway shall be constructed of either asphalt or cement
and shall be at least the width of the garage opening plus two feet (2'),
except in the case of a flag lot which shall be subject to the width and
surface requirements set forth in section
10-7-12 of this title.
   B.   Number: Not more than two (2) driveways shall be used for each one
hundred feet (100') or fraction thereof of frontage on any street utilizing
high back curb and gutter.
   C.   Distance: No two (2) of said driveways shall be closer to each other
than twelve feet (12').
   D.   Curb Cutting: Each driveway cut in high back curb shall be not more
than thirty five feet (35') in width, measured at right angles to the
centerline of the driveway, except as increased by permissible curb return
radii. The entire flare of any return radius shall fall within the right of
way.
   E.   Corner Lot: No driveway shall be closer than twenty five feet (25') to
the intersection, measured along the property line.
   F.   Safety Island: In all cases in commercial zones where there is an
existing high back curb and gutter or sidewalk on the street, the applicant for
a permit shall provide a safety island along the entire frontage of the
property, except for the permitted driveway. On the two (2) ends and street
side of each such island shall be constructed a concrete curb, the height,
location and structural specifications of which shall be approved by the city
engineer. (Ord. 2006-32, 10-4-2006)
   G.   Shared Parking Facilities: Shared parking facilities may be used
jointly with parking facilities for other uses when operations are not normally
conducted during the same hours, or when peak uses vary.
Requests for shared parking are subject to the approval of the planning
commission. Requests shall be subject to the following guidelines. Sufficient
evidence shall be presented to show that there will be no substantial conflict
in the periods of peak demand of uses for which the joint use is proposed.
      1.   The number of parking stalls which may be credited against the
requirements for the uses involved will not exceed the number of spaces that
may normally be required for any one of the uses sharing the parking.
      2.   Parking facilities shall not be located further than two hundred
feet (200') from any use proposing to use such parking and should be contiguous
to the businesses sharing the lot.
      3.   A written agreement shall be executed by all parties concerned
assuring the continued availability of shared parking facilities in the event
that one of the uses shall be sold or otherwise change ownership or management.
(Ord. 99-07, 6-16-1999; amd. Ord. 2006-32, 10-4-2006)
   H.   Overflow Parking: All parking lots or stalls in excess of the minimum
requirements for section
10-10-4 of this chapter constitute overflow parking, and may be provided at the
property or business owner's discretion. (Ord. 2002-08, 7-17-2002; amd. Ord.
2006-32, 10-4-2006)
10-10-6: VEHICLE CONDITION:
All vehicles parked on streets or in off street parking must be in running
condition. Any parking of vehicles not in running condition will be deemed a
nuisance. (Ord. 99-07, 6-16-1999)
10-10-7: LOCATION OF GASOLINE PUMPS:
Gasoline pumps shall be set back not less than eighteen feet (18') from any
street line to which the pump island is vertical and twelve feet (12') from any
street line to which the pump island is parallel, and not less than ten feet
(10') from any residential or agricultural district boundary line. If the pump
island is set at an angle on the property, it shall be so located that the
automobiles stopped for service will not extend over the property line. (Ord.
99-07, 6-16-1999)
10-10-8: MAINTENANCE OF LOTS:
Every parcel of land used as a public or private parking lot shall be developed
and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
   A.   Required: Each parking lot shall be permanently maintained. (Ord. 99-
07, 6-16-1999)
   B.   Surfacing: Each off street parking lot shall be surfaced with an
asphaltic or concrete pavement so as to provide a dustless surface; the parking
area shall be so graded as to dispose of all surface water. If such water is
carried to adjacent streets, it shall be piped under sidewalks. Overflow
parking lots or stalls may be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, gravel or other
all weather surface so as to provide for a dustless surface. (Ord. 2002-08, 7-
17-2002)
   C.   Screening: The sides and rear of any off street parking lot which face
or adjoin a residential district shall be screened from such district by a
masonry wall or solid visual barrier fence eight feet (8') in height.
   D.   Lighting: Lighting used to illuminate any parking lot shall be arranged
to reflect the light away from adjoining premises in any residential district
and from street traffic. (Ord. 99-07, 6-16-1999)
CHAPTER 11
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Purpose And Objectives
10-11-2: General Requirements
10-11-3: Definitions
10-11-4: Permit Process
10-11-5: Classification Of Signs
10-11-6: Prohibited Signs
10-11-7: Exempt Signs
10-11-8: Sign Standards
10-11-9: Unlawful Signs, Sign Removal, And Indemnification
10-11-10: Disposal Of Signs
10-11-11: Area And Height Computation
10-11-12: Sign Standards Table For Residential, Industrial And Commercial Zones
10-11-13: Nonconforming Signs
10-11-14: Violations And Remedies
10-11-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
   A.   The purpose of these sign regulations is to encourage the effective use
of signs as a means of communication in the city; to maintain and enhance the
aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic
development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize
the adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to
enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions.
Accordingly, the city adopts these regulations to provide for a healthy
business environment considering safety aspects while maintaining those
aesthetic qualities reflective of the natural surroundings. This chapter is
adopted under the zoning authority of the city in furtherance of the more
general purposes set forth in this zoning title. It supersedes all previous
ordinances or sections pertaining to the same.
   B.   The goals to be achieved by these regulations are:
      1.   To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in
commercial and industrial zones, and a limited variety of signs in other zones,
subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this chapter;
      2.   To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive and incidental to
the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to
the substantive requirements of this chapter, but without a requirement for
permits;
      3.   To provide for temporary signs without commercial messages in
limited circumstances in the public right of way;
      4.   To prohibit the construction of any new off premises signs
throughout the city;
      5.   To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter;
      6.   To stimulate harmony within the community while allowing for
competitive opportunities and protection of property values to preserve a
healthy business environment and a sustainable economy;
      7.   To create a city image that reflects the surrounding natural scenic
grandeur;
      8.   To establish a visual management corridor along scenic Highway 9;
      9.   Provision for the safety of pedestrians and motorists and promotion
and protection of the public welfare; and
      10.   To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2005-41, 12-21-2005)
10-11-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted,
created or maintained in the city only in conformance with the standards,
procedures, exemptions and other requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Sign Approval: Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful and
an infraction to erect or maintain any sign or outdoor advertising structure in
the city of LaVerkin without first obtaining the approval of the planning
commission for said sign or advertising structure, the giving of which shall be
based upon the provisions of this title. Said approval shall not be required
for exempt signs that meet the requirements of this title.
   C.   Variances: Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of
the requirements of this chapter as applied to a sign that such person owns,
leases, or in which such person holds some other beneficial interest, may apply
to the board of adjustment for a variance in accordance with this title.
   D.   Appeals: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission
may appeal in writing within fifteen (15) days of said decision pursuant to
this title. (Ord. 2005-41, 12-21-2005)
10-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in
this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in this
zoning title shall be given the meanings set forth in such title. All other
words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for
reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this
chapter.
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict
action or create a special effect or scene. A sign on which the message changes
more than eight (8) times per day.
BANNER: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently
mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or more edges.
National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any
institution or business, shall not be considered banners.
BEACON: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or
directed on one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source;
also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BILLBOARD: A freestanding sign that exceeds the maximum allowable dimensions of
freestanding signs as set forth in this title.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The building inspector of the city or his or her designee.
BUILDING MARKER: Any sign indicating the name of a building and date and
incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry
surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
BUILDING SIGN: Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a
freestanding sign.
CANOPY SIGN: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or
other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance,
window, or outdoor service.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or
illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or
the surface of the sign.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that,
directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business,
product, service, or other commercial activity.
FLAG: Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or
symbols, used as a symbol of government, political subdivision or other
official entity.
FLAGPOLE: A tall staff or pole on which a flag is raised; a strong rod or stick
with a specialized utilitarian purpose.
FREESTANDING SIGN: Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed
on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or
other structure.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Any sign which indicates the business name or official
entity.
INCIDENTAL SIGN: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary
to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as "no parking",
"entrance", "loading only", "telephone" and other similar directives. No sign
with a commercial message shall be considered incidental.
LOT: Any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the boundaries
of which have been established by some legal instrument of record that is
recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership.
MARQUEE: Any permanent roof like structure projecting beyond a building or
extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally
designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind. Individual pennants shall not
measure more than eight inches by fifteen inches (8" x 15") triangle.
PERSON: Any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or
partnership, singular or plural, of any kind.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not
limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs
connected to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as
signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on
vehicles parked and visible from the public right of way, unless said vehicle
is used in the normal day to day operations of the business.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot on which it is located. Zone lots with multiple principal uses may have
multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages and other clearly
accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that
its leading edge extends more than six inches (6") beyond the surface of such
building or wall.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses
that contains no commercial message.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a
building, supported by the roof structure and extending vertically above the
highest portion of the roof.
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or
essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that
no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof
and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a
space of more than six inches (6").
SETBACK: The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the
applicable building or structure that uses any color, form, graphic,
illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or
identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of
any kind to the public.
SIGN: Any device, fixture, placard, or structure, including banners and flags,
that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to
advertise, announce the purpose of, show support for, or identify the purpose
of a person, entity or cause, or to communicate information of any kind to the
public.
STREET: A strip of land or way subject to vehicular or pedestrian traffic that
provides direct or indirect access to property, including, but not limited to,
alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives, highways, lanes, places, roads,
terraces, trails or other thoroughfares.
STREET FRONTAGE: The distance for which a lot line adjoins a public street,
from one lot line intersecting said street to the farthest distant lot line
intersecting the same street.
SUSPENDED SIGN: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal
plane surface and is supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently
mounted. The signs shall be removed when the event advertised is complete or
within six (6) months of installation.
TIME/TEMPERATURE SIGN: An animated sign on which the only copy that changes is
an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature.
VISUAL CORRIDOR: In recognition of the role that visitation to Zion national
park plays in attracting economic development to the city of LaVerkin, there is
hereby created a visual management corridor. This is defined as the area east
of mile marker 13 on Highway 9 to the town of Virgin town limits. The
boundaries for the purpose of regulating signage and building to minimize
distraction of views and scenery will be three hundred feet (300') or all of
any commercial zone abutting SR9, whichever is greater.
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches (6") of, a
wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits
of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such
wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to
communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or
service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and
is visible from the exterior of the window.
ZONE LOT: A parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient size to
meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage and use, and that can
provide such yards and other open spaces as required by zoning regulations.
(Ord. 2005-41, 12-21-2005; amd. Ord. 2024-09, 3-6-2024) 
10-11-4: PERMIT PROCESS:
   A.   Permits In General: The approval of the planning commission shall be
evidenced by a permit issued by the building inspection division. All signs
shall be constructed and all permits shall be issued in accordance with the
provisions of the applicable building related code(s).
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   A permit is required if a sign requiring a permit under the
provisions of this chapter is to be placed, constructed, erected, or modified
on a zone lot. The owner of the lot shall secure a sign permit prior to the
construction, placement, erection, or modification of such a sign in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
         a.   Flag Poles greater than twenty-five feet (25') in height are
required to get a building permit from the city which includes plans and
specifications stamped by a licensed structural and electrical engineer to
assure proper grounding, strength, wind resistance, seismic loads, and other
relevant engineering requirements as required by the building codes.
      2.   The property owner shall maintain in force, at all times, a sign
permit for such sign in accordance with this section.
      3.   No sign permit of any kind shall be issued for an existing or
proposed sign unless such sign is consistent with the requirements of this
chapter.
   C.   Off Premises Permits: Permits for off premises nonconforming signs
shall be renewed on an annual basis. Applications for permits, or for the
renewal of permits, shall require the applicant to disclose the owner of the
sign and the owner of the property on which the sign is or will be located, all
relevant dates in regard to expiration of any lease or lease option, the date
and cost of construction of the sign, the date and cost of any modification of
the sign, the fair market value as appraised for property tax purposes, the
date the sign will be depreciated for federal income tax purposes, the cost of
operating the sign, and any other information reasonably required by the
planning commission.
   D.   Revocation: A permit may be revoked and a sign removed pursuant to this
code if the applicant for a permit makes a false or misleading statement in the
permit application or renewal.
   E.   Permit Procedures: The following procedures shall govern the
application for and the issuance of all sign permits under this chapter:
      1.   Application For Permit: All applications for sign permits shall be
submitted to the building inspector on an application form provided by the
building inspector. Any sign requiring a conditional use permit shall make
application for planning commission review. Planning commission shall set the
conditions for the signage in question. Any appeal of the planning commission
decision shall go before city council.
      2.   Fees: Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by the
applicable fees set forth in this section, which shall be established by the
city council from time to time by resolution.
      3.   Completeness: Within five (5) days of receiving an application for a
sign permit, the building inspector shall review it for completeness. If the
building inspector finds that it is complete, the application shall then be
processed. If the building inspector finds that it is incomplete, the building
inspector shall, within such five (5) day period, send a notice to the
applicant of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with
appropriate references to the applicable sections of this chapter.
      4.   Action On Plan:
         a.   Approve Or Reject: The building inspector shall either:
            (1)   Approve the proposed plan if the sign as shown on the plan
and the plan itself conforms in every respect with the requirements of this
chapter; or
            (2)   Reject the proposed plan if the sign as shown on the plan or
the plan itself fails in any way to conform to the requirements of this
chapter. In the case of a rejection, the building inspector shall specify in
the rejection the section or sections of this chapter with which the plan is
inconsistent.
         b.   Permits To Construct Or Modify: Signs identified in this chapter
as requiring a permit, may be installed or created only in accordance with a
duly issued and valid sign construction permit from the building inspector.
Such permits shall be issued only in accordance with the following requirements
and procedures:
            (1)   Permit For New Sign Or Sign Modification: An application for
construction, creation or installation of a new sign or for modification of an
existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the dimensions,
design, structure and location of each particular sign then in effect for the
zone lot. One application and permit may include multiple signs on the same
zone lot.
            (2)   Inspection: The building inspector shall cause an inspection
of the zone lot for which each permit for a new sign or for modification of an
existing sign is issued during the six (6) month period after the issuance of
such permit or at such earlier date as the owner may request. If the
construction is not substantially complete at the time of inspection, the
permit shall lapse and become void. If the construction is substantially
complete, but not in full compliance with this chapter and applicable codes,
the building inspector shall give the owner or applicant notice of the
deficiencies and shall allow an additional thirty (30) days from the date of
inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not
corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse. All records on permitted signs
shall be kept and maintained at the city offices by the building inspector.
         c.   Term Of Permit; Renewable: The owner of a zone lot containing
signs requiring a permit under this chapter shall at all times maintain in
force a sign permit for such property. Sign permits shall be issued for
individual zone lots, notwithstanding the fact that a particular zone lot may
be included with other zone lots in a common signage plan. Sign permits shall
be issued for twelve (12) months. Signs shall be automatically renewed so long
as no changes have occurred or the sign permit has not lapsed.
            (1)   Initial Sign Permit: An initial sign permit shall be issued
by the building inspector covering the period from the date of the inspection
of the completed sign installation, construction, or modification through the
last day of the calendar year.
            (2)   Lapse Of Sign Permit: A continuing sign permit shall lapse if
not renewed or if the business license for the premises lapses, is revoked or
is not renewed. A sign permit shall also lapse if the business activity on the
premises is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days or more
and is not renewed within thirty (30) days of a notice from the city to the
last permittee, sent to the premises, that the sign permit will lapse if such
activity is not renewed.
            (3)   Assignment Of Sign Permits: A current and valid sign permit
shall be freely assignable to a successor as owner of the property or holder of
a business license for the same premises, subject only to filing such
application as the building inspector may require and paying any applicable
fee.
   F.   Fee Schedule: The fees for sign permits and plans shall be as
established by resolution of the city council. This fee schedule may be
modified from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 2005-41, 12-21-2005; amd. Ord.
2007-24, 8-15-2007; Ord. 2024-09, 3-6-2024)
10-11-5: CLASSIFICATION OF SIGNS:
Every sign erected or proposed to be erected within the city of LaVerkin shall
be classified by the planning commission in accordance with the definitions of
signs contained in this chapter. Any sign which does not clearly fall within
one of the classifications shall be placed in the classification which the
sign, in view of its design, location, and purpose, most clearly approximates
in the opinion of the planning commission. (Ord. 2005-41, 12-21-2005)
10-11-6: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
In addition to any sign not specifically permitted or allowed in accordance
with this chapter, the following signs are prohibited:
   A.   Billboards; Off Premises Signs: No outdoor off premises advertising
signs shall be constructed or erected after the effective date hereof. Any
replacement sign shall conform to all provisions of this chapter. This
subsection is not meant to prohibit temporary signs off premises advertising
yard sales, open houses, or other similar residential related activities.
   B.   Others Specified: All signs not expressly permitted or allowed under
this chapter or exempt from regulation hereunder in accordance with this
chapter, are prohibited in the city. Such signs include, but are not limited
to:
      1.   Beacons.
      2.   Billboards.
      3.   Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background,
except those exempt in this chapter.
      4.   Inflatable signs and tethered balloons.
      5.   Faded, torn or stained flags are prohibited.
      6.   Signs designed for emitting sound, smoke, or steam.
      7.   Natural object used as a sign. No sign shall be painted on or
affixed to any natural object in its natural location such as, but not limited
to, a boulder, tree, or cliff face.
      8.   Vehicle signs. Signs affixed upon a vehicle, trailer or the like,
parked conspicuously so as to attempt to direct attention to a place of
business in an effort to circumvent the provisions of this chapter. This shall
apply to vehicles parked on either public or private property. This shall not
be construed as to prohibit customized automobile license plates.
      9.   Signs which bear or contain statements, words or pictures of an
obscene or pornographic character (as defined by the U.S. supreme court in
Miller vs. California, 413 U.S. 15, 24 (1973)), and anything that demeans or
otherwise degrades religions, races, sexes or ethnic groups. (Ord. 2005-41, 12-
21-2005)
10-11-7: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs shall be exempt from permit regulation under this chapter:
   A.   No Permit Required: The following signs shall be allowed without a sign
permit under the noted conditions and shall not be included in the
determination of type, number or area of signs allowed on premises. Any other
signs exceeding the conditions specified in this section (i.e., number, size,
type, or area), shall require a permit as prescribed in this chapter. Exempt
signs are subject to the provisions of this chapter regarding the safety,
maintenance, and repair of signs. Exempt signs shall be compatible with the
overall purpose and intent of these regulations.
      1.   Public notices; warnings: Any public notice or warning required by a
valid and applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance.
      2.   Interior signs: Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window
or door, that is not legible from a distance of more than three feet (3')
beyond the lot line of the zone lot or parcel on which such sign is located.
      3.   Holiday lights, decorations: Holiday lights and decorations with no
commercial message.
      4.   Traffic control signs: Traffic control signs on private property,
such as stop, yield and similar signs, the face of which meet department of
transportation standards and which contain no commercial message.
      5.   Construction signs: One nonilluminated sign per construction project
not to exceed eight (8) square feet in area, nor six feet (6') in height, used
to indicate owner, general contractor, architect, and other pertinent
construction data. Such signs shall be erected no more than five (5) days prior
to the beginning of construction for which a valid building permit has been
issued, shall be confined to the construction site, and shall be removed within
five (5) days of completion.
      6.   Directional or instructional signs: Signs not to exceed four (4)
square feet in area, used to identify restrooms, public telephones, walkways or
signs providing direction such as parking lot entrance and exit signs and those
of similar nature. Such signs shall be located entirely on the property to
which they pertain and shall not in any way advertise or otherwise mention a
business. Such signs shall be either wall mounted or freestanding. If
freestanding and such sign is located adjacent to a primary street, it shall be
placed at the driveway or sidewalk entrance to the property closest to the item
being identified. Freestanding directional signs shall not exceed three feet
(3') above grade. If wall mounted, no portion of such sign shall be placed
higher than eight feet (8') above grade. Directional or instructional signs
visible from the public right of way shall not exceed two (2) such signs per
business or business center.
      7.   Flags:
         a.   Flags flown on a temporary basis for purposes of honoring
national or civic holidays.
         b.   Any official flag, pennant, or emblem of any nation, state, city
or other political unit, provided all such flags or emblems shall not exceed
twenty five feet (25') in height.
      8.   Government signs: Governmental signs for traffic control and other
regulatory purposes, street signs, danger signs, and signs of public service
companies indicating danger, notices issued by any court and aids to service or
safety that are erected by or by order of a public officer in the performance
of his public duty.
      9.   Historical or memorial signs: Memorial signs or tablets erected by
recognized historical agencies, names of buildings, dates of erection and
related information, provided the sign be cut into any masonry surface or
inlaid so as to be part of the building and does not exceed two (2) square feet
in area.
      10.   House numbers and nameplates: Signs not exceeding two (2) per
address and each sign not to exceed two (2) square feet in area in all city
zones.
      11.   Open House Signs: Nonilluminated, off site, portable signs, placed
on private property, containing directions to the location of an open house
which is for sale, limited to one sign per intersection corner, not to exceed a
total of five (5) such signs, provided the signs:
         a.   Shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area or four feet (4')
in height; and
         b.   Shall be removed immediately following a scheduled open house.
      12.   Political and campaign signs: Any number of nonilluminated
political or campaign signs on behalf of candidates for public office or
measures on election ballots, provided said signs shall:
         a.   Be placed, posted or erected no earlier than one day following
the candidate filing deadline and shall be removed within four (4) days
following election when candidate is either eliminated or elected;
         b.   Be placed only on private property with the permission of the
property owner;
         c.   Not be located within or over the public right of way.
A fifty dollar ($50.00) fine shall be levied for each day a sign is displayed
after the four (4) day deadline for removal has expired.
      13.   Protective signs: Nonilluminated flat signs of not more than one
square foot each, which contain words protective of an occupant, such as "no
trespassing", "beware of dog", and the like, provided such signs be placed only
at intervals of not less than thirty feet (30') or in compliance with the
requirements of state law. The total number of signs allowed per property shall
be reasonable in number, not to exceed six (6) such signs and shall comply with
the intent of these sign regulations.
      14.   Real estate signs:
         a.   On each street frontage, for any lot or building, one
nonilluminated sign that serves solely to advertise the actual intent to sell,
rent or build to suit, provided:
            (1)   Such sign is located entirely within the property to which
the sign applies;
            (2)   Each individual sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet,
nor four feet (4') in height and the total combined sign area shall not exceed
twelve (12) square feet; and
            (3)   The signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the
sale, rental or lease has been consummated.
      15.   Service station signs: For each service station or other business
selling automotive fuel, one price sign for each street frontage. Each sign
strip not to exceed eight (8) square feet in area. Total price sign shall not
exceed eight feet (8') in height. In addition, one "self/mini/full serve" sign,
not to exceed three (3) square feet in area, is allowed on each end of each
pump island.
      16.   Temporary signs: Temporary signs not exceeding eight (8) square
feet in area pertaining to:
         a.   Fundraisers or events of civic, philanthropic, educational or
religious organizations; provided, that said signs are posted no more than
fourteen (14) days prior to said event and are removed no more than seven (7)
days after an event; or
         b.   Special commercial events, such as grand openings or sales,
provided such sign be displayed no longer than fourteen (14) consecutive days.
No more than one such sign per business shall be displayed at any one time and
no more than two (2) such signs may be displayed during any twelve (12) month
period.
   B.   Maintenance: Repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and
repair of a sign not involving structural, design, color, or character changes
or alterations shall not be considered as creating a sign insofar as requiring
issuance of a sign permit. Such signs must be in conformance with all other
building, structural, and electrical codes and regulations of the city.
Substitution of a new or different advertiser shall not be considered normal
maintenance and shall be considered creating a new sign requiring the issuance
of a sign permit. (Ord. 2005-41, 12-21-2005)
10-11-8: SIGN STANDARDS:
All signs requiring permit approval shall comply with the following standards
and regulations and these standards and regulations shall be considered minimum
requirements in reviewing all applications for sign permits:
   A.   Materials: All signs shall be constructed of permanent materials.
   B.   Attachment: All signs shall be permanently attached to the ground, a
building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or
structure except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs.
   C.   Visibility: No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any streets
in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of traffic or create a
safety hazard.
   D.   Signs On Private Property: Signs shall be allowed on private property
in the city in accordance to specifications set forth in this chapter.
   E.   Signs In The Public Right Of Way: No signs shall be allowed in the
public right of way, except as listed hereafter. Any sign installed or placed
on public property, except in conformance with the requirements of this
section, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In
addition to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover
from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and
disposal of such sign.
      1.   Permanent Signs: Permanent signs, including:
         a.   Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to
post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information such as
chamber of commerce at each city entrance, and direct or regulate pedestrian or
vehicular traffic;
         b.   Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company;
         c.   Information signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines,
pipes or facilities; and
         d.   Awning, projecting and suspended signs projecting over a public
right of way in conformity with the conditions of this chapter.
      2.   Temporary Signs: Temporary signs in accordance with this chapter,
meeting the following requirements:
         a.   No Commercial Message: Such signs shall contain no commercial
message; and
         b.   Emergency Signs: Emergency warning signs erected by a
governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized
or permitted work within the public right of way.
   F.   Fire Escapes: No sign shall be erected in such a manner that any
portion of the sign or its support, will interfere with the use of any fire
escape, exit, or standpipe, or obstruct any required stairway, door,
ventilator, or window.
   G.   Utility Lines: No sign shall be erected or maintained which has less
horizontal or vertical clearance from communication lines and energized
electrical power lines than that prescribed by the laws of the state of Utah or
rules and regulations duly promulgated by agencies thereof.
   H.   Clearance: No sign shall be erected in such a manner that any portion
of the sign or its support will extend over a public or private walkway with a
minimum clearance of less than twelve feet (12').
   I.   School Zones: No sign shall be erected within twenty feet (20') of a
school zone except for those signs designated in this section. (Ord. 2005-41,
12-21-2005)
10-11-9: UNLAWFUL SIGNS, SIGN REMOVAL, AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Compliance With Code: All signs shall be maintained in good structural
condition, in compliance with the appropriate detailed provisions of the
building code relating to design, structural members, and connections. Signs
shall also comply with the provisions of the national electrical code and
additional construction standards hereinafter set forth in this section.
   B.   Abandoned Signs: Any sign, including all structural, support and other
componential elements, which is located on a property, premises or structure
which:
      1.   Becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of one hundred eighty
(180) days or more,
      2.   Pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, or
      3.   Pertains to an occupant or business different from the resident
occupant or business
shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Abandoned signs shall be removed
according to the provisions of this section.
   C.   Dangerous Or Defective Signs: No person shall maintain or permit to be
maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him, any sign which is in a
dangerous or defective condition. Dangerous or defective signs shall be removed
in accordance with this section.
   D.   Unlawful Signs:
      1.   Any sign displayed, erected, installed, suspended, attached, moved,
enlarged, replaced, converted or altered after the effective date hereof, which
does not comply with the provisions of this title, shall be deemed unlawful.
Any work in progress on such sign shall be ordered by the planning commission
or designee to cease immediately and said sign shall be removed in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
      2.   Signs which are not in compliance with this chapter and are
therefore considered unlawful according to this section and which continue to
be in noncompliance according to the provisions of these sign regulations,
shall be deemed unlawful, and shall be removed according to the provisions of
this section.
   E.   Removal Of Signs: The planning commission or designee shall cause to be
removed any sign not in compliance with safety or maintenance standards,
abandoned signs, dangerous or defective signs, or unlawful signs. The planning
commission or designee shall prepare a notice which shall describe the sign and
specify the violation involved and which shall state that if the sign is not
removed or the violation is not corrected within fifteen (15) days, the sign
shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section.
      1.   Notices: All notices shall be mailed by certified mail to the owner
of the property on which the sign is located, the owner of the sign and the
occupant of the property. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found,
notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any, and shall
be posted on said sign or on the premises.
      2.   Time Periods: Any time periods provided in this section shall be
deemed to commence on the date of the certified mailing. If more than one
notice is sent by certified mail, the date of the first notice mailed shall
apply. Signs may be required to be removed as a condition of a conditional use
permit without further notice.
      3.   Appeal: The sign owner or property owner on whose property the sign
is located may appeal the determination ordering removal or compliance by
filing a written notice of appeal with the planning commission within fifteen
(15) days after mailing of the notice pursuant to this chapter.
      4.   Emergency Abatement: Notwithstanding the above, in cases of
emergency, the planning commission or designee may cause the immediate removal
of a dangerous or defective sign without notice. (Ord. 2005-41, 12-21-2005)
10-11-10: DISPOSAL OF SIGNS:
   A.   Authority: Any sign removed by abatement by the planning commission or
designee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become the property
of the city and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the
city. The cost of removal and disposal shall be considered a debt owed to the
city by the owner of the sign and the owner of the property, and may be
recovered in an appropriate court action by the city. The cost of removal and
disposal shall include all incidental expenses incurred by the city in
connection with the sign removal and disposal.
   B.   Emergency Removal: When it is determined by the planning commission or
designee that said sign would cause an imminent danger to the public safety,
and contact cannot be made with the sign owner or property owner, no written
notice shall have to be served. In this emergency, the planning commission or
designee may correct the danger, all costs being charged to the sign owner and
property owner.
   C.   Sale Of Signs: If it shall be necessary for the planning commission or
designee to remove a sign pursuant to the provisions hereof, and it should be
practical to sell or salvage any material derived in the aforesaid removal, the
planning commission may sell the same at private or public sale at the best
price obtainable, and shall keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such
proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the costs of removal to be charged to
the sign owner or property owner. The city may file suit in court to collect
any excess over such proceeds and the cost of such removal shall be levied as
an assessment against the property on which the sign is located. (Ord. 2005-41,
12-21-2005)
10-11-11: AREA AND HEIGHT COMPUTATION:
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign
height:
   A.   Single Faced Signs: The area of a sign face shall be computed by means
of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle or combination thereof that
will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or
other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of
the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the
backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any
supporting framework, bracing or decorative fence or wall when such fence or
wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to
the display itself.
   B.   Multifaced Signs: The sign area for a sign with more than one face
shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from
any one point. When two (2) identical sign faces are placed back to back so
that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such
sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than twenty
four inches (24") apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of
one of the faces.
   C.   Height: The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the
base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component
of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of:
      1.   Existing grade prior to construction; or
      2.   The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any
filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely for locating the sign.
In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height
shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at
the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the
crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to
the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is lower.
   D.   Maximum Total Permitted Sign Area For Zone Lot: The permitted sum of
the area of all individual signs on a zone lot shall be computed by applying
the formulas provided in this chapter to the lot frontage, building frontage,
or wall area, as appropriate, for the zoning district in which the lot is
located. Lots fronting on two (2) or more streets are allowed the permitted
sign area for each street frontage. However, the total sign area that is
oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot's
total sign area allocation that is derived from the lot, building, or wall area
frontage on that street. (Ord. 2005-41, 12-21-2005)
10-11-12: SIGN STANDARDS TABLE FOR RESIDENTIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL
ZONES:
Sign Type Residenti al Zones Size And Number Industrial And   Size And Number
                             Allowable       Commercial Zones Allowable
Sign Type       Residenti al Size And Number  Industrial And   Size And Number
                Zones        Allowable        Commercial Zones Allowable
                                              Conditional use
                                              permit           Conditional use
                                              (commercial      permit
Animated        Prohibite d     X          zones only)
                                              Permitted        Contact city for
                                              (industrial zone size and number
                                              only)
                                                               5 percent wall
                             5 percent wall                    area
Banner          Allowed      area             Allowed          1 per building
                             1 per building                    12 foot
                                                               clearance
Beacon          Prohibite d     X          Prohibited          X
Billboard       Prohibite d     X          Prohibited          X
                                              Allowed
                                              (industrial zone 4 square feet
Building marker Allowed      4 square feet    only)
                                              Permitted        Contact city for
                                              (commercial      size and number
                                              zones only)
                                                               25 percent of
                                                               vertical surface
Canopy          Prohibite d     X          Permitted        of canopy
                                                               12 foot
                                                               clearance
Changeable copy Prohibite d     X          Permitted        64 square feet
                             16 foot                           Contact City for
Flag/Flagpole   Allowed      clearance        Allowed          size and number;
                             25 foot height                    see Note 6
                             32 square feet                    64 square feet
Freestanding    Permitted    5 foot height    Permitted        25 foot height
                             10 foot setback                   10 foot setback
Identification  Allowed      5 percent total  Allowed          20 percent total
                             wall area                         wall area
Incidental      Allowed      6 square feet    Allowed          64 square feet
                                              Conditional use
                                              permit           Conditional use
                                              (commercial      permit
Marquee         Prohibite d     X          zones only)
                                              Permitted        Contact city for
                                              (industrial zone size and number
                                              only)
                                                               2 per building
Pennant         Prohibite d     X          Allowed          12 foot
                                                               clearance
Portable        Permitted    20 square feet   Allowed          20 square feet
                                                               40 square feet
Projecting      Prohibite d     X          Permitted        12 foot
                                                               clearance
Residential     Allowed      20 square feet   Allowed          20 square feet
                                                               40 square feet
Roof            Prohibite d     X          Permitted        1 per principal
                                                               building
                                                               40 square feet
Roof/integral      X         X          Permitted        2 per principal
                                                               building
                                                               20 percent total
                                                               wall area
Suspended       Prohibite d     X          Permitted        1 per entrance
                                                               12 foot
                                                               clearance
                                                               32 square feet
Temporary       Allowed      32 square feet   Allowed          per 50 foot
                                                               frontage
                                              Conditional use
                                              permit           Conditional use
Time/temperatur                               (commercial      permit
e                  X         X          zones only)
                                              Permitted        Contact city for
                                              (industrial zone size and number
                                              only)
Wall            Allowed      1 per building   Allowed          20 percent total
                                                               wall area
Window,         Allowed      20 percent total Allowed          20 percent total
permanent                    area                              area
Window,                      1 per building
temporary       Allowed      20 percent total Allowed          No limitation
                             area
 
Notes:
      1.   Total Signage:
         a.   Residential Zone: Total area of all signs, except building
markers and flags, shall not exceed 64 total square feet.
         b.   Commercial Zone: Total area of all signs, except building markers
and flags, not to exceed 300 total square feet; and should be less than 10
percent of ground floor area.
         c.   Industrial Zone: The total area of all signs, except building
markers and flags, shall not exceed 300 square feet. The total sign area shall
not exceed 10 percent of ground floor area of the principal building.
      2.   Typical Setback: Typical setbacks in residential and commercial
zones shall be 10 feet unless otherwise specified.
      3.   Sign Location In Intersections: Signs shall be located such that
there is at every street intersection, a clear view between heights of 3 feet
and 10 feet within a triangular area formed by the corner and points on the
curb 30 feet from the intersection or entranceway.
      4.   Lots Fronting Two Or More Streets: Lots fronting on 2 or more
streets are allowed the permitted signage for each street frontage, but signage
cannot be accumulated and used on 1 street in excess of that allowed for lots
with only 1 street frontage.
      5.   Total Wall Area: Total wall area shall be computed without using
window area.
   6.   Flagpoles with Flags Taller than 25 feet:
      a.   Where allowed:
         i.   Public Facilities Zone
         ii.   Tourist Resort Commercial Zone
      b.   Compliance with LaVerkin City night sky ordinance:
         i.   Lighting must illuminate from top down.
      c.   Building Permits: See
10-11-4.B.1.a.
      d.   Flag sizes and flagpole heights:
 
Flagpole Structure Maximum Size of Flag
20 feet            4 ft x 6 ft
25 feet            5 ft x 8 ft
30-35 feet         6 ft x 10 ft
40-45 feet         6 ft x 10 ft or 8 ft by 12 ft
50-65 feet         8 ft x 12 ft or 10 ft x 15 ft
 
(Ord. 2005-41, 12-21-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-28, 7-19-2006; Ord. 2024-09, 3-6-
2024)
10-11-13: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the owner of any zone lot or other
premises on which exists a sign that does not conform with the requirements of
this chapter or for which there is no current and valid sign permit shall be
obligated to remove such sign or, in the case of a nonconforming sign, to bring
into conformity with the requirements of this chapter.
   A.   Signs Existing On Effective Date: For any sign existing in the city on
the effective date hereof, an application for a sign permit must be submitted
to the building inspector before the expiration of six (6) months from the
effective date hereof. For any sign on property annexed later, applications for
sign permits shall be submitted within six (6) months of the effective date of
the annexation or within such period as may be established in an annexation
agreement between the city and the landowner. Signs that are the subject of
applications received after the applicable date set forth in this section shall
be subject to all of the terms and conditions of this chapter and shall not be
entitled to the protection of this chapter.
   B.   Nonconforming Existing Signs; Permits And Terms:
      1.   Permit Issued: A sign that would be permitted under this chapter
only with a sign permit, but which was in existence on the effective date
hereof or a later date when the property is annexed to the city, and which was
constructed in accordance with the ordinances and other applicable laws in
effect on the date of its construction, but which by reason of its size,
height, location, design or construction is not in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, shall be issued a nonconforming sign permit if an
application in accordance with subsection A of this section is filed within six
(6) months of the above date or within six (6) months of property annexation.
      2.   Term: Such permit shall allow the signs subject to such permit,
which were made nonconforming by the adoption of this chapter, to remain in
place and be maintained for a period ending no later than five (5) years;
provided, that no action is taken which increases the degree or extent of the
nonconformity. Such signs are also subject to the provisions of subsection B4
of this section. A change in the information on the face of an existing
nonconforming sign is allowed; however, any nonconforming sign shall either be
eliminated or made to conform with the requirements of this section when any
proposed change, repair or maintenance would constitute an expense of more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the lesser of the original value or replacement
value of the sign.
      3.   Lapse Of Nonconforming Sign Permit: A nonconforming sign permit
shall lapse and become void under the same circumstances as those under which
any other sign permit may lapse and become void.
      4.   Sign Removal Required: A sign that was constructed, painted,
installed or maintained in conformance with a permit under this chapter, but
for which the permit has lapsed or for which the time allowed for the
continuance of a nonconforming sign has expired, shall immediately be removed
by the property owner, including the supporting structure, upon the city's
request. (Ord. 2005-41, 12-21-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-28, 7-19-2006)
10-11-14: VIOLATIONS AND REMEDIES:
   A.   Specified Violations: Any of the following shall be a violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided
by this chapter, by this zoning title and by state law:
      1.   To install, create, erect or maintain any sign in a way that is
inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot on
which the sign is located;
      2.   To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit
without such permit;
      3.   To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected or
maintained in violation of this chapter, or for which the sign permit has
lapsed; or
      4.   To continue any such violation. Each such day of a continued
violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty
portions of this title.
   B.   Separate Violation: Each sign installed, created, erected, or
maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate
violation when applying the penalty portions of this title.
   C.   Specified Remedies For Enforcement: Any violation of this chapter or of
any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained,
corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate
proceedings pursuant to state law. A violation of this chapter shall be
considered a violation of this zoning title. The remedies of the city shall
include the following:
      1.   Issuing a stop work order for any work on any signs on the same zone
lot;
      2.   Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that
requires the removal of the sign or the correction of the nonconformity;
      3.   Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the city
under this zoning title;
      4.   Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that can be imposed
by such court under this zoning title; and
      5.   In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public
health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the city under the
applicable provisions of this zoning title and building code for such
circumstances;
      6.   Reimbursement of enforcement costs from the property owner,
including attorney fees; and
      7.   The city shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time
to time be provided for or allowed by state law for the violation of this
zoning title.
   D.   Cumulative Remedies: All such remedies provided herein shall be
cumulative. To the extent that state law may limit the availability of a
particular remedy set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof,
such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the
same violation. (Ord. 2005-41, 12-21-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-28, 7-19-2006)
CHAPTER 12
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Purpose
10-12-2: Applicability
10-12-3: R-1-14 Standards
10-12-4: Condominium Standards
10-12-5: Height Modification Standards
10-12-1: PURPOSE:
The city recognizes that in some instances it may be appropriate to modify
zoning requirements with a development agreement. The regulations set forth in
this chapter outline the requirements for development agreements as referred to
elsewhere in this zoning title.
Items for possible review within the development agreement include: drainage;
sewer; water and other utility requirements; special yards; open spaces;
buffers; fences and walls; installation and maintenance of landscaping; street
dedications and improvements; vehicular ingress and egress; traffic circulation
and regulation; signage; hours and methods of operation; building and yard
maintenance; development standards; development schedules; setbacks; structure
design; lighting; noise; dust; odors and emissions; colors; aesthetics; and
impacts on neighboring properties. Other conditions may be reviewed as the
council may deem necessary to ensure compatibility of the use with surrounding
developments and uses and to preserve the public health, safety and welfare.
The city council may require that the applicant prepare and record covenants,
conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) which are binding upon the applicants and
their successors. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007)
10-12-2: APPLICABILITY:
Applications for development agreements may be considered in the following
cases and as described below:
   A.   R-1-14 zone where it may be desired to reduce frontage or lot size;
   B.   R-3-6 zone where residential condominiums may be desired;
   C.   Retail commercial zone where height restriction modification may be
desired;
   D.   Resort commercial zone where height restriction modification or
residential condominiums may be desired;
   E.   Other situations where city council determines a project subject to a
development agreement, would benefit the community and meet the policies set
forth in the general plan and in this zoning title. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007)
10-12-3: R-1-14 STANDARDS:
It may be appropriate to reduce the minimum size of subdivision lots in the low
density residential zone (R-1-14) from fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet
to not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, provided careful and
creative planning methods are utilized to master plan the subdivision. The city
council may approve a reduction in the minimum required size of subdivision
lots to not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet within the low density
residential zone (R-1-14) subject to the following requirements:
   A.   Planning Commission Recommendation: A request to develop a subdivision
where any lot therein is less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet shall
first be submitted to the planning commission for its recommendation to the
city council after notice and a public hearing before the planning commission
as required by this title.
   B.   Development Agreement:
      1.   Approval of any subdivision with lots less than fourteen thousand
(14,000) square feet shall be contingent upon the developer entering into a
development agreement in form and content as approved by the city council. Such
agreement shall constitute a binding contract between the developer and the
city (the parties) and shall be construed together with the provisions of this
chapter and any conditions attached thereto, to accomplish and give effect to
the purposes set forth herein. The city council, by and through the mayor,
shall be authorized to sign the development agreement(s) on behalf of the city.
      2.   The purpose of the development agreement shall be to specify the
detailed terms and conditions upon which the developer will complete the
subdivision and the covenants, conditions and restrictions that will attach to
the subdivision. The development agreement shall create a vested right in
applicant or its successors or assigns to develop and construct the project as
set forth in the development agreement. Any development agreement may be
amended by mutual written consent of the parties.
         a.   A development agreement, including exhibits incorporated by
reference thereto, entered into pursuant to this chapter shall contain
provisions that:
            (1)   Specify the duration of the agreement;
            (2)   Specify the permitted uses of the property;
            (3)   Specify the permitted density of use or development;
            (4)   Specify the maximum height, dimensions, building materials,
and design of the proposed structures;
            (5)   Set forth the provisions for the reservation or dedication of
lands for public purposes, including, without limitation: parks, roadways,
trails, and utility easements, as applicable;
            (6)   Provide that construction shall be commenced within a
specified time and that the project or any phase thereof shall be completed
within a specified time, which shall be consistent with the expected build out
of the phase. The development agreement may also include a provision which
allows the parties to amend the expected build out calculations approved in the
original development agreement;
            (7)   Provide for periodic review of the status of performance
under the development agreement; and
            (8)   Contain exhibits or attachments thereto that are incorporated
into the agreement by reference, including, but not limited to: a) covenants,
conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs); b) a site plan or plat depicting the
layout of the subdivision, including the dimensions and square footage of all
lots, streets, and other improvements to the subdivision; c) traffic, soil or
any other studies as deemed appropriate by city staff; d) a title report
showing that ownership of the property is vested in the developer or an owner
who has contracted with the developer to transfer title to the property upon
the approval of the subdivision by the city; e) any other document, study or
requirement city staff deems reasonably necessary for the particular
development.
         b.   The parties shall not execute any development agreement prior to
the final approval by the city council as provided under this section.
         c.   An executed development agreement under this section shall be
recorded in the office of the county recorder within ten (10) days after it is
executed by the parties.
      3.   This section is designed to inform applicants and the public of the
requirements and conditions necessary to obtain approval of any subdivision
with lots less than fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet as would otherwise
be required by this title. To this end, all requirements, where possible, are
expressly delineated in this section or other applicable ordinances. However,
since it is impossible to cover every contingency and there are some aspects
which do not lend themselves to be easily articulated, this section allows the
planning commission to recommend and city council to impose reasonable
conditions upon an applicant in addition to those expressly required, so long
as such conditions do not conflict with any requirements set forth in this
section or other applicable ordinances. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007)
10-12-4: CONDOMINIUM STANDARDS:
It may be appropriate to allow condominium projects in the resort commercial
zone or in residential zones where multiple-housing is allowed to achieve
preferable architectural or aesthetic elements, provided careful and creative
planning methods are utilized in the design of the building. The city council
may approve condominium developments subject to the following requirements:
   A.   Planning Commission Recommendation: A request to construct a
condominium project in a multiple-housing residential zone or in the resort
commercial zone shall first be submitted to the planning commission for its
recommendation to the city council after notice and a public hearing before the
planning commission as required by this title. A draft of the development
agreement described below shall be submitted to the planning commission
sufficiently in advance of the public hearing to facilitate discussion of the
proposed development agreement at the public hearing.
   B.   Development Agreement:
      1.   Approval of a condominium project may be approved contingent upon
the developer entering into a development agreement in form and content as
approved by the city council. Such agreement shall constitute a binding
contract between the developer and the city (the parties) and shall be
construed together with the provisions of this chapter and any conditions
attached thereto, to accomplish and give effect to the purposes set forth
herein. The city council, by and through the mayor, shall be authorized to sign
the development agreement(s) on behalf of the city.
      2.   The purpose of the development agreement shall be to specify every
acceptable design, exterior building material and feature, and landscaping of
the building(s), including, but not limited to, building and building
improvement heights. The development agreement shall create a vested right in
the applicant or its successors or assigns to develop and construct the
building(s) as set forth in the development agreement, provided that the
applicant or its successors or assigns commences with construction within one
year and completes construction within two (2) years of the date of execution
of the development agreement. Any development agreement may be amended by
mutual written consent of the parties.
         a.   A development agreement, including exhibits incorporated by
reference thereto, entered into pursuant to this chapter shall contain
provisions that:
            (1)   Specify the term of the agreement;
            (2)   Specify the maximum height, dimensions, building materials,
and design of the proposed building and any improvements thereto or to the
underlying parcel of real property;
            (3)   Provide that construction shall be commenced within a
specified time and that the building shall be completed within a specified
time;
            (4)   Provide for periodic review of the status of performance
under the development agreement; and
            (5)   Contain exhibits or attachments thereto that are incorporated
into the agreement by reference, including, but not limited to: a)
architectural plans; b) building plans; c) landscaping plans; d) lists or
summaries of approved building materials; e) a title report showing that
ownership of the property is vested in the developer or an owner who has
contracted with the developer to transfer title to the property upon the
approval of the subdivision by the city; and f) any other document, study or
requirement the city deems reasonably necessary for the particular building.
         b.   The parties shall not execute any development agreement prior to
the final approval by the city council as provided under this section.
         c.   An executed development agreement under this section shall be
recorded in the office of the county recorder within ten (10) days after it is
executed by the parties. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007)
10-12-5: HEIGHT MODIFICATION STANDARDS:
It may be appropriate to increase the height of buildings to more than fifty-
five feet (55'), and to increase the height of facades, rooflines, and other
non-occupied building improvements (collectively hereafter "building
improvements") to more than sixty-six feet (66'), to achieve preferable
architectural or aesthetic elements, provided careful and creative planning
methods are utilized in the design of the building. The city council may
approve an increase in allowable height of a building or building improvements
subject to the following requirements:
   A.   Planning Commission Recommendation: A request to construct a building
where the proposed building height will exceed fifty-five feet (55') or
building improvements will exceed sixty-six feet (66') shall first be submitted
to the planning commission for its recommendation to the city council after
notice and a public hearing before the planning commission as required by this
title. A draft of the development agreement described below shall be submitted
to the planning commission sufficiently in advance of the public hearing to
facilitate discussion of the proposed development agreement at the public
hearing.
   B.   Development Agreement:
      1.   Approval of any building greater than fifty-five feet (55') or
building improvement greater than sixty-six feet (66') shall be contingent upon
the developer entering into a development agreement in form and content as
approved by the city council. Such agreement shall constitute a binding
contract between the developer and the city (the parties) and shall be
construed together with the provisions of this chapter and any conditions
attached thereto, to accomplish and give effect to the purposes set forth
herein. The city council, by and through the mayor, shall be authorized to sign
the development agreement(s) on behalf of the city.
      2.   The purpose of the development agreement shall be to specify every
acceptable design, exterior building material and feature, and landscaping of
the building, including, but not limited to, building and building improvement
heights. The development agreement shall create a vested right in the applicant
or its successors or assigns to develop and construct the building as set forth
in the development agreement, provided that the applicant or its successors or
assigns commences with construction within one year and completes construction
within two (2) years of the date of execution of the development agreement. Any
development agreement may be amended by mutual written consent of the parties.
         a.   A development agreement, including exhibits incorporated by
reference thereto, entered into pursuant to this chapter shall contain
provisions that:
            (1)   Specify the term of the agreement;
            (2)   Specify the maximum height, dimensions, building materials,
and design of the proposed building and any improvements thereto or to the
underlying parcel of real property;
            (3)   Provide that construction shall be commenced within a
specified time and that the building shall be completed within a specified
time;
            (4)   Provide for periodic review of the status of performance
under the development agreement; and
            (5)   Contain exhibits or attachments thereto that are incorporated
into the agreement by reference, including, but not limited to: a)
architectural plans; b) building plans; c) landscaping plans; d) lists or
summaries of approved building materials; e) a title report showing that
ownership of the property is vested in the developer or an owner who has
contracted with the developer to transfer title to the property upon the
approval of the subdivision by the city; and f) any other document, study or
requirement the city deems reasonably necessary for the particular building.
         b.   The parties shall not execute any development agreement prior to
the final approval by the city council as provided under this section.
         c.   An executed development agreement under this section shall be
recorded in the office of the county recorder within ten (10) days after it is
executed by the parties. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007; amd. Ord. 2023-02, 2-1-2023)
CHAPTER 13
RESERVED
(Ord. 2008-05, 2-20-2008)
CHAPTER 14
RESERVED
(Ord. 2008-05, 2-20-2008)
CHAPTER 15
PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-15A-1: Purpose
10-15A-2: Interpretation
10-15A-3: Definitions
10-15A-4: General Considerations
10-15A-5: General Responsibilities
10-15A-6: Appeals Of Final Decisions
10-15A-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter, and any rules, regulations,
specifications, and procedures hereafter adopted, is to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare through provisions designed to establish a
planned community development zoning district which will:
      1.   Provide for the harmonious and coordinated development of the city
by allowing for the systematic implementation of large residential or mixed use
development proposals;
      2.   Facilitate large scale, mixed use developments incorporating various
types of residential, commercial, and industrial uses and zoning concepts which
may create significant impacts on the city, while maximizing the public benefit
from such developments, and minimizing any adverse impacts of such
developments;
      3.   Provide a streamlined review procedure for such development
proposals designed to accommodate a multiple phased approach to design, and
construction of large residential or mixed use developments;
      4.   Prevent the waste of public and private resources and the escalation
in the cost of development associated with duplicative land development, review
and approval procedures, regulations, and amendments thereto;
      5.   Encourage continuity in design and planning of large residential or
mixed use projects;
      6.   Ensure adequate open space for traffic, recreation, light, and air;
and
      7.   Facilitate the conservation and production of integrated municipal
streets, transportation, water, sanitation, and other related utility systems.
   B.   This chapter is designed to inform applicants and the public of the
requirements and conditions necessary to obtain approval of planned community
developments (PCD) as defined herein. To this end, all requirements, where
possible, are expressly delineated in this chapter or other applicable
ordinances. However, since it is impossible to cover every contingency and
there are some aspects which do not lend themselves to be easily articulated,
this chapter allows the planning commission to recommend and city council to
impose reasonable conditions upon an applicant in addition to those expressly
required, so long as such conditions do not conflict with any requirements set
forth in this chapter or other applicable ordinances.
   C.   This chapter shall provide a consolidated framework for the processing
of preliminary and final PCD project plans and development agreements as
defined under this chapter, and other applicable provisions of LaVerkin City
ordinances.
   D.   The application of the PCD concepts created under this chapter is
intended to ensure substantial compliance with the intent of the zoning
district regulations and other provisions of LaVerkin City zoning ordinance,
and at the same time provide flexibility in order to secure the advantages of
large scale site planning and development for residential, commercial, and
industrial developments, or combinations thereof under the PCD zone
designation. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15A-2: INTERPRETATION:
The express provisions contained in this chapter are intended to provide
procedures for large residential or mixed use development applications and to
outline necessary review procedures. Upon final adoption by the LaVerkin City
council of the PCD project plan and/or development agreement as defined under
this chapter, the adopted project plan and/or development agreement will be
considered the legal basis for the physical development of the land identified
in the project plan and/or development agreement. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15A-3: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever any word or phrase used in this chapter is not defined herein, but is
defined in related sections of the Utah code, or in other LaVerkin City
ordinances, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall apply as they
set forth herein in full, unless the context clearly indicates a contrary
intention.
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, words used in the present tense
include the future, the singular includes the plural, the term "shall" is
always mandatory and the term "may" is permissive. The following terms as used
in this chapter shall have the respective meanings as set forth:
DESIGN GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS: Those specific design criteria for physical
improvements to the land covered by a PCD application which are proposed by an
applicant and approved by the city council.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A binding contract between the city and a planned
community development application wherein the detailed terms and conditions
upon which a planned community development will proceed are agreed upon. The
development agreement specifies any vested rights granted to the applicant or
its successor or assigns.
PCD PROJECT PLAN: A planning document(s) outlining the development of property
located in a specific geographic area of the city. The plan should establish
the general type, land use(s), density, and character of the proposed
development and shall include supplemental information and reports as may be
required.
PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT (PCD): A proposed development, featuring
integrated design for development and construction of residential, commercial,
or industrial uses, or combinations of such uses, which, because of the nature
of the proposed use and/or size of the proposed development, will substantially
impact the entire city, therefore requiring special review. Planned community
developments may include, without limitation, the following characteristics:
   A.   Residential Developments: Residential developments are desired, with an
accumulative project size not less than two hundred (200) acres for all phases
of the proposed development, and not less than six hundred (600) dwelling
units; however, smaller developments may petition the council to allow for a
developmental agreement of at least fifty (50) acres with a density allowance
of one hundred fifty (150) dwelling units, the smallest lot being one-third (1/
3) acre.
   B.   Nonresidential Developments: Nonresidential developments of
accumulative project size of not less than two hundred thousand (200,000)
square feet, excluding parking and loading areas, and not less than two hundred
(200) acres.
   C.   Hospitals: Hospitals which have a design capacity of more than one
hundred (100) beds, or whose application for certificate shows in the statement
of purpose and need that such hospital is designed to serve the citizens of
more than one city or county.
   D.   Mining Operations: Any proposed solid mineral mining operation which
annually requires the removal or disturbance of solid minerals or overburden in
any area, whether or not contiguous, greater than five (5) acres. In computing
the acreage for this purpose, a removal or disturbance of solid materials or
overburden shall be considered part of the same operation if it is all located
within a circle, the radius of which is one mile and the center of which is
located in an area of removal of disturbed solid minerals or overburden;
1. The term "overburden" means the natural covering of a solid mineral sought
to be mined including, but not limited to, soils, sands, rocks, gravel,
limestone, water or peat;
2. The term "solid mineral" includes, but is not limited to, clay, sand,
gravel, phosphate rock, lime, stone, and any rare earths contained in the soils
or waters of this state, which have heretofore been discovered or may be
hereafter discovered;
This definition does not include crushing, extraction, refining or smelting
operations. Such operations are not permitted in a planned community
development.
   E.   Airports: Any new commercial service or general aviation airport with a
paved runway(s).
   F.   Attractions: Any sport, entertainment, amusement, or recreation
facility, including, but not limited to, sports arena, stadium, race track, or
amusement park, the construction and/or expansion of which: 1) provides parking
spaces for more than two hundred (200) cars, or 2) provides more than two
thousand (2,000) permanent seats for spectators. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002; amd.
Ord. 2003-14, 12-17-2003)
10-15A-4: GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   The PCD project plan and any development agreement approved and adopted
by the city council pursuant to this chapter is intended to be utilized as a
master plan in relation to the zoning, regulation, and development of
properties designated therein. The design guidelines and standards approved and
adopted by the city council pursuant to its adoption of the PCD project plan
and/or development agreement shall control and regulate the development and
construction within the project.
   B.   The PCD shall be designed so as to: 1) preserve existing trees, native
land cover, natural watercourses, and topography; 2) prevent excessive grading
and scarring of the landscape; and 3) interface with existing street plans and/
or subdivisions contiguous to the proposed PCD. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15A-5: GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   The applicant shall prepare a PCD project plan consistent with the
requirements and standards contained in this chapter and shall pay for the
design and inspection of the public improvements required by city
specifications or PCD design standards as applicable. The city shall process
the required PCD project plan and/or development agreements in accordance with
the regulations set forth herein. The applicant shall not alter the terrain or
remove any vegetation from the proposed PCD site or engage in any site
development until he/she has obtained the necessary approvals as outlined
herein or required by any other applicable ordinance.
   B.   The city staff shall review the PCD project plan for design, conformity
to this chapter and other applicable ordinances, and shall process the PCD
project plan and application as provided under this chapter.
   C.   The planning commission shall act as an advisory commission to the city
council. It is charged with making investigations, reports, and recommendations
on proposed PCD's as to their conformance to this chapter and other pertinent
ordinances and statutes. The planning commission shall recommend approval,
approval with conditions, or disapproval of the proposed PCD, and/or the PCD
project plan.
   D.   The city attorney shall review the form of any development agreement
provided herein and/or final PCD project plan to determine: 1) if it is correct
and acceptable pursuant to this chapter and that all other applicable
ordinances are complied with; 2) that the individual(s) dedicating land for use
of the public is the owner of record; and 3) that the land dedicated for the
use of the public is free and clear of unacceptable encumbrances according to
the title report, which shall be submitted by the applicant.
   E.   The city manager shall act as a liaison between the planning
commission, city staff, city attorney, and city council. Upon review the final
recommendation by the planning commission, the PCD application and PCD project
plan shall be forwarded to the city manager for presentation to the city
council for final action. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15A-6: APPEALS OF FINAL DECISIONS:
   A.   Any person adversely affected may file a petition for review of the
decision of the city council to the district court. Such petition shall be
filed within thirty (30) days after the final decision is rendered.
   B.   Recommendations made by the planning commission or city staff under
this chapter shall be advisory only and not considered final or subject to
judicial appeal. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
ARTICLE B. APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-15B-1: PCD Application
10-15B-2: Schematic Plan Review
10-15B-3: PCD Project Plan
10-15B-4: Staff Review
10-15B-5: Planning Commission Review
10-15B-6: City Council Review
10-15B-1: PCD APPLICATION:
An application for approval of any PCD shall be filed with the LaVerkin City
staff by a person having an interest in the property for which the PCD is
requested at least sixty (60) days prior to the planning commission meeting at
which the application will be considered. The application shall be made on a
form provided by the city and must include written consent by the owner/owners
of all property to be included in the PCD. The PCD application shall include:
   A.   A map of existing sites;
   B.   A preliminary schematic plan;
   C.   A written statement of intent and objectives;
   D.   A completed application form, which is supplied by the city; and
   E.   Payment of required fees. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15B-2: SCHEMATIC PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   A schematic plan shall be required of all applicants. This provides the
applicant with an opportunity to consult with and receive assistance from the
city regarding the regulations and design requirements applicable under this
chapter and/or pursuant to the development agreement.
   B.   A schematic plan shall include:
      1.   An accurate map showing boundaries, topography, important physical
features, adjacent properties, and a sketch of the proposed PCD land uses,
major roadways, and other items the applicant determines may clarify the intent
of the project; and
      2.   A general statement of intent and long range planning goals and
objectives.
   C.   The schematic plan shall be submitted to the city staff for preliminary
review. After submittal, the staff shall present the schematic plan to the
planning commission at a regularly scheduled planning commission meeting for
their information and preliminary comments.
   D.   The schematic plan requirement is designed to provide the applicant
with helpful information and suggestions before he/she incurs the expense and
time involved in preparing a detailed PCD project plan. However, only the city
council may bind the city and only the city manager and planning commission can
make official recommendations to the city council. The city employees, planning
staff, and individual planning commissioners, may make recommendations,
suggestions, and dispense information regarding applicable ordinances, but such
comments or suggestions shall in no way be binding upon the city. (Ord. 2002-
05, 3-20-2002)
10-15B-3: PCD PROJECT PLAN:
After completion of the schematic review by the city staff and planning
commission, the applicant shall submit a PCD project plan which shall include
the following:
   A.   Map Of Existing Site: The map of the existing site shall show the
following information for the site prior to the demolition of any existing
improvement or alterations to natural vegetation and terrain:
      1.   Vicinity map (scale to be determined by planning staff during plan
review);
      2.   Scale and north arrows;
      3.   Site boundaries, dimensions, and acreage;
      4.   Topography with contours at not greater than ten foot (10')
intervals;
      5.   Existing vegetation, location and types;
      6.   Existing parcel ownership, structures and designation of their
current uses;
      7.   Existing roads and other improvements;
      8.   Location of existing public utilities and utility easements;
      9.   Such other data as may be required as a result of unique conditions
or circumstances associated with the proposed PCD; and a
      10.   Description and location of existing public utilities and services
including fire and police stations, schools, hospitals and their proximity to
the PCD.
   B.   Specific Site Plan: The specific site plan shall consist of a plan
showing the major details of the proposed PCD project together with supporting
information as required hereunder. The plan will be prepared at a scale
determined by the city staff at the schematic plan review stage. The specific
plan guides the creation of the PCD and ensures that the completed development
will meet the standards envisioned at the time of approval. The design
guidelines and standards that are established within the specific plan shall
function as the primary land use regulatory tool establishing the land use
controls, standards, and procedures applicable to development and construction
of the PCD. The specific site plan shall contain the following information:
      1.   Proposed name of the PCD;
      2.   Scale and north arrow;
      3.   Name and address of applicant, owner(s), and the preparer(s) of the
plan;
      4.   All proposed land uses, densities, and proposed units within the
PCD, including a land use summary and population projections for the proposed
units. This section shall also include a comparison of the proposed densities
with the densities permitted in similar LaVerkin City zoning districts;
      5.   Designation of major roads and highways both within the proposed PCD
and those that interface or adjoin the proposed PCD;
      6.   Topography with contours no greater than ten foot (10') intervals;
and
      7.   Public and civic facilities, both currently existing and proposed,
including, without limitation, schools, churches, fire stations, police
stations, hospitals, and existing utility service locations.
   C.   Design Guidelines And Standards: Design guidelines and standards, which
will show in detail the internal land use standards and regulations to be
applied to the PCD, including all proposed land use regulations, procedures,
specifications, as well as specific building and architectural standards and
criteria as applicable. The design guidelines and standards developed and
adopted by the LaVerkin City council shall be the base upon which the PCD
design guidelines and standards will be based.
   D.   Grading: Grading concept plan.
   E.   Utilities Plan: This plan designates the location of main lines for
water, sewer, gas, electric, and phone services.
   F.   General Landscaping Plan: A general landscaping plan designates: 1)
proposed open spaces; and 2) general landscaping criteria, including a list of
plants and materials to be used. These criteria will be followed by a detailed
landscaping plan which will be submitted with the application for final plat
approval on each phase.
   G.   Preliminary Geology And Soils Reports: A more detailed geology and
soils report will be provided with a final plat application on each phase.
   H.   Cultural Resource Study: A cultural resource study is intended to
identify any potential historical or prehistorical resources on the project
site.
   I.   Site Drainage Plan: The site drainage plan includes designation of
existing natural drainage patterns, together with any proposed modifications or
construction of additional drainage and/or retention facilities.
   J.   Traffic: Traffic study and analysis.
   K.   Noise: Noise impact report.
   L.   Light: Light impact report.
   M.   Project Phasing Plan: A project phasing plan outlines approximate time
frames for the beginning and completion of each phase of proposed development
and construction.
   N.   Adjoining Property Owners: The names and addresses of all adjoining
property owners.
   O.   Responsibilities: Construction and maintenance responsibilities.
   P.   Miscellaneous Studies: The applicant shall provide such additional
studies as may be pertinent to the specific site, context, and characteristics
of the proposed PCD, as may be required under state or federal law, including,
without limitation, biology, studies, environmental studies, wetland analysis,
and EPA assessments.
   Q.   Written Statement: The written statement to be submitted with the PCD
application shall contain the following information:
      1.   A statement of purpose and intent; and long range planning goals and
objectives, including design intent, general architectural themes, and
guidelines.
      2.   A statement of the ownership, proposed tenancy and legal description
of the land included in the PCD project plan together with a preliminary title
report.
      3.   A statement of any internal land use standards, regulations, or
covenants, conditions and restrictions which will be applied to properties and
uses within the proposed PCD. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15B-4: STAFF REVIEW:
The city staff shall receive and check the PCD project plan for general
compliance with this chapter and required submissions. If the PCD project plan
is not complete, or not in general compliance, the city staff shall notify the
applicant in writing and specify the respects in which it is deficient. If the
submission is complete and in general compliance, the applicant shall transmit
the requested number of copies of the complete PCD plan, together with all
accompanying data, to those public agencies and utilities as may be concerned,
as designated by the city staff. Each of the public agencies and utilities may,
within fifteen (15) working days, forward to the city staff a written report of
its findings and recommendations. These agencies shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to: improvement districts; Southwest Utah district
health department; school district, city public works department; city
engineer, fire department; and telephone, gas and power companies. The staff
will also provide the city manager with one full set of the PCD project plans
for comment and review. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15B-5: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW:
Within a reasonable time, but not less than sixty (60) days after filing of the
PCD project plan and accompanying data for a staff review, the city manager
shall forward the application and PCD project plan to the planning commission
for review and action thereon. The planning commission shall base its findings
upon the review standards set forth below. If the planning commission shall
find that the proposed PCD project plan complies with the requirements of this
chapter and that it is satisfied with the proposed PCD project plan, it shall
recommend approval, or approval with conditions, of the PCD project plan. If
the planning commission finds that the proposed PCD project plan does not meet
the requirements of this chapter or other applicable ordinances, it shall
recommend disapproval of the PCD project plan and shall include with its
recommendations written findings as to the deficiencies and basis for its
recommendation.
   A.   Review Standards: The planning commission shall review the PCD project
plan for substantial compliance with this chapter. In addition, the planning
commission shall consider the following matters when reviewing the PCD project
plan:
      1.   Consideration relating to traffic safety and traffic flow patterns,
including, without limitation, the city engineer's analysis of the effect of
the PCD project plan on traffic conditions on adjoining streets and circulation
patterns within the boundary of the proposed PCD;
      2.   General signage proposals including design standards, tentative
locations, and lighting of signage;
      3.   General landscaping plans including proposed materials, landscaping
guidelines, and proposed dedicated open spaces, parks, etc;
      4.   Considerations relating to the presence of hazards on the site,
including, without limitation: a) the location of any floodplains or channels;
b) the location of any unstable soils formations or geologic formations,
including known earthquake faults; and c) the location of critical public
facilities such as schools, churches, utilities, or transportation corridors;
      5.   Considerations relating to the overall consistency of planning
design and objectives.
   B.   Recommendations: The city manager shall provide notice to the
applicant, in writing, of the final action taken by the planning commission and
shall submit to the city council written recommendations of approval or denial
of the PCD project plan, together with accompanying data, and minutes of the
planning commission meeting, and shall schedule the application for a public
hearing and review before the city council. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15B-6: CITY COUNCIL REVIEW:
   A.   Within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days of receipt of
the recommendation from the planning commission, and after giving public notice
in a manner prescribed in section
10-2-9 of this title, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the PCD
project plan. Members of the public may submit written comments to be part of
the public hearing record, or may present oral comments at the hearing.
   B.   The city council shall not be bound by the recommendation of the
planning commission, the city manager, or city departments, and may set its own
conditions and requirements consistent with this chapter.
   C.   Within a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) days following the
public hearing, the city council shall take final action on the PCD project
plan. In the event of unforeseen circumstances which may not allow the city
council to take final action within thirty (30) days, the city council and
applicant may enter into an extension agreement which specifies when final
action will take place. If the city council determines that the PCD project
plan is in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, other applicable
ordinances, and any conditions as recommended by the city departments, planning
commission, city manager, or on its own initiative, and that it is satisfied
with the PCD project plan, it shall approve the plan and shall include with its
approval written findings as to the basis for its approval. The city council
may also find that the PCD project plan is not in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, other applicable ordinances, and any conditions
as recommended by the city departments, planning commission, city manager, or
on its own initiative, and may deny the plan and shall include with its
approval written findings as to the basis for its denial. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-
2002)
ARTICLE C. CONSTRUCTION LIMITATIONS/SUBSEQUENT APPROVALS
SECTION:
10-15C-1: Phasing Plan Approvals
10-15C-2: Further City Review
10-15C-3: Amendments
10-15C-4: Permit Issuance
10-15C-5: Assignment Of Rights
10-15C-1: PHASING PLAN APPROVALS:
Upon approval of the PCD project plan, the applicant shall then apply for final
plan approval for the specific phases of the PCD as outlined under the PCD
project plan. Review and approval of final plat applications shall be governed
by section 3.7 of the LaVerkin City subdivision ordinance, as amended. All
detailed plans and specifications as required under section 3.7 of the LaVerkin
City subdivision ordinance, as amended, shall comply with and proceed only in
accordance with the design guidelines and standards adopted by the city and/or
established and approved under the PCD project plan and/or development
agreement. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15C-2: FURTHER CITY REVIEW:
So long as the specific phases of development and construction comply with the
provisions of the approved PCD project plan and/or development agreement,
further review and approval of subsequent phases contemplated under the PCD
project plan shall not require additional planning commission or city council
review and approvals beyond finding that each phase is in conformance with the
approved project plan and/or development agreement, and that all platting
requirements are met. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15C-3: AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to the approved PCD project plans or to any conditions attached by
the city council with its final approval shall be obtained only by following
the procedures herein outlined governing the original approval. (Ord. 2002-05,
3-20-2002)
10-15C-4: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
The city staff shall not issue any permit for any grading proposed building,
structure, or use within any approved PCD, unless such building, structure, or
use is in accordance with the approved PCD project plan and with any conditions
imposed by the city council with its final approval. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15C-5: ASSIGNMENT OF RIGHTS:
Approvals and specific plan design standards established within the approved
PCD project plan and/or development agreement shall be assignable and
transferable with the property. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
ARTICLE D. DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
SECTION:
10-15D-1: General Provisions
10-15D-2: Purpose
10-15D-3: Amendments
10-15D-4: Mandatory Contents
10-15D-5: Execution And Recording
10-15D-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
When a PCD project plan is approved by the city council, the city council may
choose to enter into a development agreement with the applicant. Such agreement
shall constitute a binding contract between the applicant and the city (the
parties) and shall be construed together with the provisions of the PCD project
plan and any conditions attached thereto, to accomplish and give effect to the
purposes set forth in this chapter. The city council, by and through the mayor,
shall be authorized to sign the development agreement(s) on behalf of the city.
(Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15D-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the development agreement shall be to specify the detailed terms
and conditions upon which the parties will cooperate in completing development
of the subject property under the PCD project plan. The development agreement
shall create a vested right in applicant or its successors or assigns to
develop and construct the project as set forth in the PCD project plan. The
agreement may also specify the terms and conditions relating to annexation of
the subject property, if applicable. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15D-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any development agreement may be amended by mutual written consent of the
parties. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15D-4: MANDATORY CONTENTS:
A development agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter shall contain
provisions that:
   A.   Specify the duration of the agreement;
   B.   Specify the permitted uses of the property;
   C.   Specify the permitted density of use or development;
   D.   Specify the maximum height and dimensions of the proposed structures;
   E.   Set forth the provisions for the reservation or dedication of lands for
public purposes, including, without limitation: parks, roadways, and utility
easements, as applicable;
   F.   Provide that construction shall be commenced within a specified time
and that the project or any phase thereof shall be completed within a specified
time which shall be consistent with the expected build out of the phase. The
development agreement may also include a provision which allows the parties to
amend the expected build out calculations approved in the original development
agreement;
   G.   Provide for periodic review of the status of performance under the
development agreement. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
10-15D-5: EXECUTION AND RECORDING:
The parties shall not execute any development agreement prior to the final
approval by the city council of any PCD project plan as provided under this
chapter.
An executed development agreement under this chapter shall be recorded in the
office of the county recorder within ten (10) days after it is executed by the
parties. (Ord. 2002-05, 3-20-2002)
ARTICLE E. DESIGN GUIDELINES AND STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-15E-1: Planned Community Development Design Review Process
10-15E-2: Planned Community Development Design Requirements
10-15E-3: Sensitive Area Regulations; Slope Protection
10-15E-4: Sensitive Area Regulations; Ridgeline Area Protection
10-15E-5: Sensitive Area Regulations; Wetlands And Stream Protection
10-15E-6: Architectural Design Guidelines
10-15E-7: Permitted Design Features
10-15E-1: PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DESIGN REVIEW PROCESS:
The planned community development design review process has two (2) primary
steps:
   A.   Sensitive Area Determination: Applicants for development must identify
the property's sensitive environmental and aesthetic areas such as steep
slopes, ridge line area, stream corridors, and provide at time of application a
sensitive area analysis, the contents and requirements of which are described
in detail in section
10-15E-2 of this article.
   B.   Site Development Suitability Review: Staff shall review the sensitive
area analysis and delineation of sensitive lands. Staff shall report to the
applicant and the planning commission those areas appropriate for development.
(Ord. 2003-07, 4-16-2003)
10-15E-2: PLANNED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Mandatory Requirements:
      1.   Sensitive Area Analysis And Determination: Any applicant for
development must produce a sensitive lands analysis performed by a qualified
professional(s) that identifies and delineates each of the following features
and conditions:
         a.   Slope/Topographic Map: A slope and topographic map based upon a
certified boundary survey depicting contours at any interval of ten feet (10')
or less. The map must highlight areas of high geological hazard, areas subject
to landsliding, and all significant steep slopes (slope determinations shall be
made upon areas with a rise of at least 25 feet vertically and a run of 50 feet
horizontally) and the map must differentiate among the various slope
determinations and display the same according to the following categories based
upon the angle of the slope:
            (1)   Greater than fifteen percent (15%), but less than or equal to
thirty percent (30%);
            (2)   Greater than thirty percent (30%), but less than or equal to
forty percent (40%); and
            (3)   Very steep slopes, greater than forty percent (40%).
         b.   Ridge Line Areas: A map depicting all crests of hills and ridge
line areas.
         c.   Vegetative Cover: A detailed map of vegetative cover.
         d.   Design Entry Corridors And Vantage Points: Designated entry
corridors and vantage points present within or adjacent to the site, including
Utah Highway 9.
         e.   Wetlands: A map depicting all wetlands established by using the
most current edition of the "Federal Manual For Identifying And Delineating
Jurisdictional Wetlands".
         f.   Stream Corridors: A map depicting all stream corridors defined by
their ordinary high water marks.
   B.   Discretionary Requirements: The city may require the applicant to
submit the following information, as applicable:
      1.   Visual Assessment: A visual assessment of the property from vantage
points designated by the city, depicting conditions before and after the
proposed development, including the proposed location, size, design,
landscaping, and other visual features of the project.
      2.   Soil Investigation Report: A soil investigation report, including,
but not limited to, shrink/swell potential, water table elevation, general soil
classification and suitability for development, erosion potential and hazardous
material analysis.
      3.   Geotechnical Report: A geotechnical report, which must include the
location of major geographic and geologic features, the depth of bedrock,
structural features, folds, fractures, etc., and potential slide and other high
hazard areas.
      4.   Additional Slope Information: If the size of the proposed
development and visual sensitivity of the site dictate, the city may require
the applicant to submit a slope-topographic map depicting contours at an
interval of two feet (2').
      5.   Hydrological Report: A hydrological report with detailed information
on ground water levels, drainage channels and systems, and base elevations in
floodplains.
      6.   Wetland/Stream Corridor Resource Evaluation: A wetland/stream
corridor resource evaluation, including a delineation of wetland and stream
corridor boundaries and a determination of resource significance.
   C.   Sensitive Area Determination: The city shall delineate all sensitive
areas on the parcel, including steep slope areas, ridge line areas, entry
corridors, wetlands and stream corridors.
   D.   Additions: Every addition to the planned community development zoning
district must provide a sensitive area analysis. (Ord. 2003-07, 4-16-2003)
10-15E-3: SENSITIVE AREA REGULATIONS; SLOPE PROTECTION:
If the city determines that a certain parcel within the planned community
development zoning district contains steep slopes sufficient to categorize the
steep slope(s) as a sensitive area within the meaning of subsection 10-15E-2C
of this article, the following slope protection provisions shall apply to the
parcel:
   A.   Prohibitions: No development is allowed on or within fifty vertical
feet (50') in elevation of very steep slopes, areas subject to land sliding,
and other high hazard geological areas.
   B.   Graded Or Filled Slopes: The applicant must avoid or, to the greatest
extent possible, minimize proposed cuts and fills. Cutting and filling to
create additional or larger building sites shall be kept to a minimum and
avoided to the maximum extent feasible. Graded or filled slopes shall be
limited to a three to one (3:1) slope or less. All graded slopes shall be
recontoured to the natural, varied contour of surrounding terrain.
   C.   Benching Or Terracing: Benching or terracing to provide additional or
larger building sites is prohibited.
   D.   Streets And Roads: Streets and roads proposed for steep slopes may not:
      1.   Cross slopes of thirty percent (30%) or greater. A short run of not
more than one hundred feet (100') may be allowed to cross slopes greater than
thirty percent (30%) if the city engineer concludes that such streets or roads
will not have significant adverse visual, environmental, or safety impacts.
      2.   Streets and roads proposed to cross slopes greater than ten percent
(10%) are allowed, subject to the following:
         a.   Proof that such street and/or road will be built with minimum
environmental damage and within acceptable public safety parameters; and
         b.   Such street and road design follows contour lines to preserve the
natural character of the land; and
         c.   Cutting and filling is minimized and revegetated.
   E.   Retaining Walls: The use, design, and construction of all retaining
walls are subject to an assessment of visual impact, compatibility with
surrounding terrain and vegetation, and safety.
   F.   Landscaping And Revegetation: An applicant must commit to landscaping
or revegetating exposed slopes. Topsoil from any disturbed portion of a steep
slope must be preserved and utilized in revegetation. Fill soil must be of a
quality to support plant growth.
   G.   Development Design Standards; Steep Slopes: All development on steep
slopes shall comply with the design standards set forth below.
      1.   Open space and density on delineated portions of sites with steep
slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%) but less than or equal to forty
percent (40%): In addition to the specific development regulations set forth in
section
10-15E-2 of this article, the following regulations apply:
         a.   Open Space: Seventy five percent (75%) of the steep slope area
must remain as open space.
         b.   Developable Land: Twenty five percent (25%) of the steep slope
area may be developed in accordance with the underlying zoning subject to the
following conditions:
            (1)   Maximum Density: The maximum density on developable land
within a steep slope area is governed by the underlying zoning and proof that
the proposed density will not have a significant adverse visual or
environmental effect on the community.
            (2)   Location Of Developable Land: The developable land in a steep
slope area is that area with the least visual and environmental impacts. The
applicant must provide a visual and environmental analysis considering the
visual impact from key vantage points, potential for screening location of
natural drainage channels, erosion potential, vegetation protection, access,
and similar site design criteria. Based upon such analysis, the planning
commission may require the applicant to site the developable land pursuant to
one or more of the following techniques:
               (A)   Clustered development (single units situated in close
proximity to other units with open space concentrated in 1 or more large areas
within the development), or
               (B)   Dispersed development (single units separated by larger
areas of open space), or
               (C)   Transfer of density to the least sensitive portions of the
site.
            (3)   Density Transfer: Upon proof of a sensitive site plan, the
applicant may transfer up to twenty five percent (25%) of the densities from
the open space portion of the site to the developable land.
            (4)   Suitability Determination: The applicant must prove that the
development will have no significant adverse impact on adjacent properties. The
planning commission shall determine that the proposal complies with this
chapter if the applicant proves:
               (A)   The density is compatible with that of adjacent
properties.
               (B)   The architectural detail, height, building materials, and
other design features of the development are compatible with adjacent
properties.
               (C)   The applicant has adopted appropriate mitigation measures
such landscaping, screening, illumination standards, and other design features
to buffer the adjacent properties from the developable land.
   H.   Open Space And Density On Very Steep Slopes:
      1.   Required Open Space: One hundred percent (100%) of the very steep
slope area, defined as a slope of more than forty percent (40%), shall remain
in open space. No vegetation within fifty (50) vertical feet in elevation of
the very steep slope area shall be disturbed.
      2.   Transfer Of Density: Up to ten percent (10%) of the densities
otherwise allowed in the zone may be transferred to other portions of the site,
including delineated sensitive areas. The density transfer shall be subject to
a suitability determination.
   I.   Density Bonuses: In addition to the density transfers permitted
pursuant to this section, the planning commission may grant up to a twenty
percent (20%) increase in transferable densities if the applicant:
      1.   Offers to preserve open space to ensure the long term protection of
a significant environmentally or visually sensitive area in a manner approved
by the city; or
      2.   Provides public access as shown on the trails master plan; or
      3.   Restores degraded wetlands or environmental areas on the site or
makes other significant environmental improvements. (Ord. 2003-07, 4-16-2003)
10-15E-4: SENSITIVE AREA REGULATIONS; RIDGELINE AREA PROTECTION:
   A.   Intent: The intent of these provisions is to ensure that development
near ridgeline areas blends with the natural contour of the land
characteristics.
   B.   Retain Natural State: Significant ridgeline areas should be retained in
a natural state, and development should be sited in such a manner so as not to
create a silhouette against the skyline or backdrops as viewed from any portion
of the city not located in the topside zone.
   C.   Visual Intrusion: No structure or other appurtenant device, including
mechanical equipment, may visually intrude on the ridgeline area from any
vantage point in the city not located in the topside zone.
   D.   Open Space And Density: The following regulations apply to all
ridgeline areas in the planned community development zoning district:
      1.   Open Space: One hundred percent (100%) of the ridgeline area shall
remain in open space.
      2.   Density Transfer: The planning commission may transfer up to twenty
five percent (25%) of the densities otherwise allowed in the ridgeline area to
developable land. The density transfer shall be subject to a suitability
determination as set forth below.
The applicant must prove that the development will have no significant adverse
impact on adjacent properties. The planning commission shall determine that the
proposal complies with this chapter if the applicant proves:
         a.   The density is compatible with that of adjacent properties.
         b.   The architectural detail, height, materials, and other design
features of the development in the receiving area are compatible with adjacent
properties.
         c.   The applicant has adopted appropriate mitigation measures such as
landscaping, screening, illumination standards, and other design features to
buffer the adjacent properties from the developable land.
   E.   Density Bonuses: In addition to the density transfers permitted
pursuant to this section at planned community development or subdivision
review, the planning commission may grant up to a twenty percent (20%) increase
in transferable densities if the applicant:
      1.   Offers to preserve open space to ensure the long term protection of
significant environmentally or visually sensitive areas in a manner approved by
city; or
      2.   Provides public access for trails, as shown on the trails master
plan; or
      3.   Restores degraded wetlands or environmental areas on the site or
makes other significant environmental improvements. (Ord. 2003-07, 4-16-2003)
10-15E-5: SENSITIVE AREA REGULATIONS; WETLANDS AND STREAM PROTECTION:
   A.   Intent: The following requirements and standards have been developed to
promote, preserve, and enhance wetlands and stream corridors and to protect
them from adverse effects and potentially irreversible impacts.
   B.   Jurisdiction: All significant wetlands and stream corridors are
regulated as provided in this section in addition to the general requirements
set forth in section
10-15E-2 of this article.
   C.   Prohibited Activities: No person shall disturb, remove, fill, dredge,
clear, destroy or alter any area, including vegetation, within significant
wetlands and significant stream corridors and their respective setbacks, except
as may be expressly allowed herein.
   D.   Boundary Delineations: The applicant must commission a wetland and
stream corridor delineation by a qualified professional, approved by the city.
      1.   Wetlands shall be established using the most current edition of the
"Federal Manual For Identifying And Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands".
      2.   Stream corridors shall be delineated at the ordinary high water
mark.
   E.   Determination Of Significance:
      1.   Wetland Criteria: A wetland delineated pursuant to the federal
manual is significant if it meets the following criteria:
         a.   Size: All wetlands that occupy a surface area greater than one-
tenth (1/10) acre or are associated with permanent surface water.
         b.   Location: All wetlands that are adjacent to, or contiguous with,
a stream corridor.
      2.   Stream Corridor: All stream corridors are significant. Stream
corridors are not irrigation ditches.
   F.   Setbacks: The following setbacks are required:
      1.   Setbacks from wetlands shall extend a minimum of fifty feet (50')
outward from the delineated wetland edge.
      2.   Setbacks from stream corridors shall extend a minimum of fifty feet
(50') outward from the ordinary high water mark.
      3.   Setbacks from irrigation ditches shall extend a minimum of twenty
feet (20') from the ordinary high water mark.
   G.   Runoff Control: All projects and development must apply best management
practices for both temporary and permanent runoff control, including all storm
drain, to minimize sediment and other contaminants.
   H.   Planned Community Development (PCD) Open Space Requirements: The
planning commission may reduce the sixty percent (60%) PCD open space
requirement in the developable land if the planning commission determines that:
      1.   Open space set aside is sufficient to provide adequate natural open
space for the entire development; and
      2.   Sufficient open space remains within the developable land to serve
residents of the development; and
      3.   At least twenty percent (20%) of the developable land is open space.
(Ord. 2003-07, 4-16-2003)
10-15E-6: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN GUIDELINES:
   A.   Number Of Exterior Wall Materials: Different exterior siding materials
add interest to a building, and to the community as a whole; however, the use
of too many exterior materials, like excessive ornamentation, detracts from the
values of adjoining properties. Exterior walls of any building may be sided
with up to three (3) different materials per building, but no more than three
(3) materials may appear on any one wall, including ornamental siding. Trim
shall not be counted as a siding material, but ornamentation is counted as a
siding material. If trim covers more than ten percent (10%) of a side of the
building, it shall be counted as a siding material on that side.
   B.   Roofing Materials: Because of the steep grade changes within the
planned community development zoning district, and the fact that residents and
visitors are frequently in a position to look down on the city from the
adjoining mesas, the appearance of roofs in LaVerkin is of more significance
than in other communities. For this reason, the following roof types are
prohibited in the planned community development zoning district:
      1.   Untreated aluminum or metal, except that copper may be used;
      2.   Reflective materials;
      3.   Brightly colored roofing such as bright red, blue, yellow, green or
similar colors that are highly visible. Exception: Green is allowed if it is
determined that its hue, color, chrome and other attributes of color are
similar to other earth tone colors. In no case shall the color be determined to
be bright or highly reflective or towards the yellow tones of the color
spectrum; or
      4.   Mechanical equipment on roofs must be hidden with a visual barrier
so it is not readily visible from nearby properties.
   C.   Skylights And Solar Panels: Skylights and solar panels must be designed
to fit flush with the roof surface, or up to a maximum of two feet (2') above
the roof's surface. No reflective material may be used unless thoroughly
shielded to prevent reflection into adjoining or nearby properties.
   D.   Window Treatments: Untreated aluminum or metal window frames are
prohibited.
   E.   Lighting: With the exception of applicable state and federal law
governing lighting requirements and street lighting, the following design
standards shall apply when exterior lighting is proposed and/or required in the
planned community development zoning district. The city of LaVerkin's light
ordinance is incorporated herein by reference, and to the extent the lighting
requirements in the planned community development zoning district are more
restrictive than the city's general light ordinance, the provisions herein
shall apply and supersede those in the general light ordinance. To the extent
an aspect of the general light ordinance is not covered herein, the provisions
of the general light ordinance shall apply.
      1.   Shielding: Exterior lighting shall be shielded and directed downward
so that the light source, the actual bulb, is not visible from beyond the
property line on which the structure is located. Exterior lighting shall not
project above the horizontal plane of the building.
      2.   Color: Warm lighting colors are required. The blue-white colors of
fluorescent and mercury vapor lamps are prohibited. Lamps emitting a color
temperature in excess of five thousand degrees (5,000°) Kelvin are prohibited.
      3.   Parking Area Lighting: In parking lots, a minimum foot-candle of 1.0
at the perimeter and between light sources, and a maximum of 5.0 foot-candles
under light fixtures are required. The height of light fixtures shall be in
proportion to the building mass and no more than fourteen feet (14') high. When
all businesses are closed, only a minimum of security lighting shall be
maintained. Shielded spotlights may be used when highlighting trees, artwork or
other special landscape features.
      4.   Advertising: The operation of searchlights or similar sources for
advertising, display or any other commercial purpose is prohibited.
   F.   Trash Enclosures: In addition to applicable local, state, and federal
health standards, if any, the following trash enclosure design standards shall
apply:
      1.   Trash and storage areas shall be screened by landscaping, fencing,
berms or other devices integral to overall site and building design;
      2.   Trash and storage enclosures shall be constructed of materials that
are compatible with the proposed or existing building and with surrounding
structures;
      3.   Trash and storage areas shall be well maintained including prompt
repair and replacement of damaged gates, fences and plants;
      4.   Openings of trash enclosures shall be oriented away from public view
or screened with sturdy gates wide enough to allow easy access for trash
collection, where practical; and
      5.   The consolidation of trash areas between businesses and the use of
modem disposal techniques is encouraged.
   G.   Mechanical Equipment: All electrical service equipment and subpanels
and all mechanical equipment, including, but not limited to, air conditioning,
pool equipment, fans and vents, utility transformers, except those owned and
maintained by public utility companies, and solar panels, shall be painted to
match the surrounding wall color or painted or screened to blend with the
surrounding natural terrain. Roof mounted equipment and vents shall be painted
to match the roof and/or adjacent wall color and shall be screened or
integrated into the design of the structure. (Ord. 2003-07, 4-16-2003)
10-15E-7: PERMITTED DESIGN FEATURES:
Any design or material that is not expressly permitted by this chapter, or a
resolution adopted to supplement it, is prohibited. (Ord. 2003-07, 4-16-2003)
CHAPTER 16
CONDOMINIUMS AND COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
10-16-1: Purpose
10-16-2: Definitions
10-16-3: General Regulations
10-16-4: Conceptual Review
10-16-5: Site Plan Review Requirements
10-16-6: Miscellaneous Requirements
10-16-7: New Condominium And CPUD Construction
10-16-8: Condominium Conversion
10-16-9: Covenants, Conditions, And Restrictions (CC&Rs)
10-16-10: Condominium Rentals
10-16-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   This chapter establishes procedures for the review and approval of
condominium projects and commercial planned unit developments (also referred to
herein as CPUDs), to ensure they comply with applicable LaVerkin City
ordinances and state laws.
   B.   Condominium projects and CPUDs shall be permitted uses in commercial
zones and, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be subject to the
requirements generally applicable to such zones.
   C.   Developments in commercial zones may apply for subdivision approval
under and in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
   D.   All condominium projects shall conform to the requirements of the
condominium ownership act of 1975, as defined and set forth in the provisions
of title 57, chapter 8, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended).
   E.   Developments in residential zones, where multiple housing is allowed,
may apply for condominium projects under a development agreement. (Ord. 2011-
05, 4-20-2011)
10-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter certain terms and words are defined and are
used in that defined context.
ALTERATION: As applied to a building or structure, means a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side, by increasing in height, or the
moving from one location or position to another.
ARCHITECTURALLY INCOMPATIBLE: Buildings or structures which are incongruous
with adjacent and nearby development due to dissimilarities in style,
materials, proportions, size, shape and/or other architectural or site design
features.
BASEMENT: A story wherein exterior walls are fifty percent (50%) or more below
grade. For purposes of establishing building height, a basement shall not count
toward the maximum number of stories allowed. The exposed portion of the
basement wall shall not exceed six feet (6').
BUILDABLE AREA: The portion of the lot remaining after required yards have been
provided and after the limitations of any pertinent environmental regulations
have been applied. Buildings may be placed in any part of the buildable area,
but if there are limitations on percent of the lot which may be covered by
buildings, some open space may be required within the buildable area.
BUILDING: A structure with a roof, intended for shelter or enclosure.
BUILDING CONNECTION: Two (2) or more buildings which are connected in a
substantial manner or by common interior space including internal pedestrian
circulation. Where two (2) buildings are attached in this manner, they shall be
considered a single building and shall be subject to all yard requirements of a
single building. Determination of building connection shall be through the site
plan review process.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of the building code.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building that is used primarily for the conduct of the
principal use.
BUILDING, PUBLIC: A building operated by a public agency of the United States
Of America or the state of Utah, or any of its subdivisions.
BUSINESS PARK: A business district planned and developed as an optimal
environment for business occupants while maintaining compatibility with the
surrounding community.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION: A certificate issued at the time when all required
inspections of a commercial building have been completed and approved by the
building inspector and the building is ready for occupancy. Such certificate
allows approval of final plat for commercial condominiums prior to use allowing
for owner modifications and improvements to the interior of a building.
Following any owner modifications or improvements, a certificate of occupancy
will be issued upon inspection and approval by the building inspector.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: A certificate issued at the time when all required
inspections on a building and/or interior modifications and improvements have
been completed and approved by the building inspector and the building is ready
for occupancy. In any case where a certificate of completion has been issued
and owner modifications have been made, a final inspection by the building
inspector must be completed and the modifications approved prior to receipt of
the certificate of occupancy.
COMMERCIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (CPUD): Commercial development wherein
ownership of lots is accomplished by subdivided lots (which may be divided on 0
lot lines, including common walls), in which the balance of the common areas,
space, and facilities are owned by a commonly managed owners' association.
COMMON AREAS, SPACE AND FACILITIES: The property and improvements of the
condominium project or portions thereof, conforming to the definition and
requirements set forth in section 57-8-7, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as
amended); and common areas located outside of lot descriptions in the case of
commercial planned unit developments (CPUDs).
CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A conceptual plan submitted for review and comment in
order to obtain guidance from the city regarding how city requirements would
apply to a proposed planned development.
CONDOMINIUM: Ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit project together with
an undivided interest in common in the common areas and facilities of the
property.
CONDOMINIUM-COMMERCIAL: Ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit commercial
project together with an undivided interest in common in the common areas and
facilities of the property.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: A real estate condominium project; a plan or project
whereby two (2) or more units, whether contained in existing or proposed
apartments, commercial or industrial buildings or structures, or otherwise, are
separately offered or proposed to be offered for sale. Condominium project also
means the property when the context so requires.
CONDOMINIUM-RESIDENTIAL: Ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit residential
project together with an undivided interest in common in the common areas and
facilities of the property.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT: A unit together with the undivided interest in the common
areas and facilities appertaining to that unit. Any reference to a condominium
unit includes both a physical unit together with its appurtenant undivided
interest in the common areas and facilities, and a time period unit together
with its appurtenant undivided interest, unless the reference is specifically
limited to a time period unit.
CONVERSION: A proposed change in the type of ownership of a parcel or parcels
of land, together with the existing attached structures, from single ownership
of said parcel, such as an apartment house or multi-family dwelling, or multi-
tenant commercial building, into that defined as a "condominium project",
commercial planned unit development, or other ownership arrangement involving
separate ownership of individual units combined with joint collective ownership
of common areas, facilities or elements.
ELEVATION AREA: The area or portion thereof (in square feet) of an
architectural elevation of one side of a building.
ELEVATION AREA, FIRST FLOOR: The elevation area or portion thereof (in square
feet) of the first or ground floor (story) of one side of a building.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (FOR DETERMINING FLOOR AREA RATIO AND SIZE OF ESTABLISHMENT):
The sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors of the building measured
from the exterior face of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls
separating two (2) buildings. The floor area of a building shall include
basement floor area, penthouses, attic space having headroom of seven feet (7')
or more, interior balconies and mezzanines, enclosed porches, and floor area
devoted to accessory uses. The floor area of covered accessory buildings,
including parking structures, shall be included in the calculation of floor
area ratio. Space devoted to open air off street parking or loading shall not
be included in floor area.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The number obtained by dividing the gross floor area of a
building or other structure by the area of the lot on which the building or
structure is located. When more than one building or structure is located on a
lot, the floor area ratio is determined by dividing the total floor area of all
the buildings or structures by the area of the site.
GUEST: Any person hiring or occupying a room for living or sleeping purposes.
LOT; COMMERCIAL LOT: It shall include a subdivided portion of a commercial
planned unit development where the primary business activity is conducted,
which is in separate fee title ownership.
OPEN SPACE: Any area of a lot which is completely free and unobstructed from
any structure or parking areas including landscaping, walkways, uncovered patio
areas, light poles and other ornamental features. Driveways that provide access
to parking lots, not exceeding twenty percent (20%) of any required yard area
that they provide access through, shall not be considered as an obstruction.
PATIO: A paved surface on an earthen/stone base that is not more than two feet
(2') above established grade, designed for pedestrian use.
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTION: A right of way intended for pedestrian movement/
activity, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, internal walkways, external
and internal arcades, and plazas.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A lot or contiguous lots of a size sufficient to create
its own character where there are multiple principal buildings on a single lot,
where not otherwise authorized by this title, or where not all of the principal
buildings have frontage on a public street. A planned development is controlled
by a single landowner or by a group of landowners in common agreement as to
control, to be developed as a single entity, the character of which is
compatible with adjacent parcels and the intent of the zoning district or
districts in which it is located.
PLAZA: An open area which is available to the public for walking, seating and
eating.
RECORD OF SURVEY MAP: The map as defined in section 57-8-3, Utah Code Annotated
(1953, as amended).
SHOPPING CENTER: A concentration of related commercial establishments with one
or more major anchor tenants, shared parking, and unified architectural and
site design. A shopping center normally has single or coordinated ownership/
operations/management control and may include pad site as well as
architecturally connected units.
UNIT: Either a separate physical part of the property intended for any type of
independent use, including one or more rooms or spaces located in one or more
floors or part or parts of floors in a building or a time period unit or
facility as defined in section 57-8-3, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended).
(Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007; amd. Ord. 2011-05, 4-20-2011)
10-16-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
The procedures and requirements of this chapter apply to the processing and
approval of condominium and CPUD plat maps. Such provisions shall supplement
zoning, site development, health, building or other ordinances which may be
applicable to the condominium project or CPUDs, and shall apply to the approval
of projects involving new construction, as well as projects involving the
conversion of existing structures. In addition, projects which involve
dedication of real property to the ownership and use of the public shall also
be considered subdivisions and require compliance with applicable provisions of
title 11 of this code. All such subdivisions or conversions shall require
notification to all property owners of record within two hundred feet (200') of
the development boundaries. (Ord. 2011-05, 4-20-2011)
10-16-4: CONCEPTUAL REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: The intent of conceptual review is to promote the safe and
efficient use of land, to contribute to an orderly and harmonious appearance in
the city and to further enhance the value of property. This process is intended
to supplement the review and administrative procedures which are carried out
under this title or other city ordinances and regulations. The conceptual
review process is intended to help ensure that newly developed properties and
redeveloped properties are compatible with adjacent development and that
traffic, public safety, overcrowding, and environmental problems are minimized
to the greatest extent possible. More specifically, the purpose of the
conceptual review process is to provide for a review of:
      1.   A project's compatibility with its environment and with other land
uses and buildings existing in the surrounding area;
      2.   The quantity, quality, utility, size and type of a project's
required open space and proposed landscaping improvements;
      3.   The ability of a project's traffic circulation system to provide for
the convenient and safe internal and external movement of vehicles and
pedestrians;
      4.   The quantity, quality, utility and type of a project's required
community facilities; and
      5.   The location and adequacy of a project's provision for drainage and
utilities. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007)
   B.   Conceptual Development Review: Before filing a formal application for
any condominium project or CPUD, whether new or conversion, the developer shall
meet with the development staff regarding the general proposal. Such action
does not require application fees, or filing of a site plan or landscape plan
and is not to be construed as an application for formal approval. No
representation made by the zoning administrator, the development staff or other
city departments during such conference shall be binding upon the city with
respect to an application subsequently submitted. (Ord. 2011-05, 4-20-2011)
10-16-5: SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application: Following the conceptual review, a site plan application
shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Each application for site plan
review shall include six (6) copies of a site plan, drawn to a scale of twenty
feet to the inch (20' = 1") or such other scale as the zoning administrator
shall deem appropriate. Plans shall contain the following information:
      1.   The applicant's name, address, telephone number and interest in the
property;
      2.   The owner's name, address and telephone number, if different than
the applicant, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application;
      3.   The street address, tax parcel number and legal description of the
subject property;
      4.   The zoning classification, zoning district boundaries and present
use of the subject property;
      5.   A vicinity map with north arrow, scale and date, indicating the
zoning classifications and current uses of properties within one hundred feet
(100') of the subject property;
      6.   The proposed title of the project and the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of the architect, landscape architect, planner or engineer on
the project, and a signature panel for zoning administrator approval;
      7.   The boundaries of the subject property, all existing property lines,
setback lines, existing streets, buildings, watercourses, waterways or lakes,
wetlands, and other existing physical features in or adjoining the project;
      8.   Topographic survey, showing the elevation of streets, alleys,
buildings, structures, watercourses and their names. The topography shall be
shown by adequate spot elevations. The finished grade for the entire site shall
be shown as well as the first floor elevation of all buildings;
      9.   Significant topographical or physical features of the site,
including existing trees;
      10.   The elevation of the curb (if existing or proposed) in front of
each lot;
      11.   Elevations of the top of bank and toe of slope, slope ratio of
fill, and limits of fill, including access;
      12.   The location and size of sanitary and storm sewers, water, gas,
telephone, electric and other utility lines, culverts and other underground
structures in or affecting the project, including existing and proposed
facilities and easements for these facilities. In the case of city owned
utilities, such information shall be provided to the applicant by the
department of public utilities;
      13.   The location, dimensions and character of construction of proposed
streets, alleys, loading areas including numbers of parking and loading spaces,
outdoor lighting systems, storm drainage and sanitary facilities, sidewalks,
curbs and gutters and all curb cuts. Additional area may also be required to
indicate connections or proposed connections to major utilities;
      14.   The location of all proposed buildings and structures, accessory
and principal, showing the number of stories and height, dwelling type if
applicable, major elevations and the total square footage of the floor area by
proposed use;
      15.   The location, height, type and material of all fences and walls;
      16.   The location, character, size, height and orientation of proposed
signs, to be erected in accordance with chapter 11 of this title, and
elevations of buildings showing signs to be placed on exterior walls. Signs
which are approved in accordance with this chapter shall be considered a part
of the approved site plan;
      17.   The proposed nature and manner of grading of the site, in
accordance with soils engineering studies to prevent soil erosion and excessive
runoff;
      18.   The location of dumpsters or other outdoor trash receptacles;
      19.   The location and dimensions of proposed recreation areas, open
spaces and other required amenities and improvements;
      20.   A tabulation of the total number of acres in the project and the
percentage and acreage thereof proposed to be allocated to off street parking,
open space, parks and other reservations; (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007)
      21.   A tabulation of the total number of dwelling units or commercial
lots in the project and the overall project density in dwelling units or
commercial lots per gross acre; (Ord. 2011-05, 4-20-2011)
      22.   The proposed and required off street parking and loading areas,
including parking and access for the handicapped, as specified in the most
current version of the international building code; and
      23.   Landscape plans subject to the standards contained in chapter 6,
article J of this title.
   B.   Waiver Of Requirements: The zoning administrator may waive any of the
above listed requirements upon making a determination that such requirements
are unnecessary due to the scope and nature of the proposed development.
   C.   Zoning Administrator Review: The authority of the zoning administrator
through the review process to require modification of a proposed site plan
shall include the following elements in order to achieve the objectives set
forth below:
      1.   Traffic And Parking:
         a.   Minimizing dangerous traffic movements.
         b.   Promoting the smooth and efficient flow of traffic in accordance
with standards in the Institute Of Traffic Engineers' "Transportation And
Traffic Engineering Handbook", and other local sources of authority as adopted
by ordinance.
         c.   Optimizing the efficient use of parking facilities through
provisions for adequate interior circulation, parking stalls and travel aisles.
      2.   Site Layout:
         a.   Promoting compatibility with adjacent and nearby properties.
         b.   Preserving and protecting valuable natural features and amenities
to the greatest extent practical.
         c.   Promoting the efficient provision of public services.
      3.   Environmental Protection:
         a.   Preserving existing healthy and long lived trees wherever
economically feasible.
         b.   Designing drainage facilities to promote the use and preservation
of natural watercourse and patterns of drainage.
         c.   Minimizing alterations to existing topography.
         d.   Protecting important views and vistas as identified in adopted
plans.
      4.   Landscaping:
         a.   Promoting the use of plant material compatible with the climate
of the region and microclimate conditions on the site.
         b.   Ensuring that plant material can be maintained for long term
health and continued growth.
         c.   Maximizing water and energy conservation through the appropriate
use of plant materials.
         d.   Ensuring that the arrangement of required landscaping produces
the optimal visual effect.
      5.   Signage:
         a.   Ensuring that the location, size and orientation of signage do
not impair the visibility of or distract motorists.
         b.   Ensuring that the location, size and orientation of signage
minimize obstructions and hazards to pedestrians. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007)
10-16-6: MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Construction Standards: In addition to standards provided in other
sections of this title for specific types of approval, the following standards
shall be applied to all applications for construction:
      1.   Lighting: All developments shall provide adequate lighting so as to
assure safety and security. Lighting installations shall not have an adverse
impact on traffic safety or on the surrounding area. Light sources shall be
shielded, and shall not shine onto adjacent properties. All lighting shall be
in accordance with city specifications and the night sky regulations.
      2.   Stormwater Drainage: Provisions for storm surface drainage shall be
in accordance with the design standards of the public works department
indicating location, size, types and grades of sewers, drainage structures,
ditches, and connection to existing drainage system. Disposition of storm or
natural waters both on and off the site shall be provided in such a manner as
not to have a detrimental effect on the property of others or the public right
of way.
      3.   Utilities: Provision of hookups to public utilities shall be the
responsibility of the applicant and connections shall be installed in
accordance with the standards of the public utilities.
      4.   Public Safety: The Washington County solid waste department and
Washington County health department shall be invited to review all site plans
for treatment of bulk trash disposal and health requirements pertaining to the
project. The police department and the fire department shall review all site
plans to determine adequacy of access and other aspects of public safety.
   B.   Time Limit: Once formal application has been made and approved plats,
site plans, landscape plans and other applicable construction plans have been
filed with the city, use of the land shall commence within twelve (12) months
from the date of approval, or the approval shall be considered void. Upon
request, revalidation of the site plan may be granted for an additional twelve
(12) months if all factors of the original site plan review are the same. The
written notice requesting revalidation shall be received by the zoning
administrator prior to expiration of the original twelve (12) month period.
   C.   Stop Work Order: A stop work order may be put on any project if
improvements required are not consistent with the approved site plan, landscape
plan or other applicable construction plans.
   D.   Maintenance Guarantee: When any improvement is to be accepted for
dedication, maintenance or operation by the city, the applicant shall be
required to provide financial security acceptable to the city attorney in the
amount of twenty five percent (25%) of the total construction costs of the
project to cover the costs of any defects which may occur in such improvements
within one year after the date of acceptance by the city. Such financial
security shall be held and released as outlined in section
11-3-5 of this code. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007)
10-16-7: NEW CONDOMINIUM AND CPUD CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   New Construction Procedure Checklist:
      1.   Zoning/Building Review: Following conceptual review, applicant shall
return a complete application to the city planning department. The zoning
administrator and the building official shall review the proposed application
and preliminary plat to determine compliance with city zoning ordinances; the
Utah condominium ownership act, where applicable; and applicable building
related codes.
      2.   Site Review: The zoning administrator shall review the proposed site
plans and shall have the authority to require additional improvements to be
made to the existing site in a written report, describing the recommended
improvements to the building, the site and the surrounding public way. The
report will summarize the review, detailing any noted deficiencies. This review
shall include an analysis of the parking, including internal circulation
issues, such as surfacing and control curbs. The analysis shall also include
the number of parking stalls, noting any deviation from current standards.
Based upon this information, the zoning administrator may require construction
of additional parking stalls on the site, or may require reasonable alternative
parking solutions. The total number of parking stalls available to the owners
of the project shall be disclosed on the condominium or CPUD plat.
      3.   Application Acceptance: Once city staff has determined that the
application is complete and that the material is adequate and correctly details
the condominium or CPUD request, the developer shall provide twelve (12) more
copies of the preliminary plat for distribution to utilities and concerned
entities. The application shall then be transmitted to pertinent departments
for review and comment and staff shall schedule a construction review meeting
of the preliminary plat with all utilities and concerned entities. The meeting
shall be held no later than two (2) weeks after preliminary plat application
has been approved and maps have been distributed. If the application is found
to be incomplete, the staff will inform the applicant of the necessary
additional information.
      4.   Construction/Utility Review: Construction review of preliminary plat
meeting with utility companies and interested entities shall be held to notify
and to ensure that the development can be serviced by utilities and concerned
entities.
      5.   Planning Commission/Public Hearing: Following the construction
review, a public hearing will be held during a regularly scheduled planning
commission meeting. No condominium project or CPUD shall be approved without a
public hearing. Notice shall be mailed to all adjacent property owners and
affected entities by city staff, as specified in section
10-16-3 of this chapter, at least three (3) days in advance. The notice shall
provide the date, time and place of the public hearing. The planning commission
may recommend preliminary approval, with or without conditions, or may deny the
proposal at the public hearing.
      6.   City Council Review: City council review for approval of the
preliminary plat shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting so long
as all conditions as stipulated by planning commission are met. Council may
approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposal.
      7.   Construction Plans Sign Off: Following approval of the preliminary
plat, construction drawings shall be distributed to the utility companies and
concerned entities for signature. Signature lines shall include the gas
company, the power company, the phone company, the water authority, the sewer
authority, the city engineer, the building official, the fire department, and
the zoning administrator. Once all signatures have been received construction
may begin.
      8.   Building Permits: No building permit for a proposed condominium
project or CPUD shall be issued without preliminary approval from the city
council. The building official, or designee, shall receive the approved
construction plans and issue applicable permits for construction. The issuance
of building permits shall serve as evidence of approval.
      9.   Construction Approval: All infrastructure construction shall be
completed and approved by the LaVerkin City engineer (as required in title 11
of this code) and all certificates of completion shall be issued from the
building inspector prior to final acceptance of the condominium project or
CPUD, at which time the developer may proceed for final plat approval.
      10.   Final Plat Application: When construction is complete and has been
accepted by the engineer, and the building official has granted final
certificate of completion, the applicant shall apply for final plat approval
before planning commission upon application provided by the city. Application
shall include all fees and recording documents. If at any time there is an
"alteration" in the building as defined in this chapter, a building permit is
required and a certificate of occupancy obtained from the building official.
      11.   Engineer Approval: Upon receipt of the final mylar plat, the city
engineer shall examine the plat to determine whether it conforms to the
preliminary plat and all conditions of approval. If the plat is found to
conform, the engineer shall sign it.
      12.   Building Official Approval: If a certificate of completion has been
issued, the building official shall sign the plat.
      13.   City Attorney Approval: The city attorney shall examine the plat
and advise the planning commission as to the form of the final plat and other
recordable documents. The city attorney shall certify that any lands dedicated
to the public are dedicated in fee simple and that the applicant is the owner
of record.
      14.   Planning Commission Approval: Planning commission shall review the
final plat at a regularly scheduled meeting. If the condominium project has
been approved by the engineer and has received a certificate of completion from
the building official, the commission chair shall sign the plat.
      15.   City Council Approval: The city council shall examine the plat and
the recordable documents to determine conformity with the requirements of city
ordinances. If the plat and the other recordable documents conform to city
ordinances, the mayor shall sign the plat. The city attorney shall then approve
and sign the plat at which time it may be recorded with the Washington County
recorder.
      16.   Recording: No final plat shall have any force or effect until it
has received final approval by the city attorney and has been recorded with the
Washington County recorder.
      17.   Condominium Sales/Rentals: No condominium units or CPUD lots may be
sold or rented until the plat has been recorded with the Washington County
recorder.
      18.   Dedication Of Public Streets: Notwithstanding any prohibition of or
relating to private streets in this code, including title 11 of this code,
CPUDs shall not be required to dedicate public streets in areas that are
intended for access to the CPUD project and associated parking areas, that will
be maintained by the owners of the CPUD (or CPUD owners' association) as common
or limited common area(s); and such common or limited common area(s) shall be
allowed and available for access and parking for the CPUD project.
   B.   Complete Application Required: The owner or developer of a new
condominium project or CPUD desiring approval shall file both a preliminary
plat application and a final plat application with the LaVerkin City planning
department on forms prescribed by the city. Complete application shall include
all required application fees, plats, articles of incorporation and bylaws of
the owners' associations, declarations, and statements as outlined hereafter:
      1.   Fees shall be determined by resolution and shall include an
application fee plus a per unit fee.
      2.   Two (2) copies of the proposed preliminary plat, for review by the
city planning and building department. The plat shall be accurately drawn to
scale, as required by section 57-8-13, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended),
which shall be made by a registered Utah engineer. Such plat shall set forth:
         a.   The angular and linear data along the exterior boundaries of the
property;
         b.   The linear measurement and location, with reference to the
exterior boundaries, of the building or buildings;
         c.   The diagrammatic floor plans of the buildings, including
identifying number or symbol;
         d.   In the case of condominiums, the elevations of the finished or
unfinished interior surfaces of the floors and ceilings and the linear
measurements of the finished or unfinished interior surfaces of the perimeter
walls, and the lateral extensions of every unit;
         e.   A distinguishing number or symbol for every physical unit
identified on the plat;
         f.   The limited common and common areas and their intended use/uses;
         g.   Other preliminary plat requirements as set forth in title 11 of
this code, as applicable; to include the location and size of sanitary and
storm sewers, water, gas, telephone, electric and other utility lines, culverts
and other underground structures in or affecting the project, including
existing and proposed facilities and easements for these facilities. In the
case of city owned utilities, such information shall be provided to the
applicant by the department of public works;
         h.   The location, dimensions and character of construction of
proposed streets, alleys, loading areas including numbers of parking and
loading spaces, outdoor lighting systems, storm drainage and sanitary
facilities, sidewalks, curbs and gutters and all curb cuts. Where necessary to
meet the purposes and intent of this chapter, such information shall be
provided for the site. Additional area may also be required to indicate
connections or proposed connections to major utilities;
         i.   The location of all proposed buildings and structures, accessory
and principal, showing the number of stories and height, dwelling type if
applicable, major elevations and the total square footage of the floor area by
proposed use;
         j.   The location, height, type and material of all fences and walls;
         k.   The location of dumpsters or other outdoor trash receptacles;
         l.   The location and dimensions of proposed recreation areas, open
spaces and other required amenities and improvements;
         m.   A tabulation of the total number of acres in the project and the
percentage and acreage thereof proposed to be allocated to off street parking,
open space, parks and other reservations;
         n.   A tabulation of the total number of dwelling units or CPUD lots
in the project, and the overall project density in dwelling units or CPUD lots
per gross acre;
         o.   The proposed and required off street parking and loading areas,
including parking and access for the handicapped, as specified in the most
current version of the international building code; and
         p.   Landscape plans subject to the standards contained in chapter 6,
article J of this title.
      3.   Two (2) copies of the proposed condominium or CPUD bylaws and
declarations, and covenants, conditions and restrictions, as outlined in
section
10-16-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-05, 4-20-2011)
10-16-8: CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION:
   A.   Conversion Checklist:
      1.   Zoning/Building Review: Following conceptual approval, applicant
shall return complete application as outlined in this chapter. The zoning
administrator and the building official shall review the proposed plat to
determine compliance to zoning ordinances; the Utah condominium ownership act
of 1975, where applicable; and applicable building related codes. If the
application and related documents are complete and accurate, the application
shall then be transmitted to pertinent departments for review and comment. If
the application is found to be incomplete, the staff will inform the applicant
of the necessary additional information.
      2.   Building Inspection: The building official shall require inspection
of the property and shall identify any improvements, repairs or replacements
which must be made to bring the structure into compliance with applicable
building codes. Any items identified, either through the inspection or in the
property report, as needing repair or replacement within five (5) years, shall
be included on the list of required improvements. The building official may
recommend denial until existing code violations identified are corrected, or
may recommend preliminary approval, subject to violations being corrected prior
to final approval. The building official shall identify any building conditions
by disclosure on the plat map.
      3.   Site Review:
         a.   The zoning administrator shall review the proposed building and
site plans and shall have the authority to require additional improvements to
be made to the existing site in a written report, describing the recommended
improvements to the building, the site and the surrounding public way. The
report will summarize the review, detailing any noted deficiencies.
         b.   This review shall include an analysis of the parking, including
internal circulation issues, such as surfacing and control curbs. The analysis
shall also include the number of existing parking stalls, noting any deviation
from current standards. Based upon this information, the zoning administrator
may require construction of additional parking stalls on the site, or may
require reasonable alternative parking solutions. The total number of parking
stalls available to the owners of the project shall be disclosed on the
condominium or CPUD plat.
         c.   In the case of condominiums, the zoning administrator shall
consider the public benefits of condominium ownership to the community and
balance that ownership against other types of housing in the community.
      4.   Application Approval: Once city staff has done the inspection of the
existing building and site plans and has further determined that the
application is complete and that the material is adequate and correctly details
the condominium or CPUD conversion request, the developer shall provide twelve
(12) more copies of the conversion plat for distribution to utilities and
concerned entities. The application shall then be transmitted to pertinent
departments for review and comment and staff shall schedule a utility review
meeting of the plat with all utilities and concerned entities. The meeting
shall be held not later than two (2) weeks after conversion application has
been approved and plans have been distributed. If the application is found to
be incomplete, the staff will inform the applicant of the necessary additional
information.
      5.   Construction/Utility Meeting: The conversion review meeting with
utility companies and interested entities shall be held to notify and to ensure
that the development can be serviced by utilities and interested entities as
outlined in the plan.
      6.   Planning Commission Review/Public Hearing: Following the conversion
review, a public hearing will be held during a regularly scheduled planning
commission meeting. No condominium conversion project or CPUD shall be approved
without a public hearing. Notice shall be mailed to all adjacent property
owners by city staff, as specified in section
10-16-3 of this chapter, at least three (3) days in advance. The notice shall
provide the date, time and place of the public hearing. The zoning official,
building official or designee may recommend preliminary approval, with or
without conditions, or may recommend denial at the public hearing. The planning
commission may recommend preliminary approval, with or without conditions, or
may deny the proposal at the public hearing.
      7.   City Council Review: Review for approval of the conversion shall be
given by the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting, so long as
all conditions as stipulated by planning commission are met. The city council
may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposal.
      8.   Building Permits: No building permit for a proposed conversion
project shall be issued without approval from the city council. The building
official, or designee, may approve the plans and issue applicable permits for
construction. The issuance of building permits shall serve as evidence of
approval.
      9.   Certification Of Occupancy: All construction shall be completed and
approved by the LaVerkin City building official and certificates of completion
shall be issued prior to final acceptance and final plat approval of the
condominium project or CPUD.
      10.   Dedication Of Public Streets: Notwithstanding any prohibition of or
relating to private streets in this code, including title 11 of this code,
CPUDs shall not be required to dedicate public streets in areas that are
intended for access to the CPUD project and associated parking areas, that will
be maintained by the owners of the CPUD (or CPUD owners' association) as common
or limited common area(s); and such common or limited common area(s) shall be
allowed and available for access and parking for the CPUD project.
   B.   Complete Application Required: The owner or developer shall file both a
preliminary plat application and a final plat application with the LaVerkin
City planning department on forms prescribed by the city. A property report and
building conversion request in accordance to subsection B2 of this section
shall be submitted as part of the application, together with a plan for
proposed improvements, renovations or repairs to existing structures/
facilities. The building official shall review the report and plans for
renovation and improvement to determine compliance with applicable codes or
ordinances. The building official may require revision and resubmission of the
reports if a determination is made that required information is missing. The
property report and building conversion request shall be submitted with all
required application fees, plats, articles of incorporation and bylaws of the
owners' association, declarations, and statements as outlined hereafter:
      1.   Fees: Fees shall be determined by resolution and shall include a
flat application fee plus a per unit fee.
      2.   Building Inspection And Site Plan Review: The authority of the
building official or the zoning administrator through the site plan review
process to require modification of a proposed site plan shall be limited to the
following elements in order to achieve the objectives set forth below:
         a.   General Provisions: Because conversion changes the original
anticipated ownership plan from a single ownership into a hybrid mixture of
separate ownership of dwelling units or commercial lots, combined with
collective ownership of common areas through an association, etc., each
structure being converted into a condominium project, CPUD, or other type of
ownership arrangement involving separate ownership of individual units combined
with joint or collective ownership of common areas shall constitute a change in
classification of occupancy and shall comply with basic requirements of this
code and the specific requirements listed below. All work on such structures in
the form of additions, alterations, or repairs shall conform to applicable
standards as required by the most current version of the international building
code. Where said provisions require conformity to requirements governing new
residential buildings, the applicable requirements of group R, division 1 or 3,
new construction shall apply.
         b.   Property Report: Each conversion project to obtain approval shall
submit two (2) copies of a property report prepared by a licensed engineer or
architect which discloses and describes:
            (1)   The age of the building or buildings;
            (2)   The general condition, useful life, and capacity of the
building's structural elements including the roof, foundations, mechanical
system, electrical system, plumbing system, boiler, and other structural
elements;
            (3)   All known conditions constituting deficiencies which require
repair to meet existing building codes; and
            (4)   All known conditions which may require repair or replacement
within the next five (5) year period.
Said report shall certify the structure currently conforms to applicable codes
or the owner shall present plans to bring the structures into conformity with
applicable building codes prior to issuance of certificates of occupancy.
      3.   Proposed Conversion Plan: Two (2) copies of the proposed conversion
plan, for review by the city planning and building department. The conversion
plan shall be accurately drawn to scale, and, for condominiums, in accordance
with the requirements of section 57-8-13, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as
amended), by a registered Utah land surveyor. Such conversion plat shall set
forth:
         a.   The angular and linear data along the exterior boundaries of the
property;
         b.   The linear measurement and location, with reference to the
exterior boundaries, of the building or buildings;
         c.   The diagrammatic floor plans of the buildings, including
identifying number or symbol;
         d.   In the case of condominiums, the elevations of the finished or
unfinished interior surfaces of the floors and ceilings and the linear
measurements of the finished or unfinished interior surfaces of the perimeter
walls, and the lateral extensions of every unit;
         e.   A distinguishing number or symbol for every physical unit
identified on the plat map;
         f.   The limited common and common areas and their intended use/uses;
         g.   The location and size of sanitary and storm sewers, water, gas,
telephone, electric and other utility lines, culverts and other underground
structures in or affecting the project, including existing and proposed
facilities and easements for these facilities. In the case of city owned
utilities, such information shall be provided to the applicant by the
department of public works;
         h.   The location, dimensions and character of construction of
proposed streets, alleys, loading areas (including numbers of parking and
loading spaces), outdoor lighting systems, storm drainage and sanitary
facilities, sidewalks, curbs and gutters and all curb cuts. Where necessary to
meet the purposes and intent of this chapter, such information shall be
provided for the site. Additional area may also be required to be shown to
indicate connections or proposed connections to major utilities;
         i.   The location of all proposed buildings and structures, accessory
and principal, showing the number of stories and height, dwelling type, if
applicable, major elevations and the total square footage of the floor area by
proposed use;
         j.   The location, height, type and material of all fences and walls;
         k.   The location of dumpsters or other outdoor trash receptacles;
         l.   The location and dimensions of proposed recreation areas, open
spaces and other required amenities and improvements;
         m.   A tabulation of the total number of acres in the project and the
percentage and acreage thereof proposed to be allocated to off street parking,
open space, parks and other reservations;
         n.   A tabulation of the total number of dwelling units or CPUD lots
in the project, and the overall project density in dwelling units or CPUD lots
per gross acre;
         o.   The proposed and required off street parking and loading areas,
including parking and access for the handicapped, as specified in the most
current version of the international building code; and
         p.   Landscape plans subject to the standards contained in chapter 6,
article J of this title.
      4.   Proposed Bylaws: Two (2) copies of the proposed condominium or CPUD
bylaws and declarations, and covenants, conditions and restrictions, as
outlined in section
10-16-9 of this chapter.
      5.   Proof Of Notice: Where conversion of an existing residential
building is proposed, proof of notice to the owners/occupants by the developer,
shall be required before approval for construction is given. The notice shall
include the estimated purchase price of the units, and information regarding
proposed improvements. The notice shall describe any financing packages or
economic incentives being offered to owners/occupants to assist in unit
purchase. The notice shall also include a date owners/occupants must vacate or
purchase. Said date shall be no earlier than ninety (90) days after service of
the notice. Any relocation information for the owners/occupants specifying
available housing relocation resource agencies, and a plan of any services to
be provided by the developer, shall be included in the notice. Notification of
tenants shall not be required where permitted occupancy is less than thirty
(30) days.
   C.   Final Plat Approval:
      1.   Final Plat Application: When construction is complete and has been
accepted by the engineer, and the building official has granted final
certificate of completion or occupancy as applicable, the applicant shall apply
for final plat approval before planning commission upon application provided by
the city, including all fees and recording documents.
      2.   Engineer Approval: Upon receipt of the final mylar plat, the city
engineer shall examine the plat to determine whether it conforms to the
preliminary plat and all conditions of approval. If the plat is found to
conform, the engineer shall sign the plat.
      3.   Building Official Approval: If a certificate of completion or
occupancy as applicable has been issued, the building official shall sign the
plat.
      4.   City Attorney Approval: The city attorney shall examine the plat and
advise the planning commission as to the form of the final plat and other
recordable documents. The city attorney shall certify that any lands dedicated
to the public are dedicated in fee simple and that the applicant is the owner
of record.
      5.   Planning Commission Approval: Planning commission shall review the
final plat at a regularly scheduled meeting. If the condominium project has
been approved by the engineer and has received a certificate of completion or
occupancy from the building official, the commission chair shall sign the plat.
      6.   City Council Approval: The city council shall examine the plat and
the recordable documents to determine conformity with the requirements of the
city ordinances. If the plat and the other recordable documents conform to city
ordinances, the mayor shall sign the plat. The city attorney shall then approve
and sign the plat, at which time it may be recorded with the Washington County
recorder.
      7.   Recording: No final plat shall have any force or effect until it has
received final approval by the city attorney and has been recorded with the
Washington County recorder.
      8.   Rental/Sales: No condominium units or CPUD lots may be sold or
rented, until the plat has been recorded with the Washington County recorder.
(Ord. 2011-05, 4-20-2011)
10-16-9: COVENANTS, CONDITIONS, AND RESTRICTIONS (CC&Rs):
CC&Rs shall include an itemization of those facilities which will be commonly
owned and maintained by the owners, and the plan for providing long term
funding and maintenance. All bylaws, declarations, covenants, conditions,
restrictions, design elements and any common requirements for ownership shall
be included. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007)
10-16-10: CONDOMINIUM RENTALS:
Where it is expected that residential condominium units will be rented to
tenants other than the owner of record, the following declarations may be
addressed in the covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs): (Ord. 2011-05,
4-20-2011)
   A.   Limitations: A statement that the homeowners' association may regulate,
limit, or prohibit rentals of condominium units;
   B.   Homeowners' Association Approval: A statement that the homeowners'
association may require the rental of condominium units to be conducted through
the homeowners' association or a designated management company, and may require
that all lease agreements be reviewed and approved by the homeowners'
association or the management company, that any tenants be screened and
approved by the homeowners' association or the management company prior to
renting the condominium, and that the approval of the homeowners' association
or the management company shall not be unreasonably withheld;
   C.   Agreements: A statement that prior to renting any condominium unit, the
condominium owner and the tenant shall execute a written lease agreement which
shall include the following provisions:
      1.   The tenant shall agree to comply with all of the terms and
conditions of the condominium declaration and bylaws;
      2.   The tenant shall agree not to allow or commit any nuisance, waste,
unlawful or illegal act upon the premises; and
      3.   The owner and the tenant shall acknowledge that the homeowners'
association is an intended third party beneficiary of the lease agreement, that
the homeowners' association shall have the right to enforce compliance with the
condominium declaration and bylaws and to abate any nuisance, waste, unlawful
or illegal activity upon the premises; and that the homeowners' association
shall be entitled to exercise all of the owner's rights and remedies under the
lease agreement to do so;
   D.   Tenant Identification: A statement requiring that prior to a tenant's
occupancy of a condominium unit, the condominium owner must provide to the
homeowners' association the name, address and telephone number of the tenant
and a copy of the written lease agreement;
   E.   Enforcement: A statement that the homeowners' association shall have
the right and the obligation to enforce compliance with the condominium
declaration and bylaws against any owner and/or occupant of any condominium
unit, and shall have all rights and remedies available under state or local
law, in addition to its rights and remedies as a third party beneficiary under
any lease agreement, to enforce such compliance. (Ord. 2007-16, 4-4-2007)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose And Intent
11-1-2: Definitions
11-1-3: Applicability
11-1-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of these subdivision rules and regulations are:
   A   To protect and promote the health, safety, convenience, and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the City of LaVerkin in the division or
subdivision of land and other matters pertaining to such division or
subdivision.
   B.   To ensure that any proposed subdivision of land and its ultimate use
shall be compatible with sound development practices, and, to the extent
possible, harmonize the interests of the person or persons seeking to obtain
subdivision approval with the interests of those persons owning land or living
in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision.
   C.   To facilitate orderly growth in the City of LaVerkin and provide
fundamental fairness in the processing of applications for subdivision of
property.
   D.   To establish such exceptions or additional requirements as may be
necessary where exceptional topographical or geological features or conditions
exist, such as sensitive lands, collapsible soils or other conditions
necessitating exceptions from or additional requirements to this chapter. (Ord.
2006-26, 8-2-2006; amd. Ord. 2008-18, 11-19-2008; Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
ADJACENT LANDOWNER: Any property owner of record, according to the records of
the county recorder, whose property adjoins or abuts property proposed for
subdivision, or any portion thereof.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY OR ALUA: An individual, board, or commission,
appointed or employed by the city, including municipal staff or a member of the
LaVerkin planning commission, to review and approve applications for
subdivision of property for single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, or
townhomes of four (4) units or fewer. It does not mean the LaVerkin City
Council or any member thereof.
AFFECTED ENTITY: Those entities defined by state law, including a county,
municipality, independent special district, local district, school district,
interlocal cooperation entity, specified public utility, or the state
department of transportation, if: (i) the entity's services or facilities are
likely to require expansion or significant modification because of an intended
use of land; (ii) the entity has filed with the municipality a copy of the
entity's general or long range plan; or (iii) the entity's boundaries or
facilities are within one mile of land which is the subject of a general plan
amendment or land use ordinance change.
BLOCK: The land surrounded by streets and other rights-of-way other than an
alley, or land which is designated as a block on any recorded subdivision plat.
BONA FIDE DIVISION OR PARTITION OF LAND FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES: The division
of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots none of which is less than five
(5) acres in an area, and where no dedication of any street is required to
serve any such lots or parcels of land so created.
CITY: City of LaVerkin, Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of LaVerkin, Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: The City Engineer of LaVerkin, Utah, or a consulting engineering
firm designated as the City Engineer by the City Council.
CITY PLANNER: The professional planner of the city, or person designated as
such by the City Council.
COMMUNICATIONS EASEMENT: An exterior easement for placement of facilities
intended to be used in connection with the delivery of multichannel video
programming services, cable services, information services, or
telecommunications or telecommunications services.
COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE: Facilities planned to be used in connection with
the delivery of multichannel video programming services, cable services,
information services, telecommunications or telecommunications services, which
term shall include, but not be limited to, conduit.
CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS: Formal plat prepared by a licensed engineer showing all
subdivision improvement plans, infrastructure, easements, structures, rights-
of-way, grading and existing and proposed utilities, for purposes of evaluating
an application for preliminary subdivision plat approval.
COUNTY: Washington County, Utah.
CULINARY WATER AUTHORITY: The department, agency, or public entity with
responsibility to review and approve the feasibility of the culinary water
system and sources for the subject property.
DEDICATION: Land set aside by an owner for any general and public uses.
DERELICT LOT OR PARCEL: A residual lot or parcel of land created or proposed to
be created as part of a proposed subdivision design of a larger tract, which
lot or parcel has insufficient area or dimension or possesses other condition
(s) which prohibit its qualification as a zoning lot within the applicable
zone.
EASEMENT: That portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use by a
person or agency other than the legal owner or owners of said property or
properties. The easement may be for use under, on, or above said lot or lots.
FINAL PLAT: The final drawing of the subdivision and dedication prepared for
filing of record with the county recorder and in compliance with all the
requirements set forth in this chapter and adopted pursuant thereto.
GENERAL PLAN: A plan, labeled "General Plan of LaVerkin City," including maps
or reports or both, which has been approved by the City Council as required by
law, or such plan as it may be amended from time to time.
IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE: A surety bond, letter of credit, financial
institution bond, cash, assignment of rights, lien, or other equivalent
security required by the city to guaranty the proper completion of landscaping
or an infrastructure improvement required as a condition precedent to recording
a subdivision plat or development of a commercial, industrial, mixed use or
multifamily project.
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT OR SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT: Permanent infrastructure
that is essential for the public health and safety or that is required for
human occupation and an applicant must install in accordance with published
installation and inspection specifications for public improvements, and,
whether the improvement is public or private, as a condition of recording a
subdivision plat, obtaining a building permit or development of a commercial,
industrial, mixed use, condominium or multifamily project.
IMPROVEMENT WARRANTY: An applicant's unconditional warranty that the
applicant's installed and accepted landscaping or infrastructure improvement
complies with the city's written standards for design, materials, and
workmanship, and will not fail in any material respect as a result of poor
workmanship or materials within the warranty period.
IMPROVEMENT WARRANTY PERIOD: A period no later than one (1) year after the
city's acceptance of required landscaping or no later than one (1) year after
the city's acceptance of required infrastructure, unless the city determines
for good cause that a one-year period would be inadequate to protect the public
health safety and welfare and the city has substantial evidence on record of
poor performance by the applicant or that the area upon which the
infrastructure will be constructed contains suspect soil and the city has not
otherwise required the applicant to mitigate the suspect soils.
JOINT UTILITY COMMITTEE: The representatives of the city, Ash Creek Special
Service District and franchisee utility companies to review and sign
construction drawings.
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The LaVerkin City Council.
LOT: A separately delineated parcel of real property having a number and
designation shown on a recorded subdivision plat, or a contiguous quantity of
real property defined in a deed by metes and bounds which has a separate
property identification number according to the records of the county recorder
and is not shown on a recorded subdivision plat.
LOT RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land of not less than twenty-six (26) feet wide
connecting a lot to a street for use as private access to that lot.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP: A zoning map adopted by the City Council pursuant to the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-501, as amended.
OPEN SPACE: Designated land within the subdivision which shall always remain
undeveloped, which shall be included in improved parks and recreational areas,
or which shall remain all natural.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or
partnership, firm, or association of individuals, however styled or designated.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The LaVerkin City Planning Commission.
PLAT: A map or depiction of a subdivision, showing thereon the division of a
tract or parcel of land into lots, blocks, and streets, or other divisions and
dedications.
PUBLIC LANDSCAPING IMPROVEMENTS: Landscaping that an applicant is required to
install to comply with published installation and inspection specifications for
public improvements that will be dedicated to and maintained by the city or are
associated with and proximate to trail improvements that connect to planned or
exiting public infrastructure.
RESIDUAL ZONING LOT: A lot or parcel: (a) created or modified by the proposed
subdivision, but not included as a lot on the final plat; and (b) which
qualifies as a zoning lot, but, because of insufficient size, dimension or
other limitation, is not readily capable of further division in accordance with
the requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance.
REVIEW CYCLE: Means: (i) the applicant's submittal of a complete subdivision
land use application; (ii) the city's review of that subdivision land use
application; (iii) the city's response to that subdivision land use
application, in accordance with this section; and (iv) the applicant's reply to
the city's response that addresses each of the city's required modifications or
requests for additional information.
SANITARY SEWER AUTHORITY: The Ash Creek Special Service District, a public
entity with responsibility to review and approve the feasibility of sanitary
sewer services or on-site wastewater systems within the city.
SECURITY OR COMPLETION ASSURANCE: A financial guarantee assuring the completion
of all subdivision public improvements and infrastructure.
STREET: A thoroughfare which has been dedicated or abandoned to the public and
accepted by proper public authority, or a thoroughfare not less than twenty-six
(26) feet wide which has been made public by right of use and which affords the
principal access to the abutting property.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended
to serve as a major traffic way and is designated on the general plan as a
controlled access highway, major street, parkway or other equivalent term to
identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street, existing or proposed, which is the main means of
access to an arterial street system.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A street which originates from a designated city street
with no other outlet and forcing a radius turn area, not to exceed six hundred
sixty (660) feet in length without the written approval of the City Council,
the Planning Commission and the Fire chief.
STREET, PRIVATE: A right-of-way or easement in private ownership not dedicated
or maintained as a public street.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL: A street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary to
a collector street and which serves or is intended to serve local needs of a
neighborhood.
SUBDIVIDER: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership,
corporation, trust or other legal entity commencing proceedings under this
chapter to effect a subdivision for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION: Means: (i) the division or development of land whether by deed,
metes and bounds description, devise and testacy, map, plat or other recorded
instrument; and (ii) except as provided herein, divisions of land for all
residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be used for
commercial, agricultural and industrial purposes. Subdivision does not include:
   1.   A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the purpose
of joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a contiguous parcel of
unsubdivided agricultural land, if neither the resulting combined parcel nor
the parcel remaining from the division or partition violates an applicable land
use ordinance;
   2.   A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining unsubdivided
properties adjusting their mutual boundary if no new lot is created and the
adjustment does not violate applicable land use ordinances;
   3.   A recorded document executed by the owner of record, revising the legal
description of more than one contiguous unsubdivided parcel of property into
one legal description encompassing all such parcels of property, or joining a
subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of property that has not been
subdivided, if the joinder does not violate applicable land use ordinances; or
   4.   The joining of a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided does not constitute a "subdivision" as to
the unsubdivided parcel of property or subject the unsubdivided parcel to the
provisions of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLANS: The civil engineering plans associated with
required infrastructure and municipally controlled utilities required for a
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE REVIEW: Review by the city to verify that a subdivision
land use application meets the criteria of the city's subdivision ordinances.
SUBDIVISION PLAN REVIEW: A review of the applicant's subdivision improvements
and other aspects of the subdivision land use application to verify that the
application complies with city ordinances and applicable standards and
specifications. (Ord. 2008-18, 11-19-2008; amd. Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is wholly or
partially within the boundaries of LaVerkin except in compliance with this
Title.
   B.   No person shall sell, exchange, or offer to sell or exchange, any
parcel of land which is part of a subdivision of a larger tract of land, or
offer for recording in the office of the Washington County Recorder any deed
conveying such parcel of land, or any interest therein, unless such subdivision
has been created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this
Title.
   C.   All lots, plots or tracts of land located within a subdivision shall be
subject to this chapter regardless of whether such tract is owned by the
subdivider or a subsequent purchaser, transferor or holder of the land.
   D.   No subdivision plan or plat shall have the effect of creating a
derelict lot or parcel. Any such lot or parcel must be attached to adjacent
lots or parcels rather than allowed to remain as an independent lot or parcel.
Privately owned protection or retainer strips shall not be permitted.
   E.   No subdivision plan or plat shall have the effect of leaving a residual
zoning lot for which the required subdivision improvements: (a) have not been
previously constructed; and (b) are not to be included as part of the required
improvements for the proposed subdivision. For purposes of this paragraph, a
"residual zoning lot" shall be construed to include a parcel: (a) created or
modified by the proposed subdivision, but not included as a lot on the final
plat; and (b) which qualifies as a zoning lot, but, because of insufficient
size, dimension or other limitation, is not readily capable of further division
in accordance with the requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance.
   F.   This chapter applies to land use decisions arising from applications
for subdivision approval of residential, commercial or industrial property; it
does not apply to land use regulations adopted, approved, or agreed upon by a
legislative body exercising land use authority in the review of land use
applications for zoning or other land use regulation approvals.
   G.   The provisions of this chapter relating to creation of the ALUA and
providing for review cycle restrictions shall apply only to applications for
subdivision approval of single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and
townhomes of four (4) units or fewer. All other subdivision applications,
including but not limited to, commercial, industrial, multi-family residential
of more than four (4) units, planned development communities, and applications
affecting property within identified geological hazard areas, shall be reviewed
and approved by the planning commission and city council in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   H.   A subdivision plat recorded without the signatures required under this
section is void.
   I.   A transfer of land pursuant to a void plat is voidable by the land use
authority.
   J.   No building permit shall be issued until the final subdivision plat has
been recorded and all public improvements have been installed and accepted by
the city or guaranteed with an improvement completion assurance.
   K.   An owner of any land located in a subdivision who transfers or sells
any land in that subdivision before a plat of the subdivision has been approved
is guilty of an infraction for each lot or parcel transferred or sold.
   L.   Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, the preliminary
plat and final plat may be reviewed and approved concurrently if no public
infrastructure or other public improvements are required and all other
applicable requirements of this title are met. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
CHAPTER 2
NECESSITY OF PLAT, ADMINISTRATION, NOTICE, FEES
SECTION:
11-2-1: Necessity Of Plat; Exemption From Plat Requirements
11-2-2: Authority To Review And Approve
11-2-3: Notice Requirements
11-2-4: Fees
11-2-1: NECESSITY OF PLAT; EXEMPTION FROM PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
All subdivisions shall be required to obtain preliminary and final plat
approval in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except as follows:
   A.   A subdivision creating no more than one (1) new lot may, with written
approval from city staff, be approved without the necessity of preparing and
filing a preliminary plat or final plat if:
      1.   The proposed subdivision is not traversed by the mapped lines of a
proposed street as shown in the general plan unless the city staff has approved
the location and dedication of any public street, municipal utility easement,
any other easement, or any other land for public purposes as the municipality's
ordinance requires;
      2.   The proposed subdivision has been approved by the culinary water
authority and the sanitary sewer authority;
      3.   The proposed subdivision is located in a zoned area; and
      4.   The proposed subdivision conforms to all applicable land use
ordinances or has properly received a variance from the requirements of an
otherwise conflicting and applicable land use ordinance.
   B.   A lot or parcel resulting from a division of agricultural land is
exempt from the plat requirements of this chapter if the lot or parcel:
      1.   Qualifies as land in agricultural use under Utah Code Ann. § 59-2-
502;
      2.   Meets the minimum size requirement of the applicable land use
ordinances; and
      3.   Is not and will not be used for any non-agricultural purpose.
   C.   The boundaries of each lot or parcel exempted under subsection A and B
above shall be graphically illustrated on a record of survey map that, after
receiving the same approvals as are required for a plat under § 10-9a-604 of
the Utah Code, as amended, shall be recorded with the Washington County
Recorder.
   D.   If a lot or parcel exempted under subsection B above is used for a non-
agricultural purpose, the city may require the lot or parcel to comply with the
requirements of Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-603, as amended, and the subdivision
requirements of this chapter.
   E.   Documents recorded in the Washington County Recorder's Office that
divide property by a metes and bounds description do not create an approved
subdivision allowed by this chapter unless the written approval required by
subsection A above is attached to the document.
   F.   The creation of a lot under subsection A above shall not be approved
until a plan for providing utilities and other required improvements to the
proposed lot has been reviewed and signed by members of the Joint Utility
Committee. No building permit will be issued for said lot until the approved
improvements are constructed and accepted.
   G.   Lot line adjustments are exempt from plat requirements. However, in
instances where the property to be adjusted abuts a city street where
improvements have only been extended to the pre-adjustment property line, prior
to final approval of the lot line adjustment, street improvements congruent to
those that are existing shall be required.
   H.   Lots or parcels created in violation of this section shall not be
issued a building permit until the violation is corrected. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-
16-2024)
11-2-2: AUTHORITY TO REVIEW AND APPROVE:
All applications for preliminary and final subdivision plat approval under this
chapter shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the following:
   A    The Administrative Land Use Authority (the "ALUA"), is hereby created
pursuant to Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-604.1 and shall be made up of five (5)
individuals, including: the City Administrator, the City Engineer, the City
Director of Operations, and two (2) members who shall be appointed by the City
Administrator, one of whom shall be a member of the Planning Commission.
      1.   The ALUA shall be responsible for review and approval of
applications for preliminary and final subdivision plat approval for
subdivisions of single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and townhomes of
four (4) units or fewer as hereinafter set forth, and to provide a monthly
status report to the City Council on all subdivision applications received by
the ALUA.
      2.   All approvals granted by the ALUA shall require a minimum of three
(3) affirmative votes.
   B.   The Planning Commission and City Council shall be responsible for
review and approval of applications for preliminary and final plat approval for
all other subdivisions, including commercial subdivisions, industrial
subdivisions, multi-family residential subdivisions exceeding more than four
(4) units, planned development communities, and applications affecting property
within identified geological hazard areas, as hereinafter set forth. (Ord.
2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-2-3: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The ALUA, Planning Commission and City Council may, but shall not be
required to, give public notice or hold public hearings in connection with
review of an application for any preliminary or final subdivision plat
approval.
   B.   Within twenty (20) days after the date on which an applicant submits a
complete application for preliminary subdivision plat review, as determined by
the ALUA or Planning Commission, as the case may be, written notice of the
proposed subdivision shall be mailed to the owner of any water conveyance
facility located entirely or partially within one hundred (100) feet of the
subdivision plat, as determined using information made available to the city. A
facility owner's failure to provide comments to the city does not affect or
impair the authority to approve the subdivision plat.
   C.   An application or petition for amendment of a subdivision plat shall
comply with the notice requirements contained in Utah Code Ann. § 10-6a-608 and
§ 10-6a-609. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-2-4: FEES:
The following fees are hereby established:
   A.   Preliminary Plat Application Fee: At the time of filing of an
application for preliminary plat approval, the applicant shall deposit with the
city a non- refundable fee made payable to the City of LaVerkin. The City
Council shall by resolution from time to time prescribe the amount of such fee,
which shall be for the purpose of reimbursing the city for the expense of
checking and reviewing the subdivision improvement plans, compliance with city
ordinances and review of the preliminary plat.
   B.   Final Plat Application Fee: At the time of filing of an application for
final plat approval, the applicant shall deposit with the city a non-refundable
fee made payable to the City of LaVerkin. The City Council shall by resolution
from time to time prescribe the amount of such fee, which shall be for the
purpose of reimbursing the city for the expense of checking and reviewing such
final subdivision improvement plans and the final plat.
   C.   Recording Fee: At the time of recording the final plat, the subdivider
shall be responsible for payment of the recording fee imposed by the Washington
County Recorder. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
CHAPTER 3
PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Pre-Application Meeting
11-3-2: Review Of Application For Completeness
11-3-3: Preparation Of Preliminary Plat
11-3-4: Construction Drawings
11-3-1: PRE-APPLICATION MEETING:
A pre-application meeting with city staff shall not be required as a condition
of preliminary plat approval; however, if an applicant requests a pre-
application meeting with city staff for review of plans for a preliminary plat,
city shall, within fifteen (15) business days after the request, schedule a
meeting to review the concept plan and give initial feedback. The city shall
make available at the pre-application meeting or on the city website:
   A.   Copies of applicable land use regulations;
   B.   A complete list of standards required for the subdivision;
   C.   Preliminary and final application approval checklists; and
   D.   Feedback on the concept plan. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-3-2: REVIEW OF APPLICATION FOR COMPLETENESS:
Applications for preliminary plat approval shall comply with all requirements
of this chapter and Utah Code Ann. §§ 10-9a-601 et. seq., and shall conform to
the following:
   A.   The applicant shall submit a complete preliminary plat application form
and application checklist, together with:
      1.   A proposed preliminary plat, prepared by a licensed engineer or
surveyor in conformity with city standards, containing the information set
forth in Section 11-3-3 below.
      2.   A subdivision improvement plan and construction drawings prepared by
a licensed engineer in PDF format in conformity with city standards and this
chapter.
      3.   An owner's affidavit certifying the accuracy of all documents
submitted.
      4.   Any previously entered-into development agreement affecting the
property.
      5.   A phasing plan for any subdivision to be developed in phases.
      6.   A plan or method for handling of storm water drainage.
      7.   Any additional information required by the city as a result of a
pre-application meeting.
      8.   A will-serve letter from any utility provider.
      9.   The preliminary plat review fee.
   B.   Upon a determination that the preliminary plat application, including
the preliminary plat, subdivision improvement plans, construction drawings,
etc., is complete and conforms with all zoning requirements or requirements of
any prior development agreement, the preliminary plat and accompanying
improvement plans, construction drawings, etc., shall be reviewed as hereafter
provided. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-3-3: PREPARATION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The preliminary plat shall be twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x
36"), shall be clear and legible, shall conform to good engineering and
professional drafting room practice, and shall contain or be accompanied by the
following information:
   A.   Title Block: The title block on the right side of each sheet shall
contain:
      1.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
      2.   The location of the subdivision, including the address and the
section, township and range.
      3.   The name and address of the owner and subdivider, if other than the
owner.
      4.   Date of preparation and north point.
      5.   Scale shall be of sufficient size to adequately describe in legible
form all required conditions of this subdivision title.
   B.   Existing Conditions: The preliminary plat shall show:
      1.   The location of the nearest survey monument.
      2.   The boundary of the proposed subdivision and the acreage included.
      3.   All property contiguous to the property to be subdivided and under
the control of the subdivider, even though only a portion is being subdivided
(where the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's tract, a
sketch of the prospective street system on the unplatted parts of the
subdivider's land shall be submitted, and the street system of the part
submitted shall be considered in light of existing master street plan or other
city studies), and all property contiguous to the proposed subdivision.
      4.   The location, width and names of all existing streets within one
hundred feet (100') of the subdivision and of all prior platted streets or
other public ways, utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces,
permanent easements, and section and corporation lines, within and adjacent to
the tract.
      5.   The location of all wells, proposed, active and abandoned, and of
all reservoirs and ponds within the tract and to a distance of at least one
hundred feet (100') beyond the tract boundaries.
      6.   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground
facilities within the tract and to a distance of at least one hundred feet
(100') beyond the tract boundaries, indicating the pipe sizes, grades, manholes
and exact location.
      7.   Existing fire hydrants within a distance of at least three hundred
feet (300') beyond the tract boundaries.
      8.   Existing ditches, canals, natural drainage channels and open
waterways and proposed realignments, including drainage and existing and future
flood control alignments.
      9.   Common boundary lines of adjacent tracts within one hundred feet
(100') of the proposed subdivision parcel, showing ownership where possible.
      10.   Contour at vertical intervals not greater than two feet (2') or
two-foot (2') elevations from the designated benchmark.
      11.   Identification of potential geotechnical constraints on the project
site (such as expansive rock and soil, collapsible soil, shallow bedrock, and
caliche, gypsiferous rock and soil, potentially unstable rock or soil units
including fault lines, shallow ground water, and windblown sand) and
recommendations for their mitigation.
   C.   Proposed Conditions: The preliminary plat should contain the following
which shall be indicated according to the specifications in this chapter:
      1.   The proposed layout of subdivision streets, tied to existing
numbered survey monuments for identification, showing location, widths and
other dimensions of proposed streets, crosswalks, alleys and easements, new
street locations, construction and compaction specifications, stop signs,
streetlights and street name signs.
      2.   Streets shall be designated with street numbers. Streets may also be
secondarily designated by actual or proposed names.
      3.   Typical street cross section and street grades pursuant to the
standard drawings as outlined in appendix charts on file in the city.
      4.   Approximate radius of all centerline curves on highways or streets.
      5.   Each lot shall front a street shown in the subdivision. Flag lots
are acceptable provided they meet all of the requirements of Section
10-7-12 of this code.
      6.   The layout, number and typical dimensions of lots.
      7.   Parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use.
      8.   Easements for culinary water, irrigation, sewer, drainage, utility
lines, access and other purposes. The culinary water, irrigation, sewer, and
drainage layouts shall be the first utilities designed.
      9.   A plan or method by which the subdivider proposes to handle
stormwater drainage for the subdivision, accompanied by a hydrology report.
      10.   Where necessary, copies of any agreement with adjacent property
owners relevant to the proposed subdivision shall be presented to the city's
authorized representative and such agreement shall be noted on the plat (i.e.,
water, sewer easements).
      11.   Phasing plan, if applicable.
   D.   Subdivision Improvement Plans: As part of a complete preliminary plat
application, the applicant shall submit subdivision improvement plans prepared
by a licensed engineer for construction and installation of all on-site and
required off-site improvements, including streets, water lines, sewer lines,
power, drainage and fencing, prepared in accordance with:
      1.   Current city land use ordinances;
      2.   Current city standards and specifications;
      3.   City drainage plan;
      4.   Ash Creek Special Service District design guidelines and
construction standards;
      5.   Applicable building code;
      6.   Applicable fire code;
      7.   Rocky Mountain Power standards and specifications, if applicable;
      8.   Specific geotechnical recommendations for the design and
construction of the proposed subdivision, which shall include the following, if
applicable:
         a.   A general assessment of the requirements needed to develop on the
site;
         b.   Site preparation and grading and the suitability of on-site soils
for use as structural fill;
         c.   Stable cut and fill slopes including recommendations concerning
the effects of material removal and the introduction of water;
         d.   Recommendations for foundation type and design criteria,
including but not limited to bearing capacity of natural or compacted soils,
provisions to mitigate the effects of expansive, compressible, or collapsible
soils, differential settlement and varying soil strength, and the effects of
adjacent loads;
         e.   Anticipated total and differential settlement;
         f.   Special design and construction considerations, as necessary,
such as the excavation and replacement of unsuitable materials, excavation
difficulties, stabilization, or special foundation provisions for problem soil
conditions;
         g.   Design criteria for restrained and unrestrained retaining or
rockery wall; and
         h.   Moisture protection and surface drainage.
Subdivision improvement plans shall remain valid for twenty-four (24) months
after final plat approval. Subdivision improvement plans signed more than
twenty-four (24) months prior to construction of improvements shall be deemed
to have expired. For a subdivision where subdivision improvements have been
started but not completed within twenty-four (24) months of approval, the
Director of Operations may permit construction to continue in accordance with
the approved plans. Subdivision improvement plans showing multiple phases of a
project are valid only for those improvements constructed within the first
twenty- four (24) months of approval. New approvals must be obtained, and any
new standards shall apply for future phases or delayed projects. (Ord. 2024-18,
10-16-2024)
11-3-4: CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS:
As part of an application for preliminary plat approval, an applicant shall
submit construction drawings which shall meet the requirements of the LaVerkin
City 2022 Design and Construction Standards, as the same now exists or as may
be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
CHAPTER 4
PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-4-1: Preliminary Plat Review And Approval For Single-Family Dwellings, Two-
Family Dwellings, And Townhomes Of Four (4) Units Or Fewer
11-4-2: Preliminary Plat Review And Approval For Other Subdivisions
11-4-3: Authorization To Proceed With Application For Final Subdivision Plat
Approval
11-4-1: PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS, TWO-
FAMILY DWELLINGS, AND TOWNHOMES OF FOUR (4) UNITS OR FEWER:
Upon receipt of a complete application for preliminary plat approval for
subdivisions consisting of single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and
townhomes of four (4) units or fewer, the ALUA shall complete its review of the
application for preliminary plat approval in no more than three (3) review
cycles, in accordance with the following:
   A.   No later than fifteen (15) business days after the day on which an
applicant submits a complete application for preliminary subdivision plat
approval, the ALUA shall complete its initial review of the application for
ordinance review.
   B.   The ALUA shall complete a subdivision plan review of a subdivision
improvement plat that is submitted with a complete subdivision application
within twenty (20) business days after the complete subdivision application is
submitted.
   C.   In reviewing an application for approval of a preliminary subdivision
plat, the ALUA may require additional information relating to an applicant's
plans to ensure compliance with city ordinances and approved standards and
specifications for construction of public improvements and modifications to
plans that do not meet current ordinances, applicable standards or
specifications, or do not contain complete information.
   D   The ALUA's request for additional information or modifications as
specified above shall be specific and include citations to ordinances,
standards, or specifications that require the modifications to subdivision
improvement plans and shall be logged in an index of requested modifications or
additions.
   E.   Unless a change or correction is necessitated by the applicant's
adjustment to a subdivision improvement plan or an update to a phasing plan
that adjusts the infrastructure needed for the specific development, a change
or correction not addressed or referenced in the city's subdivision improvement
plan review shall be waived.
   F.   A modification or correction necessary to protect public health and
safety or to enforce state or federal law will not be waived by the city.
   G.   If an applicant makes a material change to a subdivision improvement
plan, the city has the discretion to restart the review process at the first
review of the subdivision improvement plan, but only with respect to the
portion of the subdivision improvement that the material change substantively
affects.
   H.   If an applicant does not submit a revised or corrected subdivision
improvement plan within twenty (20) business days after the city requires a
modification or correction, the city shall have an additional twenty (20)
business days to respond to the subdivision improvement plan.
   I.   After the applicant has responded to the final review cycle, and the
applicant has complied with each modification or correction requested by the
city in the previous review cycle, the city may not require additional
revisions if the applicant has not materially changed the plan, other than
changes that were in response to requested modifications or corrections.
   J.   In addition to revised plans, an applicant shall provide a written
explanation in response to the city's review comments, identifying and
explaining the applicant's revisions and reasons for declining to make
revisions, if any. The applicant's written explanation shall be comprehensive
and specific, including citations to applicable standards and ordinances for
the design and an index of requested revisions or additions for each required
correction.
   K.   If an applicant fails to address a review comment in the response, the
review cycle shall not be complete and the subsequent review cycle by the city
shall not begin until all comments are addressed.
   L.   If, at any point during the review cycle, an application for approval
of the preliminary subdivision plat and subdivision improvement plan complies
with applicable city ordinances and the requirements of Utah Code Ann. §10-9a-
601 et. seq., the ALUA shall approve the preliminary subdivision plat and
subdivision improvement plan. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL FOR OTHER SUBDIVISIONS:
Review of preliminary plat for commercial subdivisions, industrial
subdivisions, multi-family subdivision of more than four (4) units; planned
development communities and applications affecting property within identified
geological hazard areas. Upon receipt of a complete application for preliminary
plat approval for any subdivision other than those described in §
11-4-1 above, and after review by city staff and the joint utility committee to
ensure compliance with all city ordinances, rules, regulations, standards and
specifications.
   A.   The Planning Commission:
      1.   May, but shall not be required to, schedule a public hearing and
give public notice of such hearing; and
      2.   Upon conclusion of its review of said application for preliminary
plat approval, forward said preliminary plat and all accompanying subdivision
improvement plans, construction drawings and other documents to the city
council along with a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, or
denial.
   B.   The city council shall, upon receipt of the recommendation of the
planning commission:
      1.   At its next regularly scheduled city council meeting, include as an
agenda item review of the preliminary plat, subdivision improvement plans,
construction drawings, other accompanying plans, and the planning commission
recommendation; and
      2.   Upon conclusion of its review of said application for preliminary
plat approval, the planning commission recommendation and all accompanying
documents, the city council shall: (a) approve the preliminary subdivision plat
if the plat and subdivision improvement plans comply with applicable city
ordinances and the requirements of Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-601; (b) approve the
preliminary plat with conditions; or (c) deny approval of the preliminary plat.
      3.   Approval by the city council of the preliminary plat, or approval of
the preliminary plat with conditions, shall enable the applicant to proceed
with the process for final plat approval. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-4-3: AUTHORIZATION TO PROCEED WITH APPLICATION FOR FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
APPROVAL:
Reserved.
CHAPTER 5
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL PROCESS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Time Frame For Submission Of Application For Final Subdivision Plat
Approval
11-5-2: Application For Final Subdivision Plat Approval
11-5-3: Final Plat Requirements
11-5-4: ALUA Review Of Application For Final Plat Approval For Single- Family
Dwellings, Two-Family Dwellings, And Townhomes Of Four (4) Units Or Fewer;
Appeal Panel
11-5-5:    Planning Commission And City Council Review Of Application For Final
Plat Approval For Commercial Subdivisions, Industrial Subdivisions, Multi-
Family Subdivisions Of More Than Four (4) Units, Planned Development
Communities, And Applications Affecting Property Within Identified Geological
Hazard Areas
11-5-1: TIME FRAME FOR SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION FOR FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
APPROVAL:
Not more than one (1) year after receiving preliminary plat approval from the
ALUA or Planning Commission, as the case may be, the applicant shall submit a
complete application for final subdivision plat approval, or the preliminary
subdivision plat approval shall expire. The ALUA or Planning Commission may,
for good cause, authorize a one-time extension not to exceed one (1) year,
provided that a written request for extension is received by the city before
the one (1) year time period has expired. In no event, however, may an
application for final subdivision plat approval be submitted more than two (2)
years after preliminary approval. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-5-2: APPLICATION FOR FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL:
An application for final subdivision plat approval shall be accompanied by:
   A.    An electronic copy of the final plat/mylar, containing the information
described in §
11-5-3, for recording at the office of the Washington County Recorder.
   B.   Subdivision improvement plans approved as part of preliminary plat
approval.
   C.   Final construction drawings approved as part of preliminary plat
approval.
   D.   Application fee.
   E.   Improvement completion assurance if required improvements have not been
completed, as prescribed in §
11-7-2.
   F.   Warranty assurance if less than one (1) year has passed since
completion of improvements, as prescribed in §
11-7-5.
   G.   Title report for the property issued not less than thirty (30) days
from the date of submission of the application for final plat review. (Ord.
2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-5-3: FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
The final plat shall be subject to the following requirements:
   A.   Size And Format: Final plats shall be clear and legible and conform to
good engineering and professional drafting room practice. The size of drawings
shall be twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" x 36"). Final plats
should also be provided to the city in an electronic format required for
mapping.
   B.   Conformance To Preliminary Plat: The final plat must conform to the
preliminary plat as approved, plus any modifications that may have occurred
since preliminary plat approval.
   C.   Copies Submitted: Two (2) copies of the final plat must be submitted,
one of which must be reproducible and filed with the city and the other of
which must be on Mylar to be recorded with the county recorder. Submission to
the city of a copy of the plat in current electronic format will also be
required, for mapping and tracking purposes.
   D.   Mylar Plat For Subdivisions: A Mylar plat is required for all
subdivisions. The Mylar plat must be prepared by a licensed land surveyor or
engineer on a standard tracing linen sheet, drawn with waterproof black India
ink. The Mylar plat shall include the following on the drawing:
      1.   The top of the plat shall be either north or east and identified by
an arrow, whichever accommodates the drawing best.
      2.   The name and location of the subdivision.
      3.   A vicinity map showing property adjacent to the subdivision.
      4.   An identification system for all lots, blocks, and streets. The
dimensions for lot lines shall be in feet and hundredths of feet.
      5.   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or
official monuments, which shall be accurately described in the plat and shown
by appropriate symbol.
      6.   Scale and elevations referenced to the latest revision of USGS
datum, including elevations for profiles.
      7.   Street centerlines, together with their relationship to the property
lines, corners, etc. Street monuments as specified by the city engineer shall
also be shown.
      8.   The accurate location of all reference (survey) monuments, including
all United States, state, county, or other official monuments.
      9.   Accurate outline and depiction of any streets, highways or other
property in the proposed subdivision to be reserved for private use, with the
purposes indicated thereon, and of any area to be reserved by deed or covenant
for the common use of all property owners.
      10.   If the subdivision will include installed street or other common or
public area outdoor lighting, the final plat shall contain a statement
certifying compliance with the applicable provisions of the LaVerkin City
outdoor lighting ordinance.
      11.   Dedicatory language describing the actual dedication to the public
of all streets, highways or other property in the proposed subdivision which is
to be dedicated to the use and benefit of the public. Recording of the Mylar
plat completes the dedication.
      12.   Where it is proposed that streets be constructed on property on
which a public agency or utility company has an easement or which it otherwise
controls, a signature of approval of such entity for the location, improvement
and maintenance of such streets shall be entered on the Mylar plat.
      13.   A registered professional engineer's and/or land surveyor's
certificate of survey.
      14.   Legal description and owner's dedication.
      15.   A notary public's acknowledgment for the owner's dedication and
certificate of survey.
      16.   Any additional explanatory or informational note required by the
ALUA.
      17.   Signature blocks along the bottom and/or right side for the city
engineer, superintendent of Ash Creek Special Service District, chairman of the
ALUA, city attorney, Washington County Treasurer, and a space in the lower
right-hand corner of the drawing for the recording information of the county
recorder. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-5-4: ALUA REVIEW OF APPLICATION FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL FOR SINGLE-FAMILY
DWELLINGS, TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS, AND TOWNHOMES OF FOUR (4) UNITS OR FEWER;
APPEAL PANEL:
Upon receipt of a complete application for final plat approval, including all
information and documentation required by §§
11-5-2 and
11-5-3, the ALUA shall:
   A.   Complete its fourth and final review cycle of the applicant's final
plat and subdivision improvement plans not later than twenty (20) days after
the day on which said application was submitted; and
   B.   In the event that the proposed final plat and final subdivision
improvement plans have not materially changed from the approved preliminary
plat and subdivision improvement plans, and if the proposed final plat meets
all requirements of this chapter and Utah Code Ann §§ 10-9a-601 et. seq., the
ALUA shall approve the final plat and final subdivision improvement plans.
   C.   If on the fourth or final review cycle, the city fails to respond
within twenty (20) business days, the city shall, upon the request of the
property owner, and within ten (10) business days after the day on which the
request is received:
      1.   For a dispute arising from the subdivision plans, assemble an appeal
panel in accordance with Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-508(5)(d) to review or deny the
final revised set of plans; or
      2.   For a dispute arising from the subdivision ordinance review, advise
the applicant, in writing, of the deficiency in the application and of the
right to appeal the determination to the city's land use appeal authority.
(Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-5-5: PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL REVIEW OF APPLICATION FOR FINAL
PLAT APPROVAL FOR COMMERCIAL SUBDIVISIONS, INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISIONS, MULTI-
FAMILY SUBDIVISIONS OF MORE THAN FOUR (4) UNITS, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
COMMUNITIES, AND APPLICATIONS AFFECTING PROPERTY WITHIN IDENTIFIED GEOLOGICAL
HAZARD AREAS:
Upon receipt of a complete application for final plat approval for any
subdivision other than those described in §
11-4-1 above, including all information and documentation required by §§
11-5-2 and
11-5-3, and after review by city staff and to ensure compliance with the
approved preliminary plat and subdivision improvement plans:
   A.   The planning commission:
      1.   May, but shall not be required to, schedule a public meeting and
provide public notice of the date, time and place of said meeting, along with
the agenda which shall include an item for review of the application for final
plat approval; and
      2.   Shall, upon conclusion of its review of said application for final
plat approval, forward said final plat and all accompanying subdivision
improvement plans, construction drawings and other documents to the city
council along with a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, or
denial.
   B.   The city council shall, upon receipt of the recommendation of the
planning commission:
      1.   At its next regularly scheduled city council meeting, include as an
agenda item review of the application for final plat approval and the planning
commission recommendation; and
      2.   Upon conclusion of its review of said application for final plat
approval and the accompanying planning commission recommendation, the city
council shall approve the application for final plat approval if the final plat
and subdivision improvement plans comply with the approved preliminary plat
plus any conditions required by the city council in connection with approval of
the preliminary plat, all applicable city ordinances, and the requirements of
Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-601. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
CHAPTER 6
RECORDING OF PLAT
SECTION:
11-6-1: Requirements For Recording Of Final Plat
11-6-2: Revocation Of Final Plat Not Timely Recorded
11-6-1: REQUIREMENTS FOR RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT:
No final subdivision plat shall be recorded at the office of the Washington
County Recorder, unless and until the following conditions are met:
   A.   The application for final subdivision plat approval, together with all
subdivision improvement plans and construction drawings, shall have been
approved by the ALUA or City Council, as the case may be. Any material changes
to the final plat/Mylar from the date of ALUA or City Council approval to the
date of recording, as determined by the city attorney, shall necessitate the
filing of an application for an amended plat.
   B.   All required dedications and all required signatures and
acknowledgments on the final plat/Mylar shall have been obtained in accordance
with this Title.
   C.   A subdivision report for the property shall have been prepared and
submitted to the city attorney with an effective date of thirty (30) days of
the date of the final plat approval.
   D.   An improvement completion assurance for public landscaping improvements
and/or infrastructure improvements shall have been submitted to and approved by
the ALUA or city council, as the case may be, in accordance with §
11-7-2.
   E.   An improvement warranty for the improvement warranty period shall have
been submitted to and approved by the ALUA or city council, as the case may be,
in accordance with §
11-7-5.
   F.   All recording fees assessed by the recorder's office shall have been
paid by the applicant. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-6-2: REVOCATION OF FINAL PLAT NOT TIMELY RECORDED:
The applicant shall be responsible to ensure that all conditions and
requirements for final plat recordation have been met, and that the final plat/
Mylar is recorded at the office of the Washington County Recorder within one
(1) year of the date of the city engineer's signature. Failure to record the
final plat/Mylar within said one (1) year period shall result in a revocation
of final plat approval. In the event that a final plat approval is revoked, the
applicant must obtain new preliminary plat approval before applying for new
final plat approval. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
CHAPTER 7
COMPLETION ASSURANCE, CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS, WARRANTY
SECTION:
11-7-1: Completion Of Improvements Or Completion Assurance
11-7-2: Improvement Completion Assurance
11-7-3: Construction Of Improvements
11-7-4: Warranty Assurance
11-7-5: Final Inspection, Acceptance, Corrective Work
11-7-6: Drawings Of Record
11-7-1: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS OR COMPLETION ASSURANCE:
Except as may be otherwise provided in a valid development agreement, before an
applicant conducts any development activity or records a subdivision plat, the
applicant shall:
   A.   Complete construction and installation of any required public
landscaping improvements or infrastructure improvements; or
   B.   Post an improvement completion assurance for any required public
landscaping improvements or infrastructure improvements. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-
2024)
11-7-2: IMPROVEMENT COMPLETION ASSURANCE:
If an applicant elects to post an improvement completion assurance:
   A.   The applicant shall provide completion assurance for one hundred
percent (100%) of the cost of the required public landscaping or infrastructure
improvements, as determined by an engineer's estimate of the cost required to
complete the improvements or the amount of a licensed contractor's bid (or, if
the city has inspected and accepted a portion of the public landscaping
improvements or infrastructure improvements, one hundred percent (100%) of the
incomplete or unaccepted public landscaping improvements or infrastructure),
plus ten percent (10%) of the amount of the assurance to cover administrative
costs incurred by the city to complete the improvements, if necessary.
   B.   The city may not require an applicant to post an improvement completion
assurance for:
      1,   Public landscaping improvements or an infrastructure improvement
that the city has previously inspected and accepted.
      2   Infrastructure improvements that are private and not essential or
required to meet the building code, fire code, flood or storm water management
provisions, street and access requirements, or other essential necessary public
safety improvements adopted in city's land use regulations.
      3.   Any development where all infrastructure improvements within the
development are required to be privately owned.
      4.   Landscaping improvements that are not public landscaping
improvements, unless the landscaping improvements and completion assurance are
required under the terms of a development agreement.
   C.   As a condition for increased density or other entitlement benefit not
currently available under the existing zone, the city may require a completion
assurance bond for landscaped amenities and common area that are dedicated to
and maintained by a homeowner's association; provided, however, that any
agreement regarding such completion assurance bond shall be memorialized in a
development agreement between the city and the applicant. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the city may not require a completion assurance bond for the
landscaping of residential lots or the equivalent open space surrounding
single- family attached homes, whether platted as lots or common area.
   D.   An improvements completion assurance shall remain in effect for a
period of one (1) year from the date of final subdivision plat approval, and
shall be accomplished by one of the following methods:
      1.   The applicant shall post a bond with a surety company which has a
AAA bond rating and is licensed to do business in the State of Utah.
      2.   The applicant shall deposit funds into an escrow account acceptable
to city.
      3.   The applicant shall provide such other financial guarantee as may be
acceptable to city.
   E.   When the city accepts an improvement completion assurance for public
landscaping improvements or infrastructure improvements for a development as
provided herein, the city may not deny an applicant a building permit if the
development meets the requirements for the issuance of a building permit under
the building code and fire code.
   F.   Any improvement completion assurance accepted by the city may be
partially released as portions of the required landscaping or infrastructure
improvements are completed and accepted by the city. Funds held as improvement
completion assurance shall be released by the city in an amount equal to the
actual cost of performing the work minus ten percent (10%). Partial release
shall be subject to the city engineer's acceptance of a logical completion of
infrastructure improvements to support the subdivision in question. (Ord. 2024-
18, 10-16-2024)
11-7-3: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider shall be responsible for completion of construction of public
landscaping and subdivision infrastructure improvements within one (1) year of
the date of final plat approval in accordance with the LaVerkin City 2022
Design and Construction Standards, as the same now exists or as may be amended
from time to time in the future. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-7-4: WARRANTY ASSURANCE:
In addition to a completion assurance escrow account or bond, as specified in
11-7-2D., the applicant/subdivider shall warrant all subdivision improvements,
including the quality of all materials and workmanship, for a period of one (1)
year after said improvements are completed and accepted by the city. At any
time before the city accepts a public landscaping improvement or infrastructure
improvement, and for the duration of the improvement warrant period specified
herein, the city shall require applicant to:
   A.   Execute an improvement warranty, either separately or as part of the
completion assurance, for the one (1) year improvement warranty period; and
   B.   Post a cash deposit, surety bond, letter of credit or other similar
security, as required by the city, in the amount of up to ten percent (10%) of
the lesser of the city engineer's original estimated cost of completion of
applicant's reasonable proven cost of completion. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-7-5: FINAL INSPECTION, ACCEPTANCE, CORRECTIVE WORK:
Upon receipt of written certification from the subdivider/applicant that all
construction and installation of subdivision improvements have been completed:
   A.   The city engineer and public works director shall make a final
inspection of the improvements and shall submit a report to the city
administrator, setting forth the conditions of such facilities.
   B.   The city administrator shall cause such portion of the completion
assurance not previously released pursuant to §
11-7-2F., minus ten percent (10%) of the amount posted as a warranty assurance,
to be released if:
      1.   If the improvements are accepted by the city as having been
completed in accordance with the terms and conditions of preliminary and final
plat approval and the provisions of this Title; and
      2.   All liens are paid.
   C.   If the city engineer and public works director determine that the
materials or workmanship is defective or otherwise does not meet the standards
of the city, that portion of the completion assurance escrow funds, bond or
other assurance which has not been released pursuant to §
11-7-2F., together with the warranty assurance bond, shall be retained by city
until such time that said defects in workmanship or materials are corrected by
the subdivider/ applicant, or the city has obtained a release of said assurance
funds for corrective work to be performed by the city. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-
2024)
11-7-6: DRAWINGS OF RECORD:
After final installation of all improvements and the final inspection and
approval of the same, the contractor shall provide a complete set of drawings
of record for all improvements that includes all items listed in the
construction drawings and any improvement dimensions or changes to the
improvements as they were constructed in the field. The drawings shall be
submitted on twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch (24" x 36") sheets. No bond
shall be released until drawings of record are received, and if changes were
made to improvements, a new drawing of record for such improvements shall be
submitted, as appropriate, before release of the bond. A submittal of drawings
of record shall include a transmittal letter, in duplicate, containing the
submittal date, project title, and the signature of the contractor or the
contractor's authorized representative. The transmittal letter shall also
include certification by a professional engineer or surveyor, licensed in the
state of Utah, that each drawing of record is complete and accurate. (Ord.
2024-18, 10-16-2024)
CHAPTER 8
VACATING OR AMENDING A SUBDIVISION
SECTION:
11-8-1: Vacating Or Amending Subdivision
11-8-1: VACATING OR AMENDING SUBDIVISION:
The vacation or amendment of all or a part of a subdivision shall be subject to
and governed by the requirements of Utah Code Ann §§ 10-9a-608, 10-9a-609 and
10-9a-609.5. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
CHAPTER 9
VALIDITY; PENALTY
SECTION:
11-9-1: Validity
11-9-2: Penalty
11-9-1: VALIDITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is, for
any reason, held to be invalid, such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion of this title. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
11-9-2: PENALTY:
Any subdivider or other person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of
the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction and punished as
provided by law upon conviction. (Ord. 2024-18, 10-16-2024)
TITLE 12
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Authorization, Findings Of Fact, Purpose And Methods
12-1-2: Definitions
12-1-3: General Provisions
12-1-4: Penalties For Noncompliance
12-1-1: AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS:
   A.   Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the state of Utah has, in
the provisions to Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended), delegated the
responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council of the city of LaVerkin,
Utah ("the city"), does ordain and establish as herein set forth.
   B.   Findings Of Fact:
      1.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief; all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      2.   These flood losses are created: a) by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities; and b) by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands, because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
   C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this title to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas, by provisions designed to:
      1.   Protect human life and health;
      2.   Minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      3.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      4.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      5.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water
and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges
located in floodplains;
      6.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
      7.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified of property that is
situated in a flood area.
   D.   Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purposes,
this title encourages, promotes, and uses the following methods:
      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      3.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
      4.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may
increase flood damage;
      5.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 2009-03, 3-18-2009)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this title shall be
interpreted to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give
this title the most reasonable application:
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform, which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30,
VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building:
   A.   Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B,
C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a
building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water; and
   B.   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case
of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building",
even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the
breakaway walls met the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the national flood
insurance program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, means structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.
"Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulation adopted by LaVerkin City.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees, or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage
to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior;
or
2. Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (pub. l. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either:
   A.   The first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
   B.   The placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications,
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this title when
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this title. (For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 2009-03, 3-18-2009)
12-1-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lands To Which This Title Applies: This title shall apply to all areas
of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
   B.   Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of
special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in a
scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study For
LaVerkin City", dated (and to be effective) April 2, 2009, with accompanying
flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and
any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of this title.
   C.   Establishment Of Development Permit: A development permit shall be
required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this title.
   D.   Compliance: No structure or land, to which the provisions of this title
apply, shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, altered,
or have its use changed, without full compliance with the provisions of this
title and other applicable regulations.
   E.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This title is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this title and another ordinance, easement,
covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   F.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this title,
all provisions shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body of the city; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   G.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection
required by this title is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions, greater
floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or
natural causes. This title does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This title shall not create liability on the part of
the city or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this title or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder. (Ord. 2009-03, 3-18-2009)
12-1-4: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
Violation of the provisions of this title by failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a class B misdemeanor. Any person
who violates this title or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than the current fine, or imprisoned
for not more than the current penalty allows, or both, for each violation, and,
in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the prosecution and
enforcement of the matter. Nothing herein contained shall prevent LaVerkin City
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
violation. (Ord. 2009-03, 3-18-2009)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
12-2-1: Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator
12-2-2: Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator
12-2-3: Permit Procedures
12-2-4: Variance Procedures
12-2-5: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
12-2-1: DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The LaVerkin City zoning official is hereby appointed the floodplain
administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this title and
other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance program
regulations) pertaining to floodplain management, in coordination with the
city's police chief (who serves as emergency coordinator of the city). (Ord.
2009-03, 3-18-2009)
12-2-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this title.
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
   C.   Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building
sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding.
   D.   Review, approve, or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this title.
   E.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334), from which prior approval is required.
   F.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
   G.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency, which is the NFIP coordinator, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
federal emergency management agency.
   H.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained.
   I.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
subsection 12-1-3B of this title, the floodplain administrator shall obtain,
review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of section
12-2-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-03, 3-18-2009)
12-2-3: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   An application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information and/or documentation is required:
      1.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      3.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of subsection 12-2-5B2 of this chapter;
      4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development,
including:
         a.   A typical valley cross section showing the channel of the stream;
         b.   The elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel;
         c.   The cross sectional areas to be corrupted by the proposed
development; and higher water information;
         d.   A plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of the
ground, all proposed and existing structures on the site and location; and
elevations of all streets, water supply and sanitary facilities;
         e.   Photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream
and downstream;
         f.   Information on all soil types;
         g.   A profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel or flow
line of the stream;
         h.   Other pertinent information; and
      5.   A record of all such information, maintained in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 12-2-2A of this chapter.
   B.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this title and the
following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters, and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area. (Ord. 2009-03, 3-18-2009)
12-2-4: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   The appeal authority as established by the city shall hear and render
judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this title.
   B.   The appeal authority shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this title.
   C.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal authority
may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
   E.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this title.
   F.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 12-2-3B of
this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the
one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
   G.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
title, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this title
(i.e., subsection 12-1-1C of this title).
   H.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   I.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that: 1) the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, and 2) the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
   J.   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of a good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      3.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   K.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
      1.   The criteria outlined in subsections A through I of this section are
met, and
      2.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 2009-03, 3-18-2009)
12-2-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following
provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
      1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
      2.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
      5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
      6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
      7.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   B.   Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in: 1) subsection 12-1-3B
of this title, 2) subsection 12-2-2I of this chapter, or 3) subsection C3 of
this section, the following provisions are required:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is
satisfied.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
      3.   Manufactured Homes: All manufactured homes to be placed within zone
A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices
which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
   C.   Standards For Subdivision Proposals:
      1.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with the provisions of this
title.
      2.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development
permit requirements of this title.
      3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than fifty (50) lots
or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to
subsection 12-1-3B of this title or subsection 12-2-2I of this chapter.
      4.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
      5.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 2009-03, 3-18-2009)
CHAPTER 3
SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS
SECTION:
12-3-1: General Requirements
12-3-2: Design Criteria
12-3-3: Excavation; Floor Level
12-3-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Grading Permit: All new developments, which require a grading permit,
or exceed one acre in area, shall submit a drainage control plan and report
prepared by a Utah registered professional engineer.
   B.   Building Requirements: Building floor levels shall be constructed a
minimum of two feet above the 100-year FEMA, and non-FEMA flood level, unless
otherwise approved by LaVerkin City as outlined in this title. Encroachment
within the 100-year floodplain for FEMA and non-FEMA natural watercourses will
not be permitted without HEC-2 hydraulic studies as directed by LaVerkin City.
All natural drainages, washes, and waterways that convey a developed 100-year
flow of one hundred (100) cfs or more shall be left open and undisturbed,
unless otherwise approved by LaVerkin City. Any alteration of FEMA floodways is
not permitted unless the proposed use can be shown to have no negative
influence on flood conveyance.
   C.   Drainage Design: Because of potential negative impacts, design of
drainage systems associated with new development cannot cause increases in
existing flood peak discharges downstream for 10-year and 100-year floods.
Drainage facilities shall be designed using currently accepted civil
engineering standards of care, applicable safety standards, and public agency
or other approved design specifications and shall be approved by the city
engineer.
   D.   Capacity: The official level of flood protection is the 100-year
recurrence interval for future land use conditions as defined by the flood
control plan. Drainage collection system capacities shall be sized for a
minimum of the 10-year flood, but no significant damage or risk of personal
injury may occur in a 100-year flood. Major hydraulic structures (including
bridges and open channels) shall be designed for the 100-year flood. (Ord.
2005-21, 5-4-2005)
12-3-2: DESIGN CRITERIA:
   A.   Streets: Design criteria for gutter capacity and associated lane
flooding will depend on roadway type as shown in table below. Street designs
must include surface drainage relief points (especially for flat gradient
areas, local sumps or depressions and downhill cul-de-sacs) and provide for
routing of 100-year recurrence hydrographs to adequate downstream conveyance
facilities. For pedestrian safety, 100-year flood flow in streets must be
limited by underground storm drain conveyance and street design so that the
product of depth (feet) and velocity (feet/second) in gutter does not exceed
six (6). 100-year flood flows in streets must be contained within the street
right of way and adjacent drainage easements. Where underground conveyance is
required to limit street flows, it will be designed for the 10-year flood, or
greater.
   STREET GUTTER CAPACITY FOR 100-YEAR EVENT
 
Locals                          Flow may spread to crown
Minor collector and residential Flow may spread to crown
collector
Collector and major collector   Flow spread must leave 1 travel lane free
                                of water
                                Flow spread must leave 1 travel lane and
Arterial                        center turn lane in each direction free
                                of water
 
   B.   Storm Drains:
      1.   Storm drain design conveyance capacity will be sized for a minimum
of the 10-year, 3-hour flood. The 100-year, 3-hour design flood will be used
for evaluation and prevention of significant damage due to street overflow.
Inlets must have sufficient capacity to prevent local ponding in the 10-year
event, with fifty percent (50%) blocking of inlets by debris. Analysis of
combined street and storm drain capacity for the 100-year flood must determine
maximum ponding depths and water levels and show that these are nondamaging.
      2.   Design consideration will be given for differences in interception
capacity of inlets on grade compared to interception capacity of inlets in sag
locations. Inlet spacing and locations will be for continuous grade or sag
situations, as appropriate.
      3.   All storm drains will be designed by application of the Manning
equation. Minimum velocity shall be two (2) feet/second flowing one-half (1/2)
full.
      4.   Storm drains will not be allowed to be designed for surcharged pipe
conditions unless otherwise approved by LaVerkin City. When storm drains are
designed for full pipe flow, or surcharged pipe conditions, the designer shall
establish the hydraulic grade line considering head losses caused by flow
resistance in the pipe, and changes of momentum and interference at junctions,
bends, and structures. The water surface elevation profile and hydraulic grade
line will be shown for the 10-year and 100-year design flood as required in the
drainage control report and plan.
   C.   Culverts: A culvert entrance blockage factor of up to fifty percent
(50%) shall be used for small diameter culverts and culverts placed in
drainages with upstream debris as determined by LaVerkin City. The 100-year
water surface backwater upstream will be determined (using HEC-2) and shown to
be nondamaging. Potential paths of embankment overtopping flows will be
determined and redirected, if necessary, so that no significant flood damage
occurs.
   D.   Bridges: Bridges must pass the 100-year event with a minimum of one
foot (1') of freeboard. No significant increases are allowed in upstream water
levels. A HEC-2 analysis of potential upstream water surface increases may be
required by LaVerkin City. If the bridge deck is not free span, local and
regional scour analyses are required for pier footings and embankments.
Appropriate references are "Stream Stability At Highway Structures", "Hydraulic
Engineering Circular No. 20", federal highway administrations, and computer
programs such as USCOE HEC-6 or FHWA FESWMS.
   E.   Open Channels: The 100-year recurrence flood will be used for design.
Side slopes and maximum velocities will depend on criteria shown in the chart
below. Drop structures may be required to limit velocities to noneroding
values. Supercritical velocities are not permitted for any material. Any use of
irrigation ditches, or canals, for flood control must receive written approval
from both the irrigation company and LaVerkin City.
   OPEN CHANNEL DESIGN CRITERIA
Material Lining Maximum Permissible
                Mean Velocity
  
Natural and improved unlined channels
Material Lining                            Maximum Permissible
                                           Mean Velocity
  
Natural and improved unlined channels
  
 Alluvial silts, colloidal                3.75
 Alluvial silts, noncolloidal             2.00
 Clay                                     6.00
 Cobbles and shingles                     5.00
 Course gravel, noncolloidal              4.00
 Fine gravel                              2.50
 Fine sand, colloidal                     1.50
 Graded loam to cobbles when noncolloidal 3.75
 Ordinary firm loam                       2.50
 Poor sedimentary rock                    10.00
 Sandy loam, noncolloidal                 1.75
 Sandy silt                               2.00
 Shales and hardpans                      6.00
 Silt loam, noncolloidal                  2.00
 Silty clay                               2.50
 Stiff clay, very colloidal               3.75
 Volcanic ash                             2.50
  
Fully lined channels
  
 Concrete                                 35.00
 Gabions                                  15.00
 Grouted riprap                           15.00
 Loose riprap                             10.00
 Soil-cement                              15.00
 Unreinforced vegetation                  5.00
 
   Notes:
      1.   For composite lined channels, use the lowest of the maximum mean
velocities for the materials used in the composite lining.
      2.   Deviations from the above values are only allowed with appropriate
engineering analysis and/or suitable agreements for maintenance
responsibilities.
   Reference:
    Natural: Fortier and Scobey, 1926
    Fully lined: Various sources
Maximum velocities for grass lined channels depend on type of grass mixtures,
with higher velocities appropriate for Bermuda grass. Consult "Open-Channel
Hydraulics", Ven Te Chow, for details. The minimum bottom width of the channels
will be six feet (6') to facilitate access of maintenance equipment.
   F.   Storage Facilities: Storage facilities will generally be used to
prevent local increases in 10-year, 72-hour; and 100-year, 72-hour; peak flows
due to development or the 100-year, 3-hour storm, whichever case requires more
volume. Detention ponds must empty in twenty four (24) hours, or less.
Partially wet basins may be allowed for recreational or aesthetic purposes, but
storage below permanent spillways or low level outlets cannot be counted into
control calculations. Retention ponds intended for infiltration may require
extensive subsoil and ground water studies and maintenance requirements and are
not allowed unless approved by LaVerkin City.
Energy dissipation and erosion protection is required at all outlet structures
where storm drainage is released into a natural drainage course, unless
LaVerkin City agrees there is no need shown for such protection. (Ord. 2005-21,
5-4-2005)
12-3-3: EXCAVATION; FLOOR LEVEL:
No building shall be constructed in or moved to any floodplain, unless an
addition to the floodplain is created by excavating an area next to the
floodplain to an area, elevation, and volume no less than the space occupied by
the building. Each building in the floodplain shall have a floor level at least
two feet (2') above the 100-year FEMA, and non-FEMA flood level unless
otherwise approved by LaVerkin City as outlined in this title. All parts of any
such building below the floor level shall be waterproofed. No building shall be
constructed in a floodplain area without proof that the building's foundation
will not be affected by any water conditions in the area. (Ord. 2005-21, 5-4-
2005)
