CITY CODE
OF
NORTH SALT LAKE CITY, UT
2012
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-06, passed 4-1-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of North Salt Lake, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-06, passed April 1, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-07
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 10 LAND USE ORDINANCE,
SECTION 10-10-3 PERTAINING TO THE MINIMUM SIDE STREET SETBACK ON CORNER LOTS IN
ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONES
 
WHEREAS, the City of North Salt Lake is an incorporated city in Davis County
Utah; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake has received a request to amend
the code related to the minimum side street setback on corner lots in all
residential zones; and
 
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission of North Salt Lake held a public hearing on
the proposed amendments on April 22, 2025 and received favorable public
comments and recommended the proposed amendments to the City Council; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake finds the proposed amendments are
also in accord with the comprehensive general plan, goals and policies of the
City; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake finds that changed or changing
conditions make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to carry out the
purposes stated in this title; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that it is in the public interest that the
North Salt Lake City Code, be amended at this time.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of North Salt
Lake as follows:
 
Section 1. Code Amendment. Pursuant to Utah Code 10-9a-502, Title 10 Land Use
Ordinance is hereby amended as follows:
a.    Chapter 10 is hereby amended as shown in the attached Exhibit “A”;
 
Section 2. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect upon posting as
required in Utah Code 10-3-713.
 
APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City of North Salt Lake, Utah on this 6 th day of
May 2025.
 
CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE
                     By:
 
______________________________
BRIAN J. HORROCKS
Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:
   
_______________________               
WENDY PAGE
City Recorder                  
 
                     City Council Vote as Recorded:
 
                     Council Member Watts Baskin   ______
                     Council Member Clayton      ______
                     Council Member Jackson      ______
                     Council Member Knowlton      ______
                     Council Member Van Langeveld   ______
 
 
Certificate of Posting Ordinance:
I, the duly appointed recorder for the City of North Salt Lake, hereby certify
that the foregoing Ordinance No. 2025-07 was passed by the governing body on
the date shown above, and that copies were posted as required by Utah Code 10-
3-713 within the municipality.
 
Recorded this _________ day of _________________________, 2025.
 
___________________________________________                           [Seal]
Wendy Page, City Recorder
 
 
 
 
 
10-10-3: USE REGULATIONS:
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall
be hereafter erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained in a Single-
Family Residential District or Multiple Residential District, except as
provided in this title:
 
                                                                           Zone
                                                                           R1- R1- R1-7  RM- RM-20
                                                                           12  10        7
Front Yard Regulations (in feet)
Corner lots, main buildings shall have 2 front yards, and 1 rear yard opposite the front elevation, and 1 side yard.
The minimum depth for the front yard for main building.           25   25  25 25 25
(corner lot side street setback: 20 feet, unless accessing a garage)
Lots having an average slope of 15 percent or more.                20   20  20 20 20
Maximum front yard setback.                                             100  100 40 40 40
Accessory buildings may have the same
minimum front yard depth as main buildings if they have the same sid6    6   6  6  10
yard required for main buildings; otherwise setback from the rear of the
main building.
Rear Yard Regulations (in feet)
The minimum depth for the back yard. (corner lot rear yard setback: 25   25  25 20 20
feet)
Accessory buildings (may be reduced to one 
(1) foot if all roof drainage stays on the lot, the walls of the building
have a one (1) hour fire rating with no windows or doors adjacent to the  3    3   3  3  3
property line, and the building is a minimum of ten (10) feet from any
dwelling on adjacent lot.
Swimming Pools                                                            5    5   5  5  5
(community or HOA pools shall be setback 15 feet)
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-10
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 4, CHAPTER 4 OF CITY CODE PERTAINING TO NOISE
CONTROL
 
WHEREAS, the City of North Salt Lake is an incorporated city in Davis County
Utah; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake has determined that it is
necessary to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace,
quiet, and quality of life for the citizens of the City; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council seeks to accomplish this through the reduction,
control and prevention of excessive noise; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council has determined that the current noise control
ordinances should be updated to include measurable standards for various
noises; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council finds the proposed amendments are in conformance with
State Code and will eliminate and reduce unnecessary and excessive traffic and
community noise, which are physically harmful or detrimental to individuals and
the community in the enjoyment of life, property, and conduct of business; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake finds that changed or changing
conditions make the proposed amendments reasonably necessary to carry out the
purposes stated in this title; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that it is in the public interest that the
North Salt Lake City Code, be amended at this time.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of North Salt
Lake as follows:
 
Section 1. Code Amendment. Title 4 Health and Sanitation, Chapter 4 Noise
Control is hereby amended as attached in Exhibit A.
 
Section 2.  Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is declared
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall not be
affected thereby.
 
Section 3. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect upon posting as
required in Utah Code 10-3-713.
 
APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City of North Salt Lake, Utah on this 3 rd day of
June, 2025.
 
CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE
                     By:
 
______________________________
BRIAN J. HORROCKS
Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:
   
_______________________               
WENDY PAGE
City Recorder                  
 
                     City Council Vote as Recorded:
 
                     Council Member Watts Baskin   ______
                     Council Member Clayton      ______
                     Council Member Jackson      ______
                     Council Member Knowlton      ______
                     Council Member Van Langeveld   ______
 
 
Certificate of Posting Ordinance:
I, the duly appointed recorder for the City of North Salt Lake, hereby certify
that the foregoing Ordinance No. 2025-10 was passed by the governing body on
the date shown above, and that copies were posted as required by Utah Code 10-
3-713 within the municipality.
 
Recorded this _________ day of _________________________, 2025.
 
___________________________________________                           [Seal]
Wendy Page, City Recorder
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE 4-HEALTH & SANITATION
CHAPTER 4
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
4-4-1: Purpose
4-4-2: Applicability
4-4-3: Definitions
4-4-4: Standards For Measuring Sound Levels
4-4-5: Prohibited Noise
4-4-6: Regulated Noise
4-4-7: Specific Noise Restrictions
4-4-8: Exceptions
4-4-9: Special Permit
4-4-10: Inspections and Investigations
4-4-11: Enforcement
 
4-4-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety,
welfare, peace, quiet, and quality of life for the citizens of the city through
the reduction, control and prevention of excessive noise. It is the intent of
this chapter to establish standards that will eliminate and reduce unnecessary
and excessive traffic and community noise, which are physically harmful or
detrimental to individuals and the community in the enjoyment of life, property
and conduct of business.
4-4-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter apply to sound generated from real property
located within the city. It shall have no applicability to all aspects of the
employer-employee relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the
confines of a place of employment.
4-4-3: DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
"A" WEIGHTING: The electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human
hearing frequency sensitivity.
AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL: The total sound pressure level which represents the
summation of the sound from all the discrete sources affecting a given site at
a given time, exclusive of the source under investigation.
AUDIBLE: Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided
hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source under investigation is a
sound amplification device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify clearly audible sound.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs: The auxiliary operational procedures
implemented by a business or facility that effectively reduce noise levels.
BMPs include but are not limited to scheduling activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices or
institutional controls that prevent or reduce noise decibel levels.
CFR: Code of Federal Regulations.
CITY APPROVED EVENT: An assembly of people which continues, and can reasonably
be expected to continue for two or more hours per day, and has received a
permit, license, or authorization from the City of North Salt Lake.
COMMERCIAL AREA, COMMERCIAL ZONE: Any area of the city with a zoning
designation of CH, CG, CS, including P-Districts which include commercial land
uses, under title 10 of this code, and the abutting public streets and public
premises.
COMMERCIAL POWER EQUIPMENT: Any equipment or device rated at more than five (5)
horsepower and used for home or building repairs or grounds maintenance.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES: Any premises involving traffic in goods or furnishing of
services for sale or profit, including, but not limited to:
A. Banking and other financial institutions;
B. Dining establishments;
C. Establishments for providing retail services;
D. Establishments for recreation and entertainment;
E. Office buildings;
F. Transportation; or
G. Warehouses; and
H. Any other premises allowed in a commercial zone other than a use categorized
as a residential premises or industrial premises.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures,
which produces sound clearly audible at the property line of the premises from
which the sound originates.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT: Any equipment or device, such as, but not limited to,
pile drivers, power shovels, derricks, hoist tractors, loaders, rollers,
concrete hauling motor vehicles, pavement breakers, bulldozers, crawler-
tractors, rotary drills and augers, cranes, ditchers, trenchers, scrapers,
wagons, pumps, compressors and pneumatic power equipment, or other mechanical
apparatus operated by fuel or electric power in the construction, repair or
demolition of any building, structure, land, street, alley, waterways or
appurtenance thereto.
dBA: The A-weighted unit of sound pressure level.
DECIBEL (dB): The unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified
location. The symbol is "dB".
DEMOLITION: The act of dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of any
right- of-way surfaces, building, structure, utility, or similar property.
DEVICE: Any equipment or mechanism which is intended to produce or which
actually produces sound when operated or handled.
DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT: Any equipment or device rated at five (5) horsepower
or less and used for home or building repairs or grounds maintenance,
including, but not limited to, power saw, sander, vacuum, lawn mower, leaf
blower, and garden equipment. "Domestic Power Equipment" does not include snow
blowers or other snow removal equipment.
DWELLING: A building or structure that is intended or designed to be used,
rented, leased, let, or hired out for human habitation.
DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE: A device used to transform a motor vehicle’s internal
combustion engine into an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the
use of wheel brakes, commonly referred to as “Jake brakes,” “compression
brakes,” or “engine brakes.”
EMERGENCY POWER GENERATOR: The equipment used to generate electrical power in
the event of an interruption, malfunction, or failure of the electrical power
otherwise supplied by the service provider.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: An authorized motor vehicle, motorboat, or aircraft which
can lawfully be used for the transportation of emergency personnel, equipment,
and supplies while responding to the scene of an emergency.
EMERGENCY WORK: Any work or action necessary to deliver essential services
including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electric, telephone, sewer
facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on
public streets, or abating life-threatening conditions.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: A peace officer, or an officer or employee of the city
authorized by administrative order of the mayor to enforce all or part of the
provisions of this chapter.
EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
EXHAUST SYSTEM: All components responsible for conducting exhaust gasses or
reducing sound from a motor vehicle or motorboat including, but not limited to,
mufflers, baffles, header pipes, manifolds, air intakes, or any other similar
component.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR): The value specified by the manufacturer as
the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where
trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating
(GCWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended
maximum loaded weight of the combination of vehicle, will be used.
HEATING, VENTILATION, AND AIR CONDITIONING (HVAC): Any system installed on or
within a dwelling, facility, building or structure for the purpose of providing
heating, ventilation, or air conditioning. HVAC may include furnaces, air
exchangers, central air condensing units, evaporative “swamp” coolers, heat
pumps, exhaust fans, and other heating and cooling equipment.
IMPULSIVE SOUND: A sound having a short duration of less than one second,
especially with high intensity, abrupt onset and rapid decay, and often rapidly
changing spectral composition.
INDUSTRIAL AREA: Any manufacturing zone.
INDUSTRIAL PREMISES: Any premises where manufacturing, processing, fabrication,
or production of goods or products takes place.
INFRASOUND: Any sound frequency less than or equal to 16 Hz.
L eq : The average measure of continuous noise that has the equivalent acoustic
energy of the fluctuating signal over the same time period. For the purposes of
this Regulation, an L eq measurement will be taken for a minimum of two
minutes.
L max : The highest root-mean-square (RMS) sound level measured over 1000
milliseconds in a slow response. For the purpose of this Regulation, L max
will be the highest A-weighted sound level occurring during a noise event.
MANUFACTURING ZONE: Any area of the city with a zoning designation of MD or MG
under title 10 of this code, and the abutting public streets and public
premises.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is
propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails, except vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized
wheelchairs. "Motor vehicle" shall not include power equipment, auxiliary
equipment and sound amplification devices on or within motor vehicles, that are
not operated by or driven by the motor vehicle engine propelling system, or any
"motor vehicle" operated on private property for recreational or amusement
purposes.
MUFFLER: A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system consisting
of a series of chambers, baffle plates, or other mechanical devices for abating
the sound of escaping exhaust gases.
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT BUILDING: Any building comprising two or more dwelling
units, including, but not limited to, apartments, condominiums, co-ops,
multiple family houses, townhouses, and attached residences.
NOISE: A sound that may be harmful to health.
NOISE CONTROL SYSTEM: The parts, mufflers, assemblies or systems, including all
exhaust system components, originally installed by the manufacturer, which
controls or reduces noise emissions.
OCTAVE BAND: The interval in Hertz between two frequencies having a ratio of 2:
1. For purposes of this Regulation, octave band sound pressure levels will be
measured at any of the following center frequencies: 31.5, 63, 125, 250, 500,
1,000, 2,000, 4,000 and 8,000 Hz.
OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE: Any vehicle not permitted to be licensed for on-road use
in the State of Utah and is propelled by an engine.
OWNER: Any person who alone or jointly and severally with others:
1.    has legal title to any premise, dwelling, or dwelling unit with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
2.    has charge, care, or control of any premises, dwelling, or dwelling unit,
as legal or equitable owner, agent of the owner, or is an executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner.
PERSON: Any individual, public or private corporation and its officers,
partnership, association, firm, trustee, executor of an estate, the State or
its departments, institutions, bureau or agency thereof, municipal corporation,
county, city, or any legal entity recognized by the law.
PREMISES: Any building, structure, land, utility or portion thereof, including
all appurtenances, and shall include yards, lots, courts, inner yards, common
areas and real properties without buildings or improvements, owned or
controlled by a person.
PROPERTY LINE: The real or imaginary line and its vertical extension which
separates one parcel of real property from another, or the vertical and
horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in a multiple dwelling
unit.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: An activity regardless of whether or not a ticket or payment
of any type is required for admission.
PUBLIC PARK: All real property owned, operated or maintained by either the city
or other public governmental entity, and used as a park, playground, swimming
pool, golf course, waterway, nature center, or other recreational facility.
PUBLIC PREMISES: Any premises, which is owned, leased or controlled by any
public governmental entity.
PUBLIC STREET: All real property and improvements thereon used or dedicated as
a public right of way for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, including any
highway, boulevard, parkway, avenue, street, road, sidewalk, park strip, or
alley.
PURE TONE: Any sound that can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or set of
single pitches.
RECEIVING PROPERTY: Any property, including an individual unit of a multi-
dwelling or multi-use property, that is adversely affected by noise transmitted
by another property or from another unit within the same multi-dwelling or
multi-use property.
REPETITIVE IMPULSE SOUND: Any impulse sound repeated at intervals such that a
sound level meter set at “fast” meter characteristic will show changes in sound
pressure level greater than 10 dB(A) within one second.
RESIDENTIAL AREA, RESIDENTIAL ZONE: Any area of the city with a zoning
designation of R1-7, R1-10, R1-12, RM-7, RM-20, or P-District, and the abutting
public streets and public premises.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: Any premises located within a residential zone or
commercial zone where single or multiple dwelling units exist, or where public
parks, schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, homes for the aged, and
similar institutional facilities are located.
SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT: Any mechanical equipment used for removing snow from
land or building surfaces including snowplows, snow blowers, snow sweepers, and
any spreader or applicator employed to apply a snow or ice melting product.
SOUND: An oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement and particle
velocity which induces auditory sensation.
SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: Any device for the amplification of the human
voice, music or any other sound, including, but not limited to, radios,
televisions, phonographs, stereos, record players, cassette players, compact
disc players, loud speakers, or sound amplifiers.
SOUND LEVEL: The instantaneous sound pressure level measured in decibels with a
sound level meter set for A-weighting on slow integration speed, unless
otherwise noted.
SOUND LEVEL METER (SLM): An instrument for the measurement of sound pressure
levels of a design, that includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector,
integrator, or time average, output meter and weighing networks used to measure
sound pressure levels.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL (SPL): Twenty (20) multiplied by the logarithm, to the
base 10, of the measured sound pressure divided by the sound pressure
associated with the threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels.
ULTRASOUND: Any sound frequency higher than 20 kHz.
Z-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL or dBZ or dB(Z): means the sound pressure level
in decibels as measured with a sound level meter using the Z-weighted filter.
Infrasound will be measured with the Z-weighted filter.
4-4-4: STANDARDS FOR MEASURING SOUND LEVELS:
The following standards shall apply to the measurement of sound levels pursuant
to this chapter:
A.   Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under
investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at
other conditions, including, but not limited to, design, maximum, and
fluctuating rates.
B.   When a noise source can be identified and measured in more than one type
of premises, the limits of the most restrictive use shall apply at the property
line between different premises types.
C.   All tests shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures:
1.   Sound pressure level measurements must be made with a calibrated and
certified Type 2 sound level meter or better instrument as specified in the
American National Standards Institute’s (ANSI) publication S1.4-1983
(Reaffirmed 2001) entitled, “Specifications for Sound Level Meters”, or its
current successor; or the International Electrochemical Commission (IEC) class
or type 1 and 2 standard 61672.
2.   All sound level measurements required by this Regulation must be taken in
dBA, unless specifically measuring infrasound and ultrasound, which will be
taken in dBZ.
3.   Infrasound and Ultrasound. For any source of sound which emits infrasound
(below 16 Hz) or ultrasound (above 20 kHz) frequencies, the sound pressure
level must not exceed 100 dBZ when measured from the receiving property.
4.   Pure Tone and Repetitive Impulse Sound. For any stationary source of sound
that emits a pure tone or repetitive impulse sound, the limits set forth in
Table 1a must be reduced by 5 dBA when measured between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m. and reduced by 10 dBA for Type A and Type B property use when
measured between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
5.   Non-Sound Based Vibrations. The transmission of vibrations that are not
sound based and cannot be measured by a sound pressure meter are not restricted
by this Chapter.
6.   The enforcement official shall, to the extent practicable, identify all
sources contributing sound to the point of measurement.
7.   Measurements shall be taken at or within the property line of the
receiving property; provided that whenever it is impossible or impractical to
measure at the property line, a greater distance from the noise source shall be
used to determine compliance with this chapter.
8.   The SLM must be calibrated in accordance with manufacturer specifications.
9.   No outdoor measurements shall be taken:
a.   During periods when wind speeds (including gusts) exceed fifteen miles per
hour (15 mph);
b.   Without a windscreen, recommended by the SLM manufacturer, properly
attached to the SLM;
c.   Under any condition that allows the SLM to become wet (e.g., rain, snow,
or condensation); or
d.   When the ambient temperature is out of the range of the tolerance of the
SLM.
D.   The report for each measurement shall include:
1.   The date, day of the week, and times at which measurements are taken;
2.   The times of calibration;
3.   The weather conditions;
4.   The identification of all monitoring equipment by manufacturer, model
number, and serial number;
5.   The normal operating cycle of the sources in question with a description
of the sources;
6.   The ambient sound level, in dBA, with the sources in question operating;
7.   The background sound level, in dBA, without the sources in question
operating; and
8.   A sketch of the measurement site, including measurement locations and
relevant distances, containing sufficient information for another investigator
to repeat the measurements under similar conditions.
E.   Prior to taking measurements the enforcement official shall explore the
vicinity of the source in question to identify any other sound sources that
could affect measurements, to establish the approximate location and character
of the principal sound source, and to select suitable locations from which to
measure the sound from the source in question.
F.   When measuring continuous sound, or sound that is sustained for more than
one second at a time, the SLM shall be set for A-weighting, slow meter response
speed, and the range (if the SLM is designed to read levels over different
ranges of SPLs) shall be set to that range in which the meter reads closest to
the maximum end of the scale. When the measured sound level is variable or
fluctuating over a range greater than +3 dBA, using the slow meter response
speed, the fast meter response speed shall be used. In either case, both the
minimum and maximum readings shall be recorded to indicate the range of
monitored values.
G.   The SLM shall be placed at a minimum height of three feet (3') above the
ground or from any reflective surface. When handheld, the microphone shall be
held at arm's length and pointed at the source at the angle recommended by the
SLM manufacturer.
H.   If extraneous sound sources, such as aircraft flyovers or barking dogs,
that are unrelated to the measurements increase the monitored sound levels, the
measurements should be postponed until these extraneous sounds have become of
such a level as not to increase the monitored sound levels of interest.
I.   The monitoring session should last for a period of time sufficient to
ensure that the sound levels measured are typical of the source in question.
4-4-5: PROHIBITED NOISE: 
It is unlawful for any person to intentionally or recklessly create the
following noise disturbances within the City:
A. Disruption Of Dwelling: To make, cause or permit any excessive or
unreasonable noise which annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health or safety of any neighborhood or person residing therein which, under
the circumstances, would disturb a person of average and reasonable
sensitivities.
B. Disruption Of Meeting: To make, cause or permit any excessive noise which
prevents or disrupts a lawful meeting, gathering, business or other lawful
activity which, under the circumstances, would disturb a person of average and
reasonable sensitivities.
   C. Street Performances: To use or permit the use of bells, whistles, sirens,
music horns or any other noisemaking device for the purpose of business,
amusement or otherwise which tends to collect persons on the streets or
sidewalks of the City.
   D. Emergency Signals: To make, cause or permit the sounding of any fire,
burglar, automobile or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar emergency
signaling device other than for emergency or testing purposes. Any testing
permitted herein shall be conducted between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and shall be conducted for the minimum test
cycle time not to exceed two (2) minutes. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-4-6: REGULATED NOISE:
Notwithstanding the specific noise restrictions in Section 4-4-7, no person may
emit, nor cause, allow, permit, or fail to control the emission of any noise
source so as to exceed the maximum allowable sound pressure levels set forth
Tables 1a and 1b below and Table 2 in Section 4-4-7 when measured from the
receiving property.
Table 1a
Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure Levels (L eq ) Table
 
 
Receiving Property Use    Between 10 p.m. & 7 a.m.  Between 7 a.m. & 10 p.m.
Type A                    5 dBA above ambient sound 10 dBA above ambient sound
Single Family Residential not to exceed 50 dBA      not to exceed 60 dBA
Type B
Multi-Family Residential
Transient Lodging
Institutional Uses        5 dBA above ambient sound 10 dBA above ambient sound
(Churches, Schools,       not to exceed 55 dBA      not to exceed 65 dBA
Medical Facilities,
Museums, etc.)
 
Type C                    5 dBA above ambient sound 10 dBA above ambient sound
Retail, Office, Parks,    not to exceed 70 dBA      not to exceed 70 dBA
other Commercial
Type D
Construction,
Entertainment Venues,     5 dBA above ambient sound 10 dBA above ambient sound
Mining, Manufacturing and not to exceed 75 dBA      not to exceed 75 dBA
Industrial Uses,
Construction
Table 1b
Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure Levels (L max ) Table
 
 
Receiving Property Use* Between 10 p.m. & 7 a.m. Between 7 a.m. & 10 p.m.
 
Type A & B              70 dBA                   100 dBA
 
Type C & D              100 dBA                  100 dBA
 
*See Table 1a for property use type examples
 
4-4-7: SPECIFIC NOISE RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to cause, permit or perform the following acts between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. :
A.    Loading Operation: Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. no person may, nor allow any person to load, unload,
open, close or otherwise handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
garbage containers or similar objects, except within the following zones:
General Commercial (CG), Manufacturing & Distribution (MD) and General
Manufacturing (MG), and a minimum of 300 feet from of a Type A or Type B
property unless the responsible party demonstrates compliance with Section 4-4-
7 Tables 1a, 1b and Section 4-4-8 Table 2.
B.   Construction Work: Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. no person may operate any tools or equipment used in
construction, drilling, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings,
structures or streets, unless a permit has been issued in accordance with
Section 4-4-9. During the months of May through September construction work may
begin at six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
C.   Power Equipment: Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. no person may operate any mechanically powered saw, drill,
sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawnmower or other similar device, other
than powered snow removal equipment.
D.    Garbage Collection: Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. no person may collect garbage, waste, recycling or
refuse within 300 feet of a Type A or Type B property unless the responsible
party demonstrates compliance with Section 4-4-6 Tables 1a, 1b and Section 4-4-
7 Table 2.
E.   Loudspeakers: Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. no person may operate or use any loudspeaker, public
address system, or mobile sound vehicle amplifying sound therefrom.
F.   Radios: Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. no person may operate or play any radio, television, musical
instrument or similar audio device. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-09,
2-18-2020)
G.   Motor Vehicles:
1.   No person may operate or use, nor may any person cause, allow, permit or
fail to control the operation or use of any motor vehicle:
a.   Without a noise control system that meets the original specifications
installed by the manufacturer;
b.   Unless the noise control system is in constant operation and free of
defects that affect sound reduction;
c.   With any cut out, bypass, or similar device which increases sound pressure
levels;
d.   With any unnecessary rapid acceleration, deceleration, engine revving or
tire squealing;
e.   When the noise control system has been modified, punctured, or rendered
inoperative; and
f.   Unless the noise control system of the motor vehicle or combination of
vehicles of a type subject to registration, at any time or under any condition
of grade, load, acceleration or deceleration does not exceed the maximum
allowable sound pressure levels set forth in Table 2 at a distance of 25 feet
or more for the category of motor vehicle, based on the legal speed limit,
posted or not, of the road on which such vehicle or vehicles are operated.
Table 2
Maximum Sound Pressure Levels for Motor Vehicles
Sound Pressure Level, dBA
 
 
                                                                                      Speed Speed
                                                                             Measured limit limit
                                                                             at a     40    over
                                                                             Distance mph   40
                                                                             of       or    mph
                                                                                      less
Any motor vehicle with a gross manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating           88    94
(GVWR) or gross combination weight rating (GCWR) of 10,000 pounds or more or 25 ft.   dBA   dBA
any combination of vehicles towed by such motor vehicle
Any other motor vehicle and any combination of motor vehicles towed by such  25 ft.   80    84
motor vehicle                                                                         dBA   dBA
 
2.   Dynamic Braking Device: No person may operate, nor may any person cause,
allow, permit, or fail to control the operation of any motor vehicle with a
dynamic braking device engaged except for the avoidance of imminent danger.
3.   Defect in Vehicle: No person may operate, nor may any person cause, allow,
permit, or fail to control the operation or use of any motor vehicle that emits
excessive or unusual noises because of disrepair or mode of operation.
4.   Motorcycles
a.   EPA Noise Emission Control Requirements. No person may cause, allow,
permit, or fail to control the operation or use of any motorcycle manufactured
after December 31, 1982, without its required Motorcycle Noise Emission Control
Label on the motorcycle vehicle itself in accordance with 40 CFR § 205.158 and
on any motorcycle exhaust system as required by 40 CFR § 205.169. i. The
following is an example of an EPA Noise Control Label: “This (manufacturer’s
name) exhaust system (serial number) meets EPA Noise Emission Requirements of
(noise 11 emission standard) dB(A) for the following motorcycles: (list of
model specific codes). Installation of this exhaust system on motorcycle models
not specified may violate federal law.”
b.   Label Tampering. No person may deface or allow any person to deface any
noise emission control label required by federal law which is affixed to any
motorcycle or motorcycle part for purposes of identifying the motorcycle or
motorcycle part as a federally regulated product.
c.   Mismatched Mufflers. No person may operate, nor may any person cause,
allow, permit, or fail to control the operation of any motorcycle manufactured
to federal noise law standards that does not bear a label or mark on the
exhaust system that matches the model specific code of the motorcycle vehicle
on which the system is installed.
d.   Competition Motorcycles. No person may operate, nor may any person cause,
allow, permit, or fail to control the operation of any motorcycle identified by
the noise emission control label or mark as being for “competition use only” on
any property other than within a motor sports facility for the purpose of
participating in a practice session or racing event.
e.   Competition Motorcycle Exhaust System. No person may operate, nor may any
person cause, allow, permit, or fail to control the operation of any motorcycle
fitted with an exhaust system or exhaust system component identified by the
noise emission control label or mark as being for “competition motorcycles
only” on any property other than a motor sports facility for the purpose of
participating in a practice session or racing event.
5.   Motor Vehicle Repair & Testing: No person may repair, rebuild, modify,
idle, run, accelerate, or test any motor vehicle, nor any auxiliary equipment
attached to such vehicle within 300 feet of a Type A or Type B property use
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless this activity complies
with Section 4-4-6 Tables 1a and 1b and Section 4-4-7 Table 2.
6.   Off-Highway Vehicles: No person may operate, nor may any person cause,
allow, permit, or fail to control the operation of any off-highway vehicle
between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. unless this activity complies with
Section 4-4-6 Tables 1a and 1b.
7.   Truck Idling: No person shall operate an engine of any standing motor
vehicle with a weight in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds' manufacturer's
gross vehicle weight (GWA) for a period in excess of ten (10) minutes when such
vehicle is parked on a residential premises, on a premises next to a
residential premises, or on a public street next to a residential premises;
provided, however, that vehicles confined and operated within an enclosed
structure, or vehicles being used directly in construction activity or the
operation of construction equipment shall not be subject to the provisions of
this subsection.
H.    Parking Lot or Road Sweepers. No person may operate, nor may any person
cause, allow, permit, or fail to control the operation of any motorized
mechanical sweeper, blower, or vacuum within 300 feet of a Type A or Type B
property use between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the
responsible party demonstrates compliance with Section 4-4-6 Tables 1a and 1b
and Section 4-4-7 Table 2.
I.   Public Assembly. No person may operate, play, nor may any person cause,
allow, permit, or fail to control the operation or playing of any noise
emitting device in such a manner:
a.   That the maximum sound pressure level exceeds 100 dB(A) at a point
normally occupied by a patron on the premises of a public assembly unless
conspicuous and legible written notification is provided to the public prior to
entrance into the event stating, “WARNING: SOUND LEVELS ON THESE PREMISES MAY
CAUSE HEARING DAMAGE. HEARING PROTECTION IS AVAILABLE.” In the alternative, the
above warning may be provided on a sign of a color and lettering design in high
contrast with its background and posted where it is plainly visible at each
public entrance in bold letters of at least 1 inch in height. This Section will
not be construed to permit conduct prohibited by any other provision of this
Regulation; and
b.   Every public assembly with the potential of exceeding 100 dB(A) must have
readily available for public distribution, at a cost not excessive of the
retail value, single-use earplugs that have a Noise Reduction Rating (NRR) of
at least 20 decibels.
J.   Commercial Refuse Compactors. No person may operate or use, nor may any
person cause, allow, permit, or fail to control the operation or use of any
commercial refuse compactor within 300 feet of a Type A or Type B property use
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the responsible party
demonstrates compliance with Section 4-4-6 Tables 1a and 1b.
K.   Fireworks or Explosives. No person may use fireworks or other explosive
devices between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the responsible
party demonstrates compliance with Section 4-4-6 Tables 1a and 1b.
 
4-4-8: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following uses and
activities:
A.   Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief
valves.
B.   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to
an emergency call or in time of emergency.
C.   Noises resulting from emergency work.
D.   Loudspeakers or other sound amplification device operated by a peace
officer or member of the fire department in the performance of official duties.
E.   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration
permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by
the city in accordance with section 4-4-9 of this chapter.
F.   Any aircraft or railroad equipment operated in conformity with, or
pursuant to, state statute, federal law or federal regulations, and traffic
control instruction used pursuant to and within the duly adopted state or
federal regulations. Any aircraft operating under technical difficulties, in
any kind of distress, under emergency orders of air traffic control or being
operated pursuant to and subsequent to the declaration of an emergency under
federal air regulations shall also be exempt.
G.   Noise from an exterior alarm system of any building or vehicle provided
such alarm shall terminate its operation within five (5) minutes of its
activation.
H.   Sound from any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church, or
sound from unamplified music or song emanating from any church or school.
I.   Noise from domestic power tools at residential locations, when operated
between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
J.   Noise from snowblowers, snow throwers, and snowplows when operated with a
muffler for the purpose of snow removal.
K.   Lawful and properly permitted organized athletic activities on school
grounds, and officially designated playgrounds used for recreation by children
under supervision, and parks or places wherein athletic contests take place
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
L.   Except when and where specifically prohibited by the South Davis Metro
Fire Agency, Davis County, City or State law, regulation, or order, noise
resulting from lawful fireworks and noisemakers used for celebration of an
official holiday:
1.   By the public:
a.   Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on the days allowed by
statute, which include July 1 through July 7 and July 21 through July 27,
except that on July 4 and July 24, the hours are 11:00 a.m. to midnight;
b.   Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. December 31 and 1:00 a.m. the following
day, except when New Year’s Eve falls on a Sunday and the local municipality
determines to celebrate New Year’s Eve on the prior Saturday; and
c.   Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. on Chinese New Year’s Eve and 1:00 a.m.
the following day.
2.   By a licensed display or special effects operator to conduct a
professional fireworks display:
a.   Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. the same day;
b.   Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and midnight on the day officially
celebrated as and including July 4 and July 24;
c.   Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. for a special events
sponsored by the city;
d.   Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. the following
day; and
e.   Between the hours of 11:00 a.m. on Chinese New Year’s Eve and 1:00 a.m.
the
M.   Noise resulting from lawful explosives is exempt from this Regulation when
discharged:
N.   For lawful mining activities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1 hour
prior to dusk.
O.   Noise generated from city sponsored celebrations or special events.
P.   Lawful exercise of free speech
Q.   Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC). Noise resulting from
the operation of a HVAC system used on or within a Type A property use,
including central air conditioning units, evaporative coolers, or window
cooling units, regardless of the time or frequency of operation, is exempt from
this Regulation, provided the system is in good repair and operating within
manufacturer’s specifications.
R.   Mechanical Equipment. Noise resulting from the use of portable mechanical
equipment is exempt from this Regulation between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:
00 p.m. so long as the equipment is in good repair, performs a legitimate
service, and is being used according to the manufacturer’s specifications.
S.   Snow Removal. Noise resulting from the operation of snow removal equipment
is exempt from this Regulation;
1.   Beginning at 4:00 a.m. when snow has accumulated during the prior 12 hours
for a Type A or Type B property use;
2.   At any time for a Type C or Type D property use NOT within 300 feet of a
Type A or Type B property use; and
3.   At any time on any street, avenue, road, boulevard or highway by a
governing entity.
 
4-4-9: SPECIAL PERMIT:
Persons may file an application with the City for a special temporary permit
authorizing the applicant to take certain action or conduct certain activities
not otherwise permitted herein. Any permit issued hereunder shall be in
addition to any and all other licenses or permits required by law.
A.   Application: Applications for a special temporary permit shall be made in
writing to the City Manager and shall include the following items:
1.   Name and address of the applicant;
2.   2.   Activity or purpose for which the permit is desired;
3.   Reasons why the permit is necessary, including an explanation of undue
hardship and lack of reasonable alternatives;
4.   The specific date, time and location to be covered by the permit;
5.   The level of noise that will occur during the period of the permit;
6.   The ordinance provision for which the permit shall apply;
7.   A description of interim noise control measures to be taken for the
applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring therefrom; and
8.   A specific schedule of the noise control measures that shall be taken to
bring the source into compliance with this chapter within a reasonable time.
9.   Any other relevant information requested by the City.
B.   Fees: Each application for permit filed hereunder shall be accompanied by
any required permit fees set forth by resolution of the City Council. No permit
shall be issued until the proper fees have been paid to the City. Unless
otherwise provided, the fees required herein shall be in addition to any and
all other license or permit fees imposed by any other law.
C.   Issuance: The City Manager, or designee, shall review all applications
filed hereunder and may issue or deny a permit, in whole or in part, based upon
consideration for public health and safety. Any permit issued hereunder shall
contain any conditions upon which the permit has been granted, including the
effective dates, time restrictions, location and other reasonable requirements
necessary to minimize adverse effects upon surrounding areas and any persons
therein. 
1.    No permit shall be approved unless the applicant presents adequate proof
that:
a.   Compliance with this chapter would impose an undue hardship on the
applicant without equal or greater benefits to the public and additional time
is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to
comply with this chapter; or
b.   The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary duration, and
cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this section; and
c.   No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant; and
d.   Noise levels occurring during the period of the permit will not constitute
a danger to public health.
2.   In making the permit determination, the City Manager, or designee, shall
consider:
a.   The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the health
and welfare or the reasonable use of property that is caused or threatened to
be caused;
b.   The social and economic value of the activity for which the permit is
sought; and
c.    The ability of the applicant to apply the best practical noise control
measures.
D.   Denial: If the proper fees have not been paid, or the City Manager
determines that the application does not conform with applicable law or it is
not in the public's best interest to issue the permit, the City Manager shall
deny the permit and notify the applicant in writing of such denial. The notice
shall state the reasons for denial and inform the applicant that he or she may
file a written appeal of such denial pursuant to subsection I of this section.
E.   Revocation: The permit may be revoked by the City manager, or designee, if
there is:
1.   Violation of one or more conditions of the permit;
2.   Material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application; or
3.   Material change in any of the circumstances relied on in granting the
permit.
F.   Term: Any permit issued hereunder shall specifically state the term and
purpose for which it was issued, not to exceed six (6) months.
G.   Limitation: Except as provided herein, each permit issued hereunder shall
be valid only for the person to whom it is issued and only for the purpose and
location for which it is issued.
H.   Notice Requirements: Upon approval of any permit, the applicant must
notify, in writing, each dwelling and facility located within 800 feet of the
event or activity, unless otherwise required by the City Manager, at least 48
hours in advance. The City must approve the content of each notice before it is
distributed. The notice must contain the following information:
1.   The name of the event or company name;
2.   The name of the coordinator or project manager;
3.   The contact phone number(s) of the coordinator or project manager;
4.   The name and contact phone number(s) of the on-site manager;
5.   The address of the event;
6.   The specific date(s) and operating time;
7.   A detailed description of the activities; and
8.   A brief description of all measures taken to maximize the abatement of the
noise emission (or to minimize the noise emission) by means of Source Reduction
Practices, Best Management Practices, and Best Operational Practices.
I.   Records: The City Manager shall keep a record of all permits issued,
including the name of the person to whom the permit was issued, the type of
permit issued, and the fees collected.
J.   Revocation: Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the
City Manager due to the permit holder's failure to comply with the provisions
hereof or other applicable law. Prior to revocation of any permit, proper
notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be provided to the permit holder.
K.   Appeal: Any determination made by the City Manager relative to the
issuance, denial or revocation of a permit hereunder may be appealed to the
City Council by filing within ten (10) days from the date of said
determination, a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds for the
appeal and any other pertinent information. Such notice of appeal shall be
filed by delivering an original and three (3) copies to the City Manager during
regular business hours. Upon receipt of the appeal, the City Council shall
thoroughly and objectively investigate the matter and issue a written decision
stating the reasons for the decision and informing the appellant of any right
to judicial review provided by law. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
 
4-4-10 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS
A.   To ensure compliance, the City has the authority to perform inspections,
investigations, reviews, and other actions as necessary.
B.   Authority for Enforcement Official to Enter Premises.
1.   Regulated Commercial Premises. Upon presenting proper identification,
authorized representatives of the City may enter upon the premises of
properties regulated by the Department to perform routine inspections to ensure
compliance with rules, standards, regulations, and ordinances adopted by City.
2.   Private Dwellings. Inspections of private dwellings are made by consent of
the owner or other party having legal authority or upon a court order.
3.   Consent by Permit. The City may require permit holders to allow access for
inspections as part of their permit. Failure to allow access for inspections as
set out in the permit may result in the suspension or revocation of the permit.
4-4-11: ENFORCEMENT:
Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as
provided in title 12 of this Code or may be subject to criminal prosecution as
a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
A.   Civil Enforcement and Administrative Actions: If the Enforcement Official
has investigated or inspected any property or facility and believes the
property owner or other responsible party is in violation of this chapter or
has other reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
part of this chapter or that the property owner or otherwise responsible party
is not in compliance with this chapter, the Enforcement Official may take civil
enforcement action as authorized by Title 12 Administrative Hearings and may
also refer the matter for criminal prosecution. Civil and criminal actions may
be brought simultaneously. A person does not need to be first adjudged liable
in a civil matter before facing criminal charges.
B.   Criminal Enforcement Actions. Any peace officer is authorized to enforce
the provisions of this section and or may be subject to criminal prosecution as
a Class C misdemeanor.
C.   Emergency Enforcement. If an Enforcement Official or Peace Officer finds
that an emergency exists that requires immediate action to protect the public
health, he or she may without notice or hearing issue an order declaring the
existence of an emergency and requiring that action be taken as deemed
necessary to meet the emergency. The order is effective immediately. Any person
to whom the order is directed must comply and abate the nuisance immediately
but may petition the Administrative Hearing Officer for a hearing in Title 12
for Appeal Hearing Procedures. After the hearing and depending upon the
findings as to whether the person has complied with the provisions of this
Chapter, the Enforcement Official may continue the order in effect or modify or
revoke it. If circumstances warrant because of the seriousness of the hazard,
the City may act to correct or abate the emergency without issuance of an order
or directive or without waiting for the expiration of compliance time
previously given in an order.
D.   CRIMINAL, CIVIL, AND ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES
1.   Criminal Penalties.
a.   Any person who is found guilty by a court of violating any of the
provisions of this Regulation, either by failing to do the acts required herein
or by doing a prohibited act, is guilty of a class C misdemeanor, pursuant to
Utah Code Ann. § 26A-1-123.
b.   Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes
a separate violation.
c.   Each similar subsequent violation occurring within two years of the
initial violation may constitute a class B misdemeanor.
2.   Civil AND Administrative Penalties.
a.   Penalties may be included in a Settlement Agreement or Stipulation &
Consent Order. Penalties may be assessed according to the following factors:
(1)   The violator’s history of compliance or non-compliance;
(2)   The violator’s economic benefit of non-compliance;
(3)   The documented costs associated with environmental or health damage;
(4)   The violator’s degree of willfulness or negligence; and
(5)   The violator’s good faith efforts to comply and cooperate.
b.   The Administrative Hearing Officer may multiply the penalty by the number
of days the violation occurred.
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-11
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 8, CHAPTER 5 OF CITY CODE PERTAINING TO STORM WATER
MANAGEMENT
 
   WHEREAS, the City of North Salt Lake is an incorporated city in Davis
County, Utah; and
WHEREAS, the City Council has determined that certain amendments to the City
Code related to storm water should be made in compliance with the State of Utah
Division of Water Quality requirements; and
   WHEREAS, the City Council finds that it is in the public interest that the
Code be amended at this time to improve storm water regulations; and
WHEREAS, the City Council finds further that changed or changing conditions
make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to carry out the storm water
management.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of North Salt
Lake, Utah, as follows:
   SECTION 1.  Code Amendment. Title 8 – Public Utilities, Chapter 5 –
Stormwater Management is hereby amended as attached in Exhibit A.   
SECTION 2.  Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is declared
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall not be
affected thereby.
   SECTION 3.   Effective Date. This ordinance is hereby adopted and shall take
effect immediately upon posting as required in Utah Code 10-3-713.
   APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of North Salt Lake,
Utah, this 3rd day of June, 2025.
CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE
 
______________________________
BRIAN J. HORROCKS
Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:               City Council Vote as Recorded:
   
_______________________         Council Member Watts Baskin   ______   
WENDY PAGE            Council Member Clayton      ______
City Recorder               Council Member Jackson      ______
                  Council Member Knowlton      ______
Council Member Van Langeveld   ______
Certificate of Posting Ordinance:
I, the duly appointed recorder for the City of North Salt Lake, hereby certify
that the foregoing Ordinance No. 2025-11 was passed by the governing body on
the date shown above, and that copies were posted as required by Utah Code 10-
3-713 within the municipality.
 
Recorded this _________ day of _________________________, 2025.
 
___________________________________________                            [Seal]
Wendy Page, City Recorder
 
 
EXHIBIT A
 
8-5-10: CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   City Permit Required: Owners and operators of any construction site
within the jurisdictional limits of the city are required to obtain a
stormwater discharge permit from the city. Residential landscaping and
gardening activities are exempt from this requirement.
   B.  A. State Permit Required: Owners and operators of any construction site
within the jurisdictional limits of the city which disturbs one acre or more of
surface area, or is part of a common plan of development or sale that disturbs
one acre or more, are required to submit an Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan (SWPPP) in accordance with the general construction permit (GCP) or the
common plan permit (CPP), respectively, and obtain an Notice of Intent (NOI)
from the Utah department of environmental quality.
   C. B. Plan Approval: No person shall be granted a stormwater discharge
permit without the approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan by the
city public works director if required under the UPDES requirements. The SWPPP
is required to be in the current format as provided on the Utah department of
environmental quality's website or format that is approved by the Utah
department of environmental quality.
   D.  C. Exempt Activities: No stormwater discharge permit is required for the
following activities:
      1.   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources.
      2.   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted main or accessory use. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
      3. Residential landscaping and gardening activities that disturb under
one (1) acre of land.
8-5-11: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Filing: Application for a construction stormwater discharge permit
shall be filed with the city engineer. Contractors are required to obtain a
permit prior to commencement of work. Each permit application shall bear the
name and address and contact information of the owner of the site, developer of
the site, contractor working at the site, and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee and a
site specific stormwater pollution prevention plan.
   B.   Bond Or Other Security Required: The applicant is required to file a
faithful performance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security in
an amount deemed sufficient by the engineering department to cover all costs of
implementation and maintenance of the approved erosion and sediment control
plan, including costs for improvements, landscaping and maintenance of
improvements for such period as specified by the city, and also to cover
engineering and inspections costs and the cost to repair improvements installed
on the site and damaged by uncontrolled erosion and sediment from the
construction site. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-12: FEES FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Required: The city shall charge and the permittee shall pay upon
issuance of the permit, fees for costs associated with the work performed under
the permit. Such costs could include costs for reviewing the project and
issuing the permit, inspections of the project, deterioration of existing
public improvements or diminution of the useful life of existing public
improvements, and other costs to the city associated with the work to be done
under the permit. All costs shall be assessed in a nondiscriminatory manner.
   B.   Reduction Or Waiver: The city engineer may reduce or waive permit fees
or penalties, or portion thereof, provided for in this chapter when he/she
determines that such permit fee or penalty:
      1.   Pertains to construction or rehabilitation of housing for persons
whose income is below the median income level for the city; or
      2.   Pertains to work by a contractor on city owned systems at the
request of the city.
   C.   Additional Charges: Additional charges to cover the reasonable cost and
expenses of any required engineering review, inspection and work site
restoration associated with each undertaking may be charged by the city to each
permittee, in addition to the permit fee.
   D.   Structure Established: The fee structure for review of any stormwater
discharge permit application shall be established by the city engineer. All of
the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to
support local plan review, inspection and program administration, and shall be
made prior to the issuance of any permit for the development. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-
16-2016)
8-5-13: CONTENTS OF PERMIT; DURATION, EXTENSIONS:
    A.   Starting, Estimated Completion Date: Each permit application shall
state the starting date and estimated completion date. Work shall be completed
within a reasonable period of time from the starting date or as determined by
the city engineer. Such determination shall be based upon factors reasonably
related to the work to be performed under the permit. Such factors may include,
in addition to other factors related to the work to be performed, the
following:
       1.   The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
       2.   Protecting existing public improvements impacted by the work;
       3.   The season of the year during which the work is to be performed, as
well as the current weather and its impact on public safety and the
environment.
The city engineer shall be notified by the permittee of commencement of the
work within twenty four (24) hours prior to commencing work. The permit shall
be valid for the time period specified in the permit.
    B.   Extension: If the work is not completed during such period, prior to
the expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to the city engineer for
an additional permit or an extension, which may be granted by the city engineer
for good cause shown.
    C.   Length Of Extension: The length of the extension requested by the
permittee shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer and will
require a written review and amendment to the stormwater pollution prevention
plan as required. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-14 11: TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT NOT PERMITTED: LOCATION OF WORK AND
RESPONSIBLE PARTIES:
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and Work shall not be
performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit.
The owner(s) and operator(s) listed on the Notice of Intent shall be the
permittee and responsible party. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a
permittee from subcontracting the work to be performed under a permit;
provided, however, that the holder of the permit shall be and remain
responsible for the performance of the work under the permit, and for all
bonding, insurance and other requirements of this chapter and under said
permit. Subcontractors shall also be appropriately licensed, insured and
bonded. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-15: WAIVER OF PERMIT REQUIREMENT: Low Erosivity Waiver
   A.   Request Filed: Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management
as required by this chapter unless a written request is filed to waive this
requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater pollution prevention plan
requirements shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval.
   B.   Conditions: The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be
waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant; provided,
that at least one of the following conditions applies:
      1.   It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter.
      2.   Alternative minimum requirements for on site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater pollution
prevention plan that has been approved by the public works department and the
implementation of the plan is required by local ordinance.
      3.   Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off site facility.
The off site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately
sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than
that which would be afforded by on site practices, and there is a legally
obligated entity responsible for long term operation and maintenance of the
stormwater practice.
      4.   The engineering department finds that meeting the minimum on site
management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical
characteristics of a site.
      5.   Nonstructural practices will be used on the site that reduce:
         a.   The generation of stormwater from the site;
         b.   The size and cost of stormwater storage; and
         c.   The pollutants generated at the site.
The amount of credit available for using such nonstructural practices shall be
determined by the public works department.
   C.   Prohibited Impacts To Downstream Waterways: In instances where one of
the conditions above applies, the city engineer may grant a waiver from strict
compliance with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable
mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a waiver, the
applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the
waiver will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways:
      1.   Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams and other
structures;
      2.   Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
      3.   Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation;
      4.   Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property.
   D.   Mitigation Measures: Furthermore, where compliance with minimum
requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy
the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by
the jurisdictional stormwater authority. Mitigation measures may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
      1.   The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of
an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands
should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent
buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat;
      2.   The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage
improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that
currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in
accordance with the purposes and standards of this chapter;
      3.   Monetary contributions (fee in lieu) to fund stormwater management
activities, such as research and studies (e.g., regional wetland delineation
studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macroinvertebrates,
stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species studies, hydrologic
studies, and monitoring of stormwater management practices).
   E.   Fee In Lieu Of Stormwater Management Practices: Where the public works
department waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management
requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate
stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the
applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the
public works department. When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required
stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in
accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and the stormwater
authority agree on a greater alternate contribution) established by the public
works department, and based on the cubic feet of storage required for
stormwater management of the development in question. All of the monetary
contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program
project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any
building permit for the development.
   F.   Dedication Of Land: In lieu of a monetary contribution, partially or
totally, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management
by entering into an agreement with the city engineer for the granting of an
easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the
construction of an off site stormwater management facility. The agreement shall
be entered into by the applicant and the city engineer prior to the recording
of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the
building permit. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-16 12: REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PERMIT:
A.   To apply for a prevention plan approval, an applicant shall submit to the
city a prevention plan for review.
 
B.   The city has 14 business days after the day on which an applicant submits
a prevention plan to review the prevention plan for compliance with local
ordinances, state law, and federal law.
 
C.   The city may request more information, or modification to the prevention
plan, if the request:
1.   Is specific for more information, lists specifically why the prevention
plan is
noncompliant; and
2. For modification:
(A)Includes citations to the permit requirements, local
ordinances, or state law,
or federal law that require the modification to the prevention plan; and
   (B)Is logged in an index of requested modification.
D. The city has five business days after the day on which the applicant submits
the
information or modification described in Subsection (12)(B) to complete the
review of
the prevention plan.
E. Once the review of the prevention plan is complete, the municipal system
authority
shall notify the applicant, in writing, whether the authorization to discharge
is granted.
   A.   Review; Determination: The engineering department will review each
application to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
regulation. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the
engineering department shall, in writing:
      1.   Approve the permit application;
      2.   Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions
as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation,
and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
      3.   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reasons and
procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. (Ord. 2016-
12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-17: MANAGEMENT CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED:
   A.   Information Required; Intent: A stormwater management concept plan
shall be required with all permit applications and will include sufficient
information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.), to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all
proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water
resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for
managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this
conceptual planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management
measures necessary for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for
management of stormwater runoff from future development. The stormwater
pollution prevention plan shall be prepared in accordance with the checklist
provided by the public works department.
   B.   Previously Developed Sites: For development or redevelopment occurring
on a previously developed site, an applicant shall be required to include
within the stormwater concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater
runoff discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this
chapter to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-18 13: FIELD INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Field inspections during preconstruction and construction shall be
conducted by the public works department or other designated agent as outlined
in the inspection checklist provided by the public works department.
   B.   Final approval inspections will be conducted by both the public works
department (for SWPPP completion and notice of termination for the stormwater
permit) and the engineering department (for final acceptance of stormwater
facilities).
   C.   Access onto private property is authorized for the city engineer, the
public works director, or other designated qualified personnel to inspect
construction stormwater BMPs on private properties that discharge to the city
stormwater system.
   D.   Access onto private properties that discharge to the city stormwater
system is authorized for the public works director to inspect existing
stormwater facilities to ensure proper function and maintenance on an annual
basis. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
A.   Except as provided in Subsection C and D, the city shall conduct an
oversight inspection through an electronic site inspection.
 
B.   Photographs submitted for electronic site inspection shall:
1.   Include meta data verifying the date, time, and GPS location corresponding
to the construction site; and
2.   Be of sufficient resolution and clarity to assess compliance with general
best management practices.
 
C.   An applicant may opt out of the electronic site inspection and instead
elect an on-site inspection.
 
D.   The city may conduct an on-site inspection if the city:
1.   Has a documented reason for justifying an on-site oversight inspection.,
which may include:
a.   Alterations of electronic photographs;
b.   Failure to submit an electronic site inspection at the appropriate time;
or
c.   The construction site is within one-half mile of a river, a stream, or a
lake;
2.   Is inspecting a state transportation project; or
3.   Is inspecting a military project.
 
E.   The city may require post-construction maintenance agreements.
8-5-19 14: AS BUILT PLANS:
All applicants are required to submit actual as built plans for any stormwater
management practices located on site after final construction is completed. The
plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management
facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection
by the public works department is required before the release of any
performance securities can occur. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-20 15: POSTCONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
Unless judged by the public works department to be exempt or granted a waiver,
the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management
at all sites:
A. All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control
the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design
storms and reduce the generation of stormwater runoff. These practices should
seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate
stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots and
landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both
water quality and quantity.
B. Stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not be allowed to
discharge into a jurisdictional wetland or local water body without adequate
treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on
wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the
public works department. In no case shall the impact on functional values be
any less than allowed by the army corps of engineers (ACE) or the department of
environmental quality (DEQ) responsible for natural resources.
C. Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained by promoting
infiltration through the use of structural and nonstructural methods. At a
minimum, annual recharge from the postdevelopment site shall mimic the annual
recharge from predevelopment site conditions.
D. Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential
pollutant loadings, as determined by the city engineer, may require the use of
specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices.
E. Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the public works
department to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design
requirements. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-21 16: BASIC STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA:
A. Site Design Feasibility: Stormwater management practices for a site shall be
chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors that
should be considered are:
1. Topography;
2. Drainage area;
3. Depth to water table;
4. Soil types;
5. Slope of the site;
6. Location of the site in relation to environmentally sensitive areas.
B. Conveyance Issues: All stormwater best management practices shall be
designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants
and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Maximizing of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points;
2. Protection of inlet and outfall structures;
3. Elimination of erosive flow velocities;
4. Providing underdrain systems, where applicable.
C. Landscaping Plans Required: All stormwater best management practices must
have a landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and
how and who will manage and maintain this vegetation. This plan must be
prepared by a registered landscape architect or soil conservation district.
D. Low Impact Development (LID) Requirements: For new development or
redevelopment projects that disturb greater than or equal to one acre,
including projects less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale, the evaluation of an LID approach is required to implement
BMPs that infiltrate, evapotranspire, or harvest and use stormwater from the
site to protect water quality (see section 10-20-3 of this code).
E. Maintenance Agreements: All stormwater treatment practices shall have an
enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions
as designed.
1. This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to
access and inspect the stormwater treatment practices, and to perform routine
maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater
treatment practice. The agreement shall include provisions allowing for access
and inspections on a reasonable basis. In addition, a legally binding covenant
specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater
treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any permits for land
disturbance activities.
2. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the
maintenance covenant, the public works department, after reasonable notice, may
correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing
all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the
event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety
or public health, the public works department shall notify the party
responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing.
Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have seven (7) days
to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After
proper notice, the public works department may assess the owner of the facility
for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work may be
placed on the utility bill and collected as ordinary utility fees by the city.
Failure to pay any portion of the fee may result in termination of water
service, power service, or both. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-22 17: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
   A.   Stop Work Order; Revocation Of Permit: In the event that any person
holding a building permit or site development permit pursuant to this chapter
violates the terms of the permit or implants site development in such a manner
as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons
residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be
materially detrimental to the public welfare, environment or injurious to
property or improvements in the neighborhood, the public works department may
suspend or revoke the site development permit and/or building permit.
   B.   Violation And Penalties: Whenever the public works department finds
that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of
this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written
notice to the responsible person or property owner. Such notice may require,
without limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      3.   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
      6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
 
A. The city:
1. Shall notify the applicant, in writing, of a specific violation;
2. Shall provide the applicant a reasonable time of at least one business day to
correct
the specific violation; and
3. May perform an inspection to verify that the applicant corrects the specific
violation.
B. If an applicant does not correct the specific violation described in Subsection
(17)(A)(1) within the timeline set under Subsection (17)(A)(2), the city:
1. Shall issue a written warning, that the applicant has not corrected the specific
violation;
2. May impose a fine if the applicant does not correct the specific violation within
no
less than an additional one business day; and
3. May perform an inspection to verify that the applicant corrected the specific
violation.
C. If an applicant does not correct the specific violation for which the applicant
received
notice in accordance with Subsection (17)(A)(1) within the timeline set under
Subsection (17)(B), the city:
1.   Shall notify the applicant, in writing, that the applicant has not corrected the
specific violation; and
         2.   May impose an administrative fine as set forth in Utah Code Section 19-
5-108.3(7)(c)(ii)(A-F), as amended, for each occurrence; and
3.   May impose the administrative fine:
a.    For each business day the specific violation continues beginning on the day
after the day on which the city issues the administrative fine; and
b. Within 30 days after the day on which the applicant corrects the violation.
D.   The city shall:
1. Impose each fine in writing and clearly document the specific violation in the
writing; and
2. Deposit collected fines into a restricted account for education and outreach under
a program.
E.   Except as provided in Subsection (17)(f), the city may not issue an order to
stop
construction activity for a violation if:
1. An applicant selects the preferred best management practice for the site
conditions;
2. An applicant implements and properly uses the preferred best management
practices; and
3. The violation results from a deficiency in the preferred best management practice.
F.   The city may issue an order to stop construction if the authority has a clearly
documented reason articulating an immediate threat to water quality.
G.   The city may recoup the reasonable costs incurred to correct a specific
violation
the applicant refuses to correct after the enforcement process described in this
Subsection (17) has been exhausted if the city, at the time of clean up, determines
there is an imminent threat of significant harm to water quality or the storm water
system.
H.   An authority may not impose a fine for any reason except as provided in
Subsection
(17).
     B.  I. Misdemeanor: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be
                 deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code, and each day during which any violation of any of
the
provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, shall
constitute a
separate offense.
      C. J. Public Nuisance Declared: Any work done or condition created or
allowed, in
                 violation of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, which may be
abated by a civil legal action by the city attorney. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-12
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CITY CODE TITLE 7, CHAPTER 7, PERTAINING TO UNSANCTIONED
CAMPING ON PUBLIC GROUNDS
   WHEREAS, the City of North Salt Lake is an incorporated city in Davis
County, Utah; and
WHEREAS, the City Council has determined that certain amendments to the City
Code related to unsanctioned camping should be made in compliance with Utah
State Code 35A-16-403 which requires municipalities to enforce an ordinance
which prohibits camping; and
   WHEREAS, the City Council has determined that certain amendments to the City
Code are necessary to define unsanctioned camping in accordance with Utah State
Code 76-6-208; and
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that it is in the public interest that the Code
be amended at this time to address unsanctioned camping; and
WHEREAS, the City Council finds further that changed or changing conditions
make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to regulate unsanctioned
camping within the City.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of North Salt
Lake, Utah, as follows:
   SECTION 1.  Code Amendment. Title 7 – Public Ways and Property, Chapter 7 –
Parks is hereby amended as attached in Exhibit A.   
SECTION 2.  Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is declared
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall not be
affected thereby.
   SECTION 3.   Effective Date. This ordinance is hereby adopted and shall take
effect immediately upon posting as required in Utah Code 10-3-711.
   APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of North Salt Lake,
Utah, this 17th day of June, 2025.
CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE
______________________________
BRIAN J. HORROCKS
Mayor
ATTEST:               
   
_______________________            
WENDY PAGE            
City Recorder               
                  City Council Vote as Recorded:
 
                  Council Member Watts Baskin   ______
                  Council Member Clayton      ______
                  Council Member Jackson      ______
                  Council Member Knowlton      ______
Certificate of Posting Ordinance:
I, the duly appointed recorder for the City of North Salt Lake, hereby certify
that the foregoing Ordinance No. 2025-12 was passed by the governing body on
the date shown above, and that copies were posted as required by Utah Code 10-
3-711.
 
Recorded this _________ day of _________________________, 2025.
 
___________________________________________                            [Seal]
Wendy Page, City Recorder
Council Member Van Langeveld   ______    
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-13
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CITY CODE TITLE 7, CHAPTER 7, PERTAINING TO UNSANCTIONED
CAMPING ON PUBLIC GROUNDS
 
   WHEREAS, the City of North Salt Lake is an incorporated city in Davis
County, Utah; and
WHEREAS, the City Council has determined that certain amendments to the City
Code related to unsanctioned camping should be made in compliance with Utah
State Code 35A-16-403 which requires municipalities to enforce an ordinance
which prohibits camping; and
   WHEREAS, the City Council has determined that certain amendments to the City
Code are necessary to define unsanctioned camping in accordance with Utah State
Code 76-6-208; and
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that it is in the public interest that the Code
be amended at this time to address unsanctioned camping; and
WHEREAS, the City Council finds further that changed or changing conditions
make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to regulate unsanctioned
camping within the City.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of North Salt
Lake, Utah, as follows:
   SECTION 1. Repeal. Ordinance 2025-12 is repealed in whole.
SECTION 2. Code Amendment. Title 7 – Public Ways and Property, Chapter 7 –
Parks is hereby amended as attached in Exhibit A.   
SECTION 3.  Severability. If any provision of this ordinance is declared
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall not be
affected thereby.
   SECTION 4.   Effective Date. This ordinance is hereby adopted and shall take
effect immediately upon posting as required in Utah Code 10-3-711.
   APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of North Salt Lake,
Utah, this 15th day of July, 2025.
CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE
 
______________________________
BRIAN J. HORROCKS
Mayor
 
ATTEST:               
   
 
_______________________            
WENDY PAGE            
City Recorder               
                  City Council Vote as Recorded:
 
                  Council Member Watts Baskin   ______
                  Council Member Clayton      ______
                  Council Member Jackson      ______
                  Council Member Knowlton      ______
Council Member Van Langeveld   ______    
Certificate of Posting Ordinance:
I, the duly appointed recorder for the City of North Salt Lake, hereby certify
that the foregoing Ordinance No. 2025-13 was passed by the governing body on
the date shown above, and that copies were posted as required by Utah Code 10-
3-711.
 
Recorded this _________ day of _________________________, 2025.
 
___________________________________________                            [Seal]
Wendy Page, City Recorder
 
7-7-2: UNSANCTIONED CAMPING ON PUBLIC GROUNDS, STREETS, PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, OR
PLAZAS:
A.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in “camping”, as defined in
subsection B of this section, on any “public grounds”, as defined in subsection
C of this section, upon any portion of a street, in any park or playground,
unless expressly approved in writing by an authorized City official for such
activities or except in cases of local emergency for the staging of emergency
response teams, including authorized personnel or community evacuation
shelters. It is unlawful for any person using or benefiting from the use of any
of the foregoing items of camping equipment to fail to remove the same for more
than five (5) minutes after being requested to do so by any police officer. A
violation of this subsection is a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 94-4, 4-19-1994)
B.   For the purpose of this section “camping” means:
1.    Erecting or occupying structures, including tents, temporary structures,
recreation vehicles, travel trailers, or motor vehicles, for camping or other
living accommodation activities, including sleeping, for any period of time;
2.   Using camping-related items, including cots, beds, sleeping bags, or
hammocks, for sleeping or other living accommodation activities; or
3.   Cooking using a camp fire, propane stove, or other heat-producing portable
cooking equipment, except in designated areas.
C.   For the purposes of this section, the term "public grounds" means any real
property owned in whole or in part by the United States Of America and its
agencies, or the state of Utah or any of its political subdivisions, including
the City of North Salt Lake Corporation, upon which no camping has been
authorized by the owner.
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-14
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE AMENDING TITLE 4, CHAPTER 3,
SECTION 6 AND TITLE 8, CHAPTER 1, SECTION 3 OF THE CITY CODE PERTAINING TO CITY
UTILITY HARDSHIP ASSISTANCE
 
WHEREAS, the City of North Salt Lake is an incorporated city in Davis County
Utah; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake has determined that certain
amendments to the City Code relating to utility fees, rates, and charges are
necessary; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council has identified the need to provide for utility
billing reduction assistance to customers of the City’s water, storm water,
and/or solid waste utility fees under circumstances where, among other
criteria, household income is at or below 150% of the Federal Poverty Level;
and
 
WHEREAS, the Audit Committee of the City of North Salt Lake met on December 3,
2024, March 18, 2025, and June 17, 2025 to discuss application procedures and
qualification criteria for a hardship assistance program; and
 
WHEREAS, the Audit Committee proposed that qualified applicants with utility
accounts in good standing may receive a 50% billing reduction for a period of
three months; and
 
WHEREAS, the period of hardship assistance may be extended for an additional
three months with demonstrated proof of continued need; and
 
 WHEREAS, City utility customers may be granted hardship assistance for no more
than six months within a 36-month period.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of North Salt
Lake as follows:
 
Section 1. Code Amendment. Title 4, Chapter 3, Section 6 and Title 8, Chapter
1, Section 3 of the City Code are hereby amended as attached in Exhibit A.
 
Section 2. Severability. If any section, part or provision of this Ordinance is
held invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not
affect any other portion of this Ordinance, and all sections, parts and
provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable.
 
   Section 3. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon
publication and posting.
APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City of North Salt Lake, Utah on this 15 th day of
July, 2025.
 
CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE
                     
 
______________________________
BRIAN J. HORROCKS
Mayor
ATTEST:
 
   
_______________________               
WENDY PAGE
City Recorder               
 
                     City Council Vote as Recorded:
 
                     Council Member Watts Baskin   ______
                     Council Member Clayton      ______
                     Council Member Jackson      ______
                     Council Member Knowlton      ______
   Council Member Van Langeveld   ______    
 
Certificate of Posting Ordinance:
I, the duly appointed recorder for the City of North Salt Lake, hereby certify
that the foregoing Ordinance No. 2025-14 was passed by the governing body on
the date shown above, and that copies were posted as required by Utah Code 10-
3-711.
 
Recorded this _________ day of _________________________, 2025.
 
___________________________________________                           [Seal]
Wendy Page, City Recorder
 
 
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-3-6: SERVICE CHARGES:
   A.   Required: All residents within the City shall pay monthly garbage
service charges in such amounts as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule
resolution.
   B.   Vacancies: If a dwelling unit or a place of business has remained
vacant for an entire month, the owner or possessor of the site may make
arrangements with the City Recorder utility billing department for no reduced
garbage collection charges during the continued vacancy of the premises.
   C.   Method Of Payment Of Service Charges:
      1.   The garbage service charges imposed by this section shall be added
to the charge made for water furnished through the water system of the City,
and shall be billed and collected in the same manner as water service charges
are billed and collected.
      2.   In the event that the obligee for the water service charges and the
obligee for the garbage service charges do not coincide, or in the event that
practical economic and administrative reasons do not make combined billing and
collection feasible, in the opinion of the City Council, the garbage service
charges may be collected with such frequency and in such manner as the City
Council shall by regulation provide. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
3. Residential property owners experiencing hardship and meeting specific
criteria may apply for assistance as described by City Code 8-1-3(C), “Hardship
Assistance”.
 
TITLE 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-1-3: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Rates And Connection Fees: The rates, penalty fee for delinquency in
payment, connection fee, reservoir fee, inspection fee and other charges
incidental to connection and services from the city water system shall be in
such amounts as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution. The
governing body may promulgate rules for levying, billing, guaranteeing and
collecting charges for water services and all other rules necessary for the
management and control of the water system. Rates for services furnished shall
be uniform with respect to each class or classes of service established or that
may hereafter be established. (1989 Code § 14-117)
   B.   Delinquency; Discontinuance Of Service:
      1.   The City shall provide a utility bill containing the utility service
charges assessed to each customer once a month. The utility bill may be sent
electronically, or by mail.
      2.   The utility bill shall specify the amount charged for utility
service, the available methods of payment, and the date payment is due.
      3.   Utility bills shall be delivered by the twentieth of each month for
services provided during the previous month. The due date for the utility bill
shall be the last day of the same month as the utility bill is delivered.
      4.   Delinquent Notification Procedure:
         a.   If utility bills are not paid by the fifteenth of the following
month, a notice of "Past Due" amount will appear on the customer's next utility
bill.
         b.   If the past due amount remains unpaid thirty (30) days after the
original due date within ten (10) days an automated voice message call will be
sent to the telephone number the customer has provided as their primary
contact.
         c.   If the past due amount remains unpaid sixty (60) days after the
original due date within ten (10) days the City will attempt a direct call (not
automated) to the telephone number the customer has provided as their primary
contact.
         d.   If the bill is not paid within twenty four (24) hours of the
direct call the City may disconnect the delinquent customer from water
services.
         e.   Shut-offs for non-payment may be done not sooner than a
delinquency of at least sixty five (65) days or when two (2) monthly payment
due dates have passed without payment.
         f.   After water service is disconnected, the City will only reconnect
the delinquent customer when the total charges are paid in full or other
arrangements are made with approval of the Finance Director or City Treasurer.
5.      The City is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the payment of
all delinquent water charges by an action of law in the name of the City. (1989
Code § 14-121; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2021-07, 8-17-2021; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022;
Ord. 2023-14, 11-7-2023)
C.   Hardship Assistance
The City of North Salt Lake recognizes that residents may experience temporary
financial hardship due to unforeseen circumstances. This policy establishes a
hardship assistance program that provides a 50% billing reduction on City
utility charges (Water, Storm Water, and/or Solid Waste) for up to three
consecutive months for qualifying customers under the following guidelines:
1.   Eligibility Criteria. To qualify for hardship assistance, applicants must
meet the following criteria:
a.   Account Holder Status:
i.   The applicant must be the named account holder for a residential utility
account within the City of North Salt Lake.
ii.   The account must be in good standing for at least six (6) months prior to
applying.
b.   Demonstrated Financial Hardship:
i.   The applicant must provide documentation proving financial hardship due to
one or more of the following reasons:
1.   Job Loss or Reduced Work Hours: Unexpected job loss or significant
reduction in work hours within the last six (6) months.
2.   Medical Hardship: Significant out-of-pocket medical expenses exceeding 10%
of household income.
3.   Natural Disaster: Home or primary residence damage due to a declared
disaster (e.g., flood, earthquake, wildfire).
4.   Disability: Temporary or permanent disability affecting the ability to
work and meet financial obligations.
5.   Death, divorce, or separation from an immediate household member resulting
in significant reduction in household income within the last six (6) months.
c.   Household income must be at or below 150% of the Federal Poverty Level
(FPL), as published annually by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS).
2.   Application. Applications for assistance must include the following:
a.   Completed Hardship Assistance Application Form.
b.   Proof of Hardship (One of the following):
i.   Job Loss: Termination letter, unemployment benefit statement, or severance
agreement.
ii.   Medical Expenses: Copies of medical bills, insurance claim denials, or a
physician’s certification.
iii.   Natural Disaster: FEMA determination letter, insurance claim, or city/
state emergency declaration.
iv.   Disability: Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) letter,
physician’s statement, or disability benefits approval.
v.   Death, divorce, or separation: Death certificate, finalized divorce
decree, separation agreement, or other substantiated evidence.
c.   Proof of Income (One of the following):
i.   Most recent pay stubs (last two months), most recent tax return (1040
form), or Social Security, Disability, or Unemployment benefits statement.
3.   Verification & Approval.
a.   The utility billing department will confirm all required documentation is
submitted. Incomplete applications will be returned with a request for missing
documents.
b.   The City reserves the right to verify hardship claims by contacting
employers, medical providers, insurance agencies, and other government
entities.
c.   Applicants will receive written notification of decision within fifteen
(15) business days of submission.
d.   If approved, the 50% billing reduction will be applied to the next billing
cycle for up to three (3) consecutive months.
4.   Program Extension.
a.   Applicants who have been approved for hardship assistance may request an
extension of up to three (3) additional months. Such requests must be submitted
to the City in writing prior to the expiration of the initial assistance
period.
b.   Approval of an extension shall be contingent upon the applicant’s
demonstrated ongoing need for assistance.
5.   Program Limitations & Funding.
a.   No applicant may receive hardship assistance for more than six (6) months
within a 36-month period.
b.   The City may suspend or modify this program for any reason, including
funding availability.
6.   Appeals. Any applicant who is denied hardship assistance shall be notified
in writing and provided with information regarding their right to appeal.
a.   An applicant may file a written appeal to the City Recorder within ten
(10) business days of the date of the denial notice.
b.   The appeal shall be heard by the City’s designated Administrative Law
Judge (ALJ) in accordance with statutory municipal administrative hearing
procedures:
i.   The City shall provide the applicant with written notice of hearing time,
date, and location.
ii.   At the hearing, the applicant will be allowed to present evidence, call
witnesses, and be represented by counsel.
iii.   The City shall maintain an official record of the hearing, including
audio/visual recordings or transcripts.
iv.   Following the hearing, the ALJ shall issue a written decision whether the
applicant demonstrated continued need and may affirm, reverse, or remand the
denial.
v.   The written decision shall be mailed to the applicant within thirty (30)
days of the hearing.
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-15
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE AMENDING TITLE 1, CHAPTER 15,
SECTIONS 1 AND 2, OF CITY CODE PERTAINING TO WRITTEN MINUTES; POLICY AND
PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL
 
WHEREAS, the City of North Salt Lake is an incorporated city in Davis County
Utah; and
 
WHEREAS, the legislative session of 2025 made changes to the Open and Public
Meetings Act and the City Council desires to align City Code with updated State
law; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council finds the proposed amendments pertaining to written
minutes are in conformity with State law and will improve procedural clarity.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of North Salt
Lake as follows:
 
Section 1. Code Amendment. Title 1, Chapter 15, Sections 1 and 2 of the City
Code are hereby amended as attached in Exhibit A.
 
Section 2. Severability. If any section, part or provision of this Ordinance is
held invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not
affect any other portion of this Ordinance, and all sections, parts and
provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable.
 
   Section 3. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon
publication and posting.
 
APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City of North Salt Lake, Utah on this 2 nd day of
September, 2025.
 
 
CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE
   
______________________________
BRIAN J. HORROCKS
Mayor
ATTEST:
   
_______________________               
WENDY PAGE
City Recorder                  City Council Vote as Recorded:
 
                     Council Member Watts Baskin   ______
                     Council Member Clayton      ______
                     Council Member Jackson      ______
                     Council Member Knowlton      ______
   Council Member Van Langeveld   ______
Certificate of Posting Ordinance:
I, the duly appointed recorder for the City of North Salt Lake, hereby certify
that the foregoing Ordinance No. 2025-15 was passed by the governing body on
the date shown above, and that copies were posted as required by Utah Code 10-
3-711.
 
Recorded this _________ day of _________________________, 2025.
 
___________________________________________                           [Seal]
Wendy Page, City Recorder
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION:
1-15-1   : Definitions
1-15-2   : Policy For Approval Of Minutes
1-15-1   : DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply so long as they are consistent with the
definitions of the same terms found in the Utah open and public meetings act.
If a term is defined differently in the Utah open and public meetings act, the
definition found in that act shall apply.
MEETING: means a gathering of a public body or specified body; with a quorum
present; and that is convened by an individual with authority to convene the
public body or specified body; and following the process provided by law for
convening the public body or specified body; and for the express purpose of
acting as a public body or specified body to:
(A)   receive public comment about a relevant matter;
(B)   deliberate about a relevant matter; or
(C)   take action upon a relevant matter.
 
MEETING CLERK: The city recorder (or their authorized designee) for the city,
or shall mean the
person assigned by a public body, other than the city council, to record and to take the written minutes
of a meeting of a public body of the city.
MINUTES OF A MEETING: A written record of the meeting that shall include:
A.   The date, time, and place of the meeting;
B.   The names of members present and absent;
C.   The substance of all matters proposed, discussed, or decided by the public body which may
include a summary of comments made by members of the public body;
D.   A record, by individual member, of each vote taken by the public body;
E.   The name of each person who:
1.   Is not a member of the public body; and
2.   After being recognized by the presiding member of the public body, provided testimony or
comments to the public body;
F.   The substance, in brief, of the testimony or comments provided by the public under subsection E
of this definition; and
G.   Any other information that is a record of the proceedings of the meeting that any member
requests be entered in the minutes or recording.
PROPOSED MINUTES:
 The written minutes prepared by the meeting clerk that have been given to the
members of a public body for their review and approval.
PUBLIC BODY:
 Any administrative, advisory, executive or legislative body of the city that:
A.   Is created by the Utah constitution, statute, rule, ordinance, or
resolution;
B.   Consists of two (2) or more persons;
C.   Expends, disburses, or is supported in whole or in part by tax revenue;
and
D.   Is vested with the authority to make decisions regarding the public's business. 
(Ord. 2013-06, 3- 19-2013)
1-15-2   : POLICY FOR APPROVAL OF MINUTES:
The following shall be the policy and procedure for the approval of minutes for the city of North Salt
Lake:
A.   Written minutes shall be taken for all public meetings of any public body of the city. The minutes
of all public meetings of any public body of the city shall be recorded and
taken down by the meeting clerk during the course of any public meeting of the
public body.
B.   Within seven (7) working days from the end of the meeting, the meeting
clerk shall prepare
proposed minutes for the meeting and give a copy of the proposed minutes to each member of the
public body for his or her review and corrections before the next scheduled
meeting.
C.   Once the proposed minutes have been given to the members of the public
body, the meeting clerk shall immediately make available to the public the
proposed written minutes, which shall be
clearly identified as "awaiting formal approval" or "unapproved" or with some other appropriate notice
that the proposed minutes are subject to change until formally approved and
they shall become a public document available to any member of the public who
requests to read or copy the proposed minutes.
D.   Each member of the public body shall review the proposed minutes before
the first meeting of the public body that immediately follows the meeting clerk
giving the proposed minutes to the members of the public body. Each member of
the public body may give to the meeting clerk his or her
suggested corrections of the proposed minutes which suggested corrections shall be immediately sent
by the meeting clerk to the other members of the public body. If any member of the public body objects
to a suggested correction, he or she shall communicate that objection to the
meeting clerk who will then put the matter of approving the minutes on the
agenda of the next meeting of the public body for the public body to either
accept as proposed or to correct as suggested.
E.   If no member of the public body suggests corrections, or if no member of the public body objects
to any suggested correction, on or before the first meeting of the public body
that immediately follows the meeting clerk giving the proposed minutes to the
members of the public body, the proposed minutes shall be voted upon by the
public body.
F.   Once the proposed minutes have been approved by the public body, they
shall become the official
record of the proceedings of the public body and shall be signed by the clerk of the meeting and the
mayor, or chair, and shall be retained in the official records of the city and
shall be a public
document available for the inspection and copying by members of the public as appropriate under
Utah law.
(Ord. 2013-06, 3-19-2013)
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-19
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 10 LAND USE ORDINANCE, SECTIONS 10-10-3 AND 10-19-
17 PERTAINING TO THE MAXIMUM SIZE OF AND MINIMUM SETBACKS FOR AN ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE IN ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONES
 
WHEREAS, the City of North Salt Lake is an incorporated city in Davis County
Utah; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake has received a request to amend
the Code related to the maximum size for an accessory structure in residential
zones; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Code conflicts with the International Building Code with
regard to minimum setbacks for accessory structures; and
 
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission of North Salt Lake held a public hearing on
the proposed amendments on November 25, 2025 and received favorable public
comments and recommended the proposed amendments to the City Council; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake finds the proposed amendments are
also in accord with the comprehensive general plan, goals and policies of the
City; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake finds that changed or changing
conditions make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to carry out the
purposes stated in this Title; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that it is in the public interest that the
North Salt Lake City Code, be amended at this time.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of North Salt
Lake as follows:
 
Section 1. Code Amendment. Pursuant to Utah Code 10-20-502, Title 10 Land Use
Ordinance is hereby amended as follows:
 
a.    Sections 10-10-3 and 10-19-17 are hereby amended as shown in the attached
Exhibit “A”;
 
Section 2. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect upon posting as
required in Utah Code 10-3-713.
 
APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City of North Salt Lake, Utah on this 2 nd day of
December 2025.
 
CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE
                     By:
 
______________________________
BRIAN J. HORROCKS
Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:
   
_______________________               
WENDY PAGE
City Recorder                  
 
                     City Council Vote as Recorded:
 
                     Council Member Watts Baskin   ______
                     Council Member Clayton      ______
                     Council Member Jackson      ______
                     Council Member Knowlton      ______
                     Council Member Van Langeveld   ______
 
 
Certificate of Posting Ordinance:
I, the duly appointed recorder for the City of North Salt Lake, hereby certify
that the foregoing Ordinance No. 2025-19 was passed by the governing body on
the date shown above, and that copies were posted as required by Utah Code 10-
3-713 within the municipality.
 
Recorded this _________ day of _________________________, 2025.
 
___________________________________________                           [Seal]
Wendy Page, City Recorder
 
 
10-19-17: RESIDENTIAL:
 
  C.   Residential Structures:
       1.   Minimum Height Of Dwellings: No dwelling or structure containing a
dwelling shall be erected to a height less than one (1) story above grade.
(Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018)
       2.   Maximum Height And Floor Area Of Accessory Buildings: No building
which is accessory to a one-family, two-family, three-family or four-family
dwelling shall be erected to a height greater than one story, fourteen feet
(14') to the top of the wall plate and no higher than twenty feet (20') to the
highest point of the building roof or coping, nor be taller than the
primary structure. For lot sizes one-half acre or less, the maximum square foot
floor area of an accessory building is fifty percent (50%) of the footprint of
the principal building to which it is accessory. For lots sizes greater than
one-half acre, the maximum square foot floor area shall be no greater than the
footprint of the principal building. An accessory structure greater than eight
hundred sq. ft. (800) must meet the minimum of side yard required by the zone
for the principal building and a rear yard setback of ten feet (10'), unless no
windows, doors, or other openings are adjacent to the property line, in which
case the allowed rear yard setback shall be five feet (5').
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3796_9700x3376.jpg]
  3.   Area Of Accessory Buildings: No accessory building or group
of accessory buildings in any Residential District shall cover more than twenty
five percent (25%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 2018-14, 11-20-2018; amd. Ord. 2025-
06, 4-1-2025)
 
10-10-3: USE REGULATIONS:
 
                                                                             ZONE
                                                                             R1- R1- R1- RM- RM-
                                                                             12  10  7   7   20
Rear Yard Regulations (in feet)
Accessory buildings (may be reduced to three feet (3’) if all roof drainage
stays on the lot, the walls of the building have a one (1) hour fire rating  5   5   5   5   5
with no windows or doors adjacent to the property line, and the building is
a minimum of ten (10) feet from any dwelling on adjacent lot.
Side Yard Regulations (in feet)
The minimum side yard in feet for an accessory building, (May be reduced to
three feet (3’) if all roof drainage stays on the lot, the walls of the
building have a one (1) hour fire rating with no windows or doors adjacent   5   5   5   5   5
to the property line, and the building is a minimum of ten (10) feet from
any dwelling on adjacent lot.)
 
 
10-19-17: RESIDENTIAL:
 
  C.   Residential Structures:
       1.   Minimum Height Of Dwellings: No dwelling or structure containing a
dwelling shall be erected to a height less than one (1) story above grade.
(Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018)
       2.   Maximum Height And Floor Area Of Accessory Buildings: No building
which is accessory to a one-family, two-family, three-family or four-family
dwelling shall be erected to a height greater than one story, fourteen feet
(14') to the top of the wall plate and no higher than twenty feet (20') to the
highest point of the building roof or coping, nor be taller than the
primary structure. For lot sizes one-half acre or less, the maximum square foot
floor area of an accessory building is fifty percent (50%) of the footprint of
the principal building to which it is accessory. For lots sizes greater than
one-half acre, the maximum square foot floor area shall be no greater than the
footprint of the principal building. An accessory structure greater than eight
hundred sq. ft. (800) must meet the minimum of side yard required by the zone
for the principal building and a rear yard setback of ten feet (10'), unless no
windows, doors, or other openings are adjacent to the property line, in which
case the allowed rear yard setback shall be five feet (5').
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3804_9700x3376.jpg]
  3.   Area Of Accessory Buildings: No accessory building or group
of accessory buildings in any Residential District shall cover more than twenty
five percent (25%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 2018-14, 11-20-2018; amd. Ord. 2025-
06, 4-1-2025)
 
10-10-3: USE REGULATIONS:
 
                                                                             ZONE
                                                                             R1- R1- R1- RM- RM-
                                                                             12  10  7   7   20
Rear Yard Regulations (in feet)
Accessory buildings (may be reduced to three feet (3’) if all roof drainage
stays on the lot, the walls of the building have a one (1) hour fire rating  5   5   5   5   5
with no windows or doors adjacent to the property line, and the building is
a minimum of ten (10) feet from any dwelling on adjacent lot.
Side Yard Regulations (in feet)
The minimum side yard in feet for an accessory building, (May be reduced to
three feet (3’) if all roof drainage stays on the lot, the walls of the
building have a one (1) hour fire rating with no windows or doors adjacent   5   5   5   5   5
to the property line, and the building is a minimum of ten (10) feet from
any dwelling on adjacent lot.)
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-20
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 10 LAND USE ORDINANCE,
CHAPTERS 10 AND 12 PERTAINING TO BUILDING ENVELOPES FOR LOTS WITHIN THE
SENSITIVE AREA DISTRICT AND GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
 
WHEREAS, the City of North Salt Lake is an incorporated city in Davis County
Utah; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake has determined that clarification
is necessary for the provision of building envelopes on lots located in the
Sensitive Area District; and
 
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission of North Salt Lake held a public hearing on
the proposed amendments on November 25, 2025 and recommended the proposed
amendments to the City Council; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake finds the proposed amendments are
also in accord with the comprehensive general plan, goals and policies of the
City; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake finds that changed or changing
conditions make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to carry out the
purposes stated in this title; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that it is in the public interest that the
North Salt Lake City Code, be amended at this time.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of North Salt
Lake as follows:
 
Section 1. Code Amendment. Pursuant to Utah Code 10-20-502, Title 10 Land Use
Ordinance is hereby amended as follows:
 
a.    Sections 10-1-39, 10-12-2, 10-12-4, 10-12-22 and 10-12-24 are hereby
amended as shown in the attached Exhibit “A”;
 
Section 2. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect upon posting as
required in Utah Code 10-3-713.
 
 
APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City of North Salt Lake, Utah on this 2 nd day of
December 2025.
 
CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE
                     By:
 
______________________________
BRIAN J. HORROCKS
Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:
   
_______________________               
WENDY PAGE
City Recorder                  
                     City Council Vote as Recorded:
 
                     Council Member Watts Baskin   ______
                     Council Member Clayton      ______
                     Council Member Jackson      ______
                     Council Member Knowlton      ______
                     Council Member Van Langeveld   ______
 
 
Certificate of Posting Ordinance:
I, the duly appointed recorder for the City of North Salt Lake, hereby certify
that the foregoing Ordinance No. 2025-20 was passed by the governing body on
the date shown above, and that copies were posted as required by Utah Code 10-
3-713 within the municipality.
 
Recorded this _________ day of _________________________, 2025.
 
___________________________________________                           [Seal]
Wendy Page, City Recorder
 
 
 
10-1-39: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used
in the interpretation and construction of this title. Words used in the present
tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural,
and the plural the singular; the word “building” shall include the word
“structure”, the words “used” or “occupied” shall include arranged, designed,
constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used or
occupied; the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory, and the word “may”
is permissive; the word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual; the word
“lot” includes the words plot or parcel. An asterisk (*) at the definition
means that the word is defined in the State Code. Words used in this title, but
not defined herein, shall have the meaning as defined in any other ordinance
adopted by the City.
                                                                          
                        A.   A surface fault rupture;
                        B.   Shallow groundwater;
                        C.   Liquefaction;
                        D.   A landslide;
                        E.   A debris flow;
GEOLOGIC HAZARD:        F.   Problem soil;
                        G.   A rockfall; or
                        H.   Any other geologic condition that presents a risk:
                           1.   To life;
                           2.   Of substantial loss of real property; or
                           3.   Of substantial damage to real property.
                         
                        A “Geologic Hazard Study” shall contain both engineering geology and geotechnical
                        engineering analyses, if applicable, to the proposed use for which applicant is
                        seeking approval and shall consider, as appropriate, Geologic Hazards as defined
                        in this Chapter.  The engineering geology analysis shall be performed under the
Geologic Hazard Study:  direct supervision of a qualified engineering geologist as defined in section 10-
                        12-6. The geotechnical engineering analysis shall be performed under the direct
                        supervision of a qualified geotechnical engineer as defined in section 10-12-5.
                        The study should be a collaborative effort between the engineering geologist and
                        geotechnical engineer.
                        A parcel or unit of land abutting a public street or approved private street,
                        described by metes and bounds and held or intended to be held in separate lease
LOT:                    or ownership, or a parcel or unit of land shown as a lot or parcel on a
                        subdivision plat map, planned unit development plot map, or condominium lot map,
                        provided it is created pursuant to this title.
                        The area contained within the property lines of the individual parcels of land
LOT AREA:               shown on a subdivision plat or required by this title, excluding any area within
                        an existing street right-of-way, or any area required as open space under this
                        title, and including the area of any easements.
                        The buildable area of a lot shall be designated as follows:
                        1.   The portion of a lot remaining after required yards, utility easements,
                        scenic easements, or other rights of way have been provided;
LOT AREA, BUILABLE:     2.   The area designated as the buildable area or building envelope on an
                 approved subdivision plat where the slope is thirty percent (30%) slope or less,
                        or as provided in Section 10-12-22;
                        3.   Any portion of the lot not defined as nonbuildable.
                         
                        The nonbuildable area of a lot shall be designated as follows:
                        1.   Any portion of a lot defined as nonbuildable under Title 10, Chapter 12;
                        2.   Any portion of a lot defined as nonbuildable by an applicant’s approved
                        Geologic Hazard Study meeting the requirements set forth herein;
                        3.   Any portion of a lot outside the defined building envelope with slopes that
LOT AREA, NONBUILDABLE: are greater than thirty percent (30%) or as provided in Section 10-12-22;
                        4.   Any portion of a lot included within a defined building envelope on a plat
                        that has slopes that are greater than thirty percent (30%), except as provided in
                        Section 10-12-22; or
                        5.   Any portion of a lot with known geologic hazards that cannot be reasonably
                        mitigated to an acceptable level, as concluded by an applicant’s approved site-
                        specific Geologic Hazard Study.
NONBUILDABLE AREA:      See: LOT AREA, NONBUILDABLE
                         
                        Soils which may present a hazard from specific soil and/or rock properties, such
PROBLEM SOILS:          as collapsible soil, corrosive soil and rock, land subsidence and earth fissures,
                        soluble soil and rock or unstable soils.
                         
 
Chapter 12: SENSITIVE AREA DISTRICT (SA) AND GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
10-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDABLE AREA: Based on an applicant’s approved Geologic Hazard Study, the
portion of a site not impacted by geologic hazards, or the portion of a site
where it is concluded the identified geologic hazards can be mitigated to a
level where risk to human life, property and city infrastructure are reduced to
an acceptable and reasonable level and where structures may be safely sited, or
as otherwise defined in Section 10-1-39.
NONBUILDABLE AREA: That portion of a site that an applicant’s approved Geologic
Hazards Study has concluded may be impacted by geologic hazards that cannot be
reasonably mitigated to an acceptable level, and where the siting of habitable
structures, structures requiring a building permit, or critical facilities, is
not permitted, or as otherwise defined in Section 10-1-39.
10-12-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR GEOLOGIC HAZARD STUDIES:
      A.   Project developers, their consultants and lot owner applicants shall
present the results of any Geologic Hazard Study in compliance with this
chapter, its appendices and the latest guidelines adopted by the Utah
Geological Survey. The standards set forth in the appendices to this chapter
are the city's minimum requirements, but may be made more restrictive (in
specific, fact sensitive circumstances) by the DRC based on recommendations of
the city engineer, in collaboration with the City and applicant’s consultants,
if compelling evidence becomes available from an applicant’s approved Geologic
Hazard Study that suggests more stringent requirements are appropriate. In
addition, the appendices shall not supersede other more stringent requirements
that may be required by other regulatory agencies or governmental entities that
have jurisdiction.
   B.   Building permits on single lots:
      1.   Any lot, whether or not in platted subdivisions, that is in the
sensitive lands overlay area, or otherwise meets the criteria defined herein,
shall be submitted with a site specific Geologic Hazard Study containing both
engineering geologic hazard and geotechnical engineering analysis in accordance
with chapter 18 of the International Building Code (IBC) and an engineered
construction plan which has been designed in compliance with the
recommendations made within the Geologic Hazard Study for site excavation,
grading, slope stability, structural components, landscaping, or any other
geologic hazard mitigation specified.
      2.   The building permit may be issued administratively after it is
determined that the lot may be developed in accordance with the intent of this
chapter.
      3.   The building official shall require the geotechnical firm to observe
the excavation of the site and submit verification of soil conditions and
suitability of the site for construction.
      4.   If the only hazard associated with the site is high liquefaction,
then the applicant must submit a soils report with recommendations for control
of subsurface water as well as footing and foundation design. (Ord. 2015-16,
10-20-2015)
10-12-22: LOT STANDARDS AND IDENTIFICATION OF BUILDING ENVELOPE:
In order to facilitate the preservation of slopes, natural terrain and
vegetation, or avoidance of geologic hazards, all subdivision lots shall
identify a building envelope when any portion of the lot for an elevation
change eight feet (8’) or greater exceeds fifteen percent (15%) slope. The
resulting area must contain a "buildable area" as defined by section 10-1-39 of
this title, “Lot Area, Buildable”.
A.   Building Envelope Determination: In determining the extent of building
envelopes for site plans, subdivision lots, or other construction projects,
building envelopes shall exclude:
1.   required building setbacks;
2.   easements and rights of ways;
3.   any areas with known, geologic hazards that have not or will not be
mitigated as a condition of construction;
4.   areas greater than thirty percent (30%) slope, as measured in accordance
with Section 10-12-24, except as provided for in subsection B below;
5.   areas of critical vegetation as identified in the applicant’s approved
Geologic Hazard Study which prevent erosion that cannot otherwise be mitigated;
6.   areas which have been designated for avoidance in the applicant’s approved
Geologic Hazard Study unless appropriately mitigated using the engineered
methods described in the Geologic Hazard Study.
B.   Building envelopes with slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) and less
than fifty percent (50%):
1.   Existing subdivision lots with identified building envelopes that include
slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) and less than fifty percent (50%) may
only be disturbed in compliance with the recommendations contained within the
applicant’s approved Geologic Hazard Study that includes detailed site-specific
slope stability modeling and is prepared by a qualified engineering geologist
and geotechnical engineer. The study shall be prepared in accordance with this
chapter and shall meet all requirements of section 10-12-33-2 (Appendix B,
Minimum Standards for Slope Stability Analysis) including meeting the minimum
acceptable factors of safety, as well as the requirements of all other sections
of this title, the city's building code and all other applicable ordinances.
2.   New subdivision lots may be approved with building envelopes which contain
areas of slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) and less than fifty percent
(50%), provided, however, that such areas may only be disturbed in compliance
with the recommendations contained within an approved Geologic Hazard Study
prepared by applicant’s selected geologist and geotechnical engineer that
includes site-specific slope stability modeling. All areas within the proposed
building envelope having slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) may not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total buildable envelope area,
provided, however, that a minimum of 5,000 square feet of the building envelope
shall have a slope of less than thirty percent (30%), as measured in section
10-12-24, below.
3.   No building permit shall be issued for construction within those areas of
the building envelope which have slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) and
less than fifty prevent (50%) without approval of a site-specific Geologic
Hazard Study that demonstrates and recommends that the proposed retaining
walls, grading, structures, or other improvements meet the slope stability
factors of safety.
C.   Building Permit and Site Plan Applications: The applicant shall indicate
on the site plan the designated building envelope, and area of ultimate land/
vegetation disturbance, that will be caused by the proposed structure and its
appurtenances. Prior to the beginning of any type of land disturbance or
construction on a given lot, the contractor performing the work is responsible
for identifying the building envelope in the field by marking of the building
envelope perimeter. The building official may require markers to be surveyed
when deemed necessary or appropriate. Marking of the building envelope shall be
inspected by the City's building division prior to commencement of any land
disturbance activity on the lot. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-24: SLOPE PROTECTION EASEMENTS:
The developer shall provide slope protection easements for all critical slopes
(native or constructed) as part of the project. Critical slopes shall include
slopes that are greater than thirty percent (30%) for an elevation change eight
feet (8') or greater. Other slopes of thirty percent (30%) or less, may be
designated by the City based upon the recommendations in the applicant’s
approved Geologic Hazard Study as critical slopes due to geologic hazard,
unstable soils, drainage flows, vegetation conditions or designated open space.
Slope protection easements shall be provided that are indicated on the final
plat or by separate recordable easement for each individual lot where the
easements are located, as designated by a site-specific approved Geologic
Hazard Study as performed by the developer’s engineering geologist and
geotechnical engineer. Such individual easements shall be accompanied by a map
indicating areas where land disturbance is prohibited. Easements for individual
lots shall be recorded simultaneously with or prior to the recordation of the
final subdivision plat. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
 
 
 
 
10-1-39: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used
in the interpretation and construction of this title. Words used in the present
tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural,
and the plural the singular; the word “building” shall include the word
“structure”, the words “used” or “occupied” shall include arranged, designed,
constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used or
occupied; the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory, and the word “may”
is permissive; the word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual; the word
“lot” includes the words plot or parcel. An asterisk (*) at the definition
means that the word is defined in the State Code. Words used in this title, but
not defined herein, shall have the meaning as defined in any other ordinance
adopted by the City.
                                                                                         
                        A.   A surface fault rupture;
                        B.   Shallow groundwater;
                        C.   Liquefaction;
                        D.   A landslide;
                        E.   A debris flow;
GEOLOGIC HAZARD:        F.   Problem soil;
                        G.   A rockfall; or
                        H.   Any other geologic condition that presents a risk:
                           1.   To life;
                           2.   Of substantial loss of real property; or
                           3.   Of substantial damage to real property.
                         
                        A “Geologic Hazard Study” shall contain both engineering geology and geotechnical
                        engineering analyses, if applicable, to the proposed use for which applicant is
                        seeking approval and shall consider, as appropriate, Geologic Hazards as defined
                        in this Chapter.  The engineering geology analysis shall be performed under the
Geologic Hazard Study:  direct supervision of a qualified engineering geologist as defined in section 10-
                        12-6. The geotechnical engineering analysis shall be performed under the direct
                        supervision of a qualified geotechnical engineer as defined in section 10-12-5.
                        The study should be a collaborative effort between the engineering geologist and
                        geotechnical engineer.
                        A parcel or unit of land abutting a public street or approved private street,
                        described by metes and bounds and held or intended to be held in separate lease
LOT:                    or ownership, or a parcel or unit of land shown as a lot or parcel on a
                        subdivision plat map, planned unit development plot map, or condominium lot map,
                        provided it is created pursuant to this title.
                        The area contained within the property lines of the individual parcels of land
LOT AREA:               shown on a subdivision plat or required by this title, excluding any area within
                        an existing street right-of-way, or any area required as open space under this
                        title, and including the area of any easements.
                        The buildable area of a lot shall be designated as follows:
                        1.   The portion of a lot remaining after required yards, utility easements,
                        scenic easements, or other rights of way have been provided;
LOT AREA, BUILABLE:     2.   The area designated as the buildable area or building envelope on an
                 approved subdivision plat where the slope is thirty percent (30%) slope or less,
                        or as provided in Section 10-12-22;
                        3.   Any portion of the lot not defined as nonbuildable.
                         
                        The nonbuildable area of a lot shall be designated as follows:
                        1.   Any portion of a lot defined as nonbuildable under Title 10, Chapter 12;
                        2.   Any portion of a lot defined as nonbuildable by an applicant’s approved
                        Geologic Hazard Study meeting the requirements set forth herein;
                        3.   Any portion of a lot outside the defined building envelope with slopes that
LOT AREA, NONBUILDABLE: are greater than thirty percent (30%) or as provided in Section 10-12-22;
                        4.   Any portion of a lot included within a defined building envelope on a plat
                        that has slopes that are greater than thirty percent (30%), except as provided in
                        Section 10-12-22; or
                        5.   Any portion of a lot with known geologic hazards that cannot be reasonably
                        mitigated to an acceptable level, as concluded by an applicant’s approved site-
                        specific Geologic Hazard Study.
NONBUILDABLE AREA:      See: LOT AREA, NONBUILDABLE
                         
                        Soils which may present a hazard from specific soil and/or rock properties, such
PROBLEM SOILS:          as collapsible soil, corrosive soil and rock, land subsidence and earth fissures,
                        soluble soil and rock or unstable soils.
                         
 
Chapter 12: SENSITIVE AREA DISTRICT (SA) AND GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
10-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDABLE AREA: Based on an applicant’s approved  Geologic Hazard Study, the
portion of a site not impacted by geologic hazards, or the portion of a site
where it is concluded the identified geologic hazards can be mitigated to a
level where risk to human life, property and city infrastructure are reduced to
an acceptable and reasonable level and where structures may be safely sited, or
as otherwise defined in Section 10-1-39.
NONBUILDABLE AREA: That portion of a site that an applicant’s approved Geologic
Hazards Study has concluded may be impacted by geologic hazards that cannot be
reasonably mitigated to an acceptable level, and where the siting of habitable
structures, structures requiring a building permit, or critical facilities, is
not permitted, or as otherwise defined in Section 10-1-39.
10-12-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR GEOLOGIC HAZARD STUDIES:
   
   A.   Project developers, their consultants and lot owner applicants shall
present the results of any Geologic Hazard Study in compliance with this
chapter, its appendices and the latest guidelines adopted by the Utah
Geological Survey. The standards set forth in the appendices to this chapter
are the city's minimum requirements, but may be made more restrictive (in
specific, fact sensitive circumstances) by the DRC based on recommendations of
the city engineer, in collaboration with the City and applicant’s consultants,
if compelling evidence becomes available from an applicant’s approved Geologic
Hazard Study that suggests more stringent requirements are appropriate. In
addition, the appendices shall not supersede other more stringent requirements
that may be required by other regulatory agencies or governmental entities that
have jurisdiction.
   B.   Building permits on single lots:
      1.   Any lot, whether or not in platted subdivisions, that is in the
sensitive lands overlay area, or otherwise meets the criteria defined herein,
shall be submitted with a site specific Geologic Hazard Study containing both
engineering geologic hazard and geotechnical engineering analysis in accordance
with chapter 18 of the International Building Code (IBC) and an engineered
construction plan which has been designed in compliance with the
recommendations made within the Geologic Hazard Study for site excavation,
grading, slope stability, structural components, landscaping, or any other
geologic hazard mitigation specified.
      2.   The building permit may be issued administratively after it is
determined that the lot may be developed in accordance with the intent of this
chapter.
      3.   The building official shall require the geotechnical firm to observe
the excavation of the site and submit verification of soil conditions and
suitability of the site for construction.
      4.   If the only hazard associated with the site is high liquefaction,
then the applicant must submit a soils report with recommendations for control
of subsurface water as well as footing and foundation design. (Ord. 2015-16,
10-20-2015)
10-12-22: LOT STANDARDS AND IDENTIFICATION OF BUILDING ENVELOPE:
In order to facilitate the preservation of slopes, natural terrain and
vegetation, or avoidance of geologic hazards, all subdivision lots shall
identify a building envelope when any portion of the lot for an elevation
change eight feet (8’) or greater exceeds fifteen percent (15%) slope. The
resulting area must contain a "buildable area" as defined by section 10-1-39 of
this title, “Lot Area, Buildable”.
A.   Building Envelope Determination: In determining the extent of building
envelopes for site plans, subdivision lots, or other construction projects,
building envelopes shall exclude:
1.   required building setbacks;
2.   easements and rights of ways;
3.   any areas with known, geologic hazards that have not or will not be
mitigated as a condition of construction;
4.   areas greater than thirty percent (30%) slope, as measured in accordance
with Section 10-12-24, except as provided for in subsection B below;
5.   areas of critical vegetation as identified in the applicant’s approved
Geologic Hazard Study which prevent erosion that cannot otherwise be mitigated;
6.   areas which have been designated for avoidance in the applicant’s approved
Geologic Hazard Study unless appropriately mitigated using the engineered
methods described in the Geologic Hazard Study.
B.   Building envelopes with slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) and less
than fifty percent (50%):
1.   Existing subdivision lots with identified building envelopes that include
slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) and less than fifty percent (50%) may
only be disturbed in compliance with the recommendations contained within the
applicant’s approved Geologic Hazard Study that includes detailed site-specific
slope stability modeling and is prepared by a qualified engineering geologist
and geotechnical engineer. The study shall be prepared in accordance with this
chapter and shall meet all requirements of section 10-12-33-2 (Appendix B,
Minimum Standards for Slope Stability Analysis) including meeting the minimum
acceptable factors of safety, as well as the requirements of all other sections
of this title, the city's building code and all other applicable ordinances.
2.   New subdivision lots may be approved with building envelopes which contain
areas of slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) and less than fifty percent
(50%), provided, however, that such areas may only be disturbed in compliance
with the recommendations contained within an approved Geologic Hazard Study
prepared by applicant’s selected geologist and geotechnical engineer that
includes site-specific slope stability modeling. All areas within the proposed
building envelope having slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) may not
exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total buildable envelope area,
provided, however, that a minimum of 5,000 square feet of the building envelope
shall have a slope of less than thirty percent (30%), as measured in section
10-12-24, below.
3.   No building permit shall be issued for construction within those areas of
the building envelope which have slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) and
less than fifty prevent (50%) without approval of a site-specific Geologic
Hazard Study that demonstrates and recommends that the proposed retaining
walls, grading, structures, or other improvements meet the slope stability
factors of safety.
C.   Building Permit and Site Plan Applications: The applicant shall indicate
on the site plan the designated building envelope, and area of ultimate land/
vegetation disturbance, that will be caused by the proposed structure and its
appurtenances. Prior to the beginning of any type of land disturbance or
construction on a given lot, the contractor performing the work is responsible
for identifying the building envelope in the field by marking of the building
envelope perimeter. The building official may require markers to be surveyed
when deemed necessary or appropriate. Marking of the building envelope shall be
inspected by the City's building division prior to commencement of any land
disturbance activity on the lot. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-24: SLOPE PROTECTION EASEMENTS:
The developer shall provide slope protection easements for all critical slopes
(native or constructed) as part of the project. Critical slopes shall include
slopes that are greater than thirty percent (30%) for an elevation change eight
feet (8') or greater. Other slopes of thirty percent (30%) or less, may be
designated by the City based upon the recommendations in the applicant’s
approved Geologic Hazard Study as critical slopes due to geologic hazard,
unstable soils, drainage flows, vegetation conditions or designated open space.
Slope protection easements shall be provided that are indicated on the final
plat or by separate recordable easement for each individual lot where the
easements are located, as designated by a site-specific approved Geologic
Hazard Study as performed by the developer’s engineering geologist and
geotechnical engineer. Such individual easements shall be accompanied by a map
indicating areas where land disturbance is prohibited. Easements for individual
lots shall be recorded simultaneously with or prior to the recordation of the
final subdivision plat. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2025-21
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 9 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION, CHAPTER 8 PERTAINING
TO THE
WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE
 
WHEREAS, the City of North Salt Lake is an incorporated city in Davis County
Utah; and
 
WHEREAS, the 2025 Utah State Legislature approved HB48 requiring all
municipalities to adopt the Wildland-Urban Interface Code and appendices, as
adopted by the state in Utah Code Annotated 15A-2-102 for the regulation and
governing the mitigation of hazard to life and property from the intrusion of
fire from wildland exposures, fire from adjacent structures and prevention of
structure fires from spreading to wildland fuels; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake finds the proposed amendments are
required by the State of Utah and are necessary for the regulation of
construction and the mitigation of the hazard to life and property from the
intrusion of fire from wildland exposures, from adjacent structures, and
prevention of structure fires from spreading to wildland fuels; and
 
WHEREAS, the Planning Commission of North Salt Lake held a public hearing on
the proposed amendments on December 9, 2025 and recommended the proposed
amendments to the City Council; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council of North Salt Lake finds that changed or changing
conditions make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to carry out the
purposes stated in this title; and
 
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that it is in the public interest that the
North Salt Lake City Code, be amended at this time.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of North Salt
Lake as follows:
 
Section 1. Code Amendment. Pursuant to Utah Code 10-20-502, Title 9 Buildings
and Construction Ordinance is hereby amended as follows:
 
a.    As attached in Exhibit “A”;
 
Section 2. Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect upon posting as
required in Utah Code 10-3-713.
 
 
APPROVED AND ADOPTED by the City of North Salt Lake, Utah on this 16 th day of
December 2025.
 
CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE
                     By:
 
______________________________
BRIAN J. HORROCKS
Mayor
 
 
ATTEST:
   
_______________________               
WENDY PAGE
City Recorder                  
                     City Council Vote as Recorded:
 
                     Council Member Watts Baskin   ______
                     Council Member Clayton      ______
                     Council Member Jackson      ______
                     Council Member Knowlton      ______
                     Council Member Van Langeveld   ______
 
 
Certificate of Posting Ordinance:
I, the duly appointed recorder for the City of North Salt Lake, hereby certify
that the foregoing Ordinance No. 2025-21 was passed by the governing body on
the date shown above, and that copies were posted as required by Utah Code 10-
3-713 within the municipality.
 
Recorded this _________ day of _________________________, 2025.
 
___________________________________________                           [Seal]
Wendy Page, City Recorder
 
 
 
TITLE 9
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 8
FIRE CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-8-1: Fire Code Adopted
9-8-2: Administration And Enforcement
9-8-3: Regulations And Prohibitions
9-8-4: Liquefied Petroleum Gas Storage
9-8-5: Residential Automatic Fire Sprinkler System Requirements
9-8-6: Wildland-Urban Interface Code
 
 
9-8-6: WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE ADOPTED:
    A.   International Wildland-Urban Interface Code: For the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from wildland fire within the area known as the Wildland-Urban Interface
Overlay Area, the City of North Salt Lake hereby adopts the currently adopted
Utah State Wildland-Urban Interface, including all of the provisions of Utah
Code, Title 15A, Chapter 2, Section 103 and Appendices of the currently adopted
edition of the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code. The fire code is
hereby incorporated as if set out at length herein, and from the effective date
hereof, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the designated
Wildland-Urban Interface Overlay Area.
    B.   In the event the State of Utah adopts or enacts a more recent version
of any code referenced in this chapter or in Utah Code Annotated title 15A,
that by virtue of its adoption by the State would require an amendment to this
chapter, this chapter shall be deemed amended to adopt the newer version of the
code on the effective date thereof.
    C.   Copy On File: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-711, as
amended, a copy of the code has been filed for use and examination by the
public in the office of the city recorder prior to the adoption date hereof.
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE 9
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 8
FIRE CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-8-1: Fire Code Adopted
9-8-2: Administration And Enforcement
9-8-3: Regulations And Prohibitions
9-8-4: Liquefied Petroleum Gas Storage
9-8-5: Residential Automatic Fire Sprinkler System Requirements
9-8-6: Wildland-Urban Interface Code
 
 
9-8-6: WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Wildland-Urban Interface Code: For the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from wildland fire within the area known as the Wildland-Urban Interface
Overlay Area, the City of North Salt Lake hereby adopts the currently adopted
Utah State Wildland-Urban Interface, including all of the provisions of Utah
Code, Title 15A, Chapter 2, Section 103 and Appendices of the currently adopted
edition of the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code. The fire code is
hereby incorporated as if set out at length herein, and from the effective date
hereof, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the designated
Wildland-Urban Interface Overlay Area.
   B.   In the event the State of Utah adopts or enacts a more recent version
of any code referenced in this chapter or in Utah Code Annotated title 15A,
that by virtue of its adoption by the State would require an amendment to this
chapter, this chapter shall be deemed amended to adopt the newer version of the
code on the effective date thereof.
   C.   Copy On File: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-711, as
amended, a copy of the code has been filed for use and examination by the
public in the office of the city recorder prior to the adoption date hereof.
 
 
 
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
NORTH SALT LAKE CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Alterations
1-1-5: Nonliability Of City
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official city code of North Salt Lake City, a
corporation located in Davis County, state of Utah. This code of ordinances
shall be known and cited as the NORTH SALT LAKE CITY CODE and is hereby
published by authority of the city council and shall be supplemented to
incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (1989 Code § 1-001; amd. 2012 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2012 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code.
(2012 Code)
1-1-4: ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city recorder shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the city
recorder. Any person having custody of a copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of
the city recorder. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and
shall be returned to the office of the city recorder when directed so to do by
order of the city council. (2012 Code)
1-1-5: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
None of the provisions of this code shall create any civil liability on the
city, its officers or employees, whether or not this code imposes mandatory or
directional duties, and whether or not the city, its officers or employees
perform or do not perform such duties. (1989 Code § 1-501)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-5: Statutes Or Codes Included And Excluded
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the city passed prior
to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included
in this code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal
(subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: subdivision
standards and specifications ordinance; master plan ordinance; tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances. (1989 Code § 1-
002; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of the ordinances provided
in subsection A of this section shall not affect any debt or fee which is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office
of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance
heretofore repealed or superseded. (1989 Code § 1-003; amd. 2012 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2012 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Scope Of Section: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Actions Now Pending: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2012 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would
have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1989 Code § 1-007; amd.
2012 Code)
1-2-5: STATUTES OR CODES INCLUDED AND EXCLUDED:
Any reference or citation to any statute shall not be interpreted or construed
to include, incorporate or make the citation or statute part of this code,
unless the provisions of this code specifically include, incorporate or make
the citation or statute part of this code by reference or incorporation, and
any such reference or citation not specifically included or incorporated may be
changed, amended or deleted without publication on an order of the governing
body. (1989 Code § 1-009)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of any provision
of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Where any provision
of this code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the
general provision imposed by this code, the provision imposing the greater
restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
   C.   Additional Interpretations:
      1.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
      2.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
      3.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
      4.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
      5.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
      6.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such
meaning.
      7.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
      8.   Officers Generally: Whenever any officer is referred by title, such
as "recorder", "treasurer", "chief of police", etc., such reference shall be
construed as if followed by the words "of North Salt Lake City".
      9.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present. (1989 Code § 1-005A; amd. 2012 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BUSINESS: Any activity, operation, enterprise or calling referred to in this
code for which a license is required.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECT:
   A.   Definition: "Capital improvement project" means an activity set forth
in the capital improvement plan for the acquisition of property, or the
physical betterment or improvement of city property including, but not limited
to:
      1.   Design and construction of any addition to the city's physical
plant, including buildings, streets, utility lines, parks, or other public
facilities; or
      2.   Rehabilitation or reconstruction of an element of the city's
physical plant; and
      3.   Is projected to cost more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   B.   Policy:
      1.   The term of the budget for a capital improvement project shall
coincide with the term of the individual project or projects. Funds
appropriated for multiyear capital projects will be automatically
reappropriated for the same project in subsequent years until the project is
complete.
      2.   Monies appropriated for a capital improvement project shall not be
used for another capital improvement project without the approval of the city
council.
      3.   A contingency account shall be created within the capital
improvement project budget for each capital improvement fund which shall be
used only for cost overruns of an authorized capital improvement project. The
amount of contingency fund monies which may be used for any one capital
improvement project shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the budgeted cost of
such project unless otherwise approved by the city council.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The person appointed by the governing body to act in such
capacity.
CITY COUNCIL: The elected or appointed representatives of North Salt Lake City,
Utah.
CITY MANAGER: The person appointed by the governing body to manage the
executive affairs of the city, except as performed by the mayor.
CITY RECORDER: The city recorder of North Salt Lake City, Utah.
CODE: The city code of North Salt Lake City.
COUNTY: Davis County, state of Utah.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation or other activity subject to city regulation,
authorization or limitation.
GOVERNING BODY: The legislative or executive body, as defined in subsection
1-5-2A of this title.
HIGHWAY OR PUBLIC HIGHWAY: Any road, street, lane, court, place, viaduct,
tunnel, culvert, bridge, alley or other public way situated within the city,
laid out or erected as such by the public, or dedicated, abandoned or open to
the public, or made such in any action for the partition of real property, or
such other public property so designated by any ordinance or statute, and
includes the entire area within the right of way.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that facts exist that bring the act or
omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act prohibited by any provision of this code or the omission of
any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL: Any elected or appointed person employed by the city,
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PROPERTY: Means and includes real and personal property.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Utah.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places, sidewalks and bicycle lanes.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TRAIL: A linear corridor of property, customarily identified on the city's
adopted general plan, which has been established for the purposes of hiking,
walking, jogging, running, cycling, or other similar use.
WEEK: Any consecutive seven (7) day period.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
means and implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the
omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law or to
injure another or to acquire any advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year, unless specified otherwise. (1989 Code § 1-005B; amd.
2012 Code; Ord. 2013-20, 10-15-2013)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1989
Code § 1-006; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Sentencing
1-4-2: Offenses Designated; Classified
1-4-1: SENTENCING:
   A.   Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance 1 :
      1.   Criminal: The city council may impose a maximum criminal penalty for
the violation of any municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum
class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a
term of imprisonment up to six (6) months, or by both the fine and term of
imprisonment.
      2.   Civil:
         a.   Except as provided in subsection A2b of this section, the city
council may prescribe a maximum civil penalty for the violation of any
municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor
fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301.
         b.   A municipality may not impose a civil penalty and adjudication
for the violation of a municipal moving traffic ordinance.
   B.   Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors 2 : A person who has been
convicted of a misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
      1.   In the case of a class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six
(6) months;
      2.   In the case of a class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days.
   C.   Infractions 3 :
      1.   A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be
subject to a fine, forfeiture and disqualification, or any combination.
      2.   Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is
specified, the person may be fined as for a class C misdemeanor.
   D.   Fines Of Persons 4 : A person convicted of an offense may, in addition
to any term of imprisonment imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the
conviction is of a class B misdemeanor conviction;
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: Seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) when the conviction is of a class C misdemeanor conviction or
infraction conviction; and
      3.   Greater Amounts When Authorized: Any greater amounts specifically
authorized by statute.
   E.   Fines Of Corporations 5 : The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon
a corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an
offense defined in this code, or the ordinances of the city, or for an offense
defined outside of this code over which this city has jurisdiction, for which
no special corporate fine is specified, shall be to pay an amount fixed by the
court, not exceeding:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the
conviction is for a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
when the conviction is for a class C misdemeanor conviction or for an
infraction conviction. (1989 Code §§ 1-320, 1-330; amd. 2012 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-3-703.
2 2. UCA § 76-3-204.
3 3. UCA § 76-3-205.
4 1. UCA § 76-3-301.
5 2. UCA § 76-3-302.
1-4-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED; CLASSIFIED:
   A.   Sentencing In Accordance With Chapter:
      1.   A person found guilty of an offense under this code or the
ordinances of this city shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      2.   Ordinances enacted after the effective date of this code which
involve an offense should be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance
with this chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   B.   Designation Of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or
infractions.
   C.   Misdemeanors Classified 1 :
      1.   Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
         a.   Class B misdemeanors;
         b.   Class C misdemeanors.
      2.   An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful in this code or any ordinance of this city, when no
other specification as to punishment or category is made, is a class B
misdemeanor.
   D.   Infractions:
      1.   Infractions are not classified. (1989 Code § 1-310)
      2.   Any offense which is an infraction in this code or other ordinances
of this city, or which is expressly designated, and any offense defined outside
this code which is not designated as a felony or misdemeanor and for which no
penalty is specified, is an infraction.
   E.   Continuing Violation: In any instance where the violation of this code
or any ordinance hereinafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation
occurs or continues to occur. (1989 Code § 1-310; amd. 2012 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 76-3-104.
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Eligibility And Residency Requirements; Mayor And Recorder Limitations
1-5-2: Governing Body
1-5-3: Election, Terms; Vacancies
1-5-4: Mayor As Member Of City Council
1-5-5: Council In Six Member Form Of Government
1-5-6: Meetings; Procedure And Conduct
1-5-7: Ordinances And Resolutions; Procedures
1-5-1: ELIGIBILITY AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS; MAYOR AND RECORDER LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Declaration Of Candidacy: A person filing a declaration of candidacy
for a city office shall:
      1.   Have been a resident of the city in which the person seeks office
for at least twelve (12) consecutive months immediately before the date of the
election; and
      2.   Meet the other requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-
203.
   B.   Annexed Areas: A person living in an area annexed to the city meets the
residency requirement of this section if that person resided within the area
annexed to the city for at least twelve (12) consecutive months immediately
before the date of the election.
   C.   Registered Voter: Any person elected to city office shall be a
registered voter in the city.
   D.   Residency Maintained: Each elected officer of the city shall maintain
residency within the boundaries of the city during the officer's term of
office.
   E.   Residence Outside City: If an elected officer of the city establishes a
principal place of residence as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-2-
105 outside of the city during the officer's term of office, the office is
automatically vacant.
   F.   Continuous Absence From City: If an elected city officer is absent from
the city any time during the officer's term of office for a continuous period
of more than sixty (60) days without the consent of the city council, the city
office is automatically vacant.
   G.   Mayor And Recorder Limitations:
      1.   The mayor may not also serve as the city recorder or city treasurer.
      2.   The city recorder may not also serve as the city treasurer. (1989
Code § 3-301; amd. 2012 Code)
1-5-2: GOVERNING BODY:
   A.   Legislative And Executive Powers: The city shall have a governing body
as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3b-105, which shall exercise the
legislative and executive powers of the city, unless the city is organized with
separate executive and legislative branches of municipal government. (1989 Code
§ 3-101; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Other Functions: The governing body may perform such other functions as
may be specifically provided or necessarily implied by law. (1989 Code § 3-102)
   C.   Composition Of Governing Body: The governing body of this city shall be
a council composed of six (6) members, one of whom shall be the mayor and the
remaining five (5) shall be council members. (1989 Code § 3-105; amd. 2012
Code)
1-5-3: ELECTION, TERMS; VACANCIES:
   A.   Municipal General Election; Terms Of Office:
      1.   a. On the Tuesday after the first Monday in November in odd numbered
years, an election shall be held in all municipalities to fill all elective
offices vacated by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the first Monday in the
January following the election. The officers elected shall continue in the
office of which they were elected for four (4) years except in case of death,
resignation, removal or disqualification from office.
         b.   The officers so elected shall begin their term of office at
twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the first Monday in January following their
election. (1989 Code § 3-201; amd. 2012 Code)
      2.   All elected officers of the city shall hold office for the term for
which they are elected and until their respective successors are chosen and
qualified, unless the office becomes vacant under Utah Code Annotated section
10-3-301. (1989 Code § 3-202; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Election Of Officers: The election and terms of office shall be as
follows:
      1.   The offices of mayor and approximately half the council members
shall be filled in municipal elections held in 2009. The terms shall be for
four (4) years. These offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal
elections.
      2.   The offices of the remaining council members shall be filled in a
municipal election held in 2011. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These
offices shall be filled every four (4) years in municipal elections.
      3.   The officers shall be elected in at large elections, which are held
at the time and in the manner provided for electing municipal officers. (1989
Code § 3-205; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Vacancy In Office: Mayor or city council vacancies shall be filled as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-1-510. (1989 Code § 3-302; amd.
2012 Code)
1-5-4: MAYOR AS MEMBER OF CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Administration Vested In Mayor: The administrative powers, authority
and duties are vested in the mayor. (1989 Code § 3-808)
   B.   Mayor Pro Tempore: The position of mayor pro tempore shall be filled by
a member of the city council elected by the council by majority vote.
      1.   Duties: The mayor pro tempore shall have and exercise all powers and
duties of the elected mayor as prescribed by state statutes and the ordinances
of the city in all cases where the elected mayor is absent, disabled,
disqualified or refuses to act.
      2.   Election, Term Of Office: An election shall be held among the city
council for the purpose of electing council member(s) to the office of mayor
pro tempore at their first regularly scheduled meeting each calendar year. The
council may elect more than one member to serve terms of one year or less
according to a stated sequence and period. The person(s) elected by and from
the council shall serve for a term as determined by the city council, which
shall not exceed one year; provided, that the last elected shall continue to
serve until a successor is elected. In no event may the mayor pro tempore serve
beyond the end of his term in office as a member of the city council.
      3.   Absence Of Mayor Pro Tempore: In the event of the absence,
disqualification or disability of the person elected to serve as mayor pro
tempore, the city council may elect a member of the council to serve as mayor
pro tempore for that meeting or that purpose, and note the election in the
minutes of the meeting in which the election occurred.
      4.   Voting: The city council member elected to serve as mayor pro
tempore shall, at all times, be entitled to cast his vote as member of the city
council, including those occasions on which he or she is acting as mayor. The
mayor pro tempore shall not be entitled to cast more than one vote on any
matter before the city council by reason of serving as mayor. The mayor pro
tempore shall not cast a second vote as mayor to break a tie vote among council
members. (Ord. 09-07, 2-17-2009)
   C.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The mayor operates under a six (6) member council form of government
and is the chief executive officer of the city to whom all employees of the
city shall report.
      2.   The mayor shall:
         a.   Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the city;
         b.   Report remittances under subsection C3b of this section to the
city council at its next regular session;
         c.   Perform all duties prescribed by statute, resolution or
ordinance;
         d.   Ensure that all the applicable statutes and municipal ordinances
and resolutions are faithfully executed and observed;
         e.   Report to the city council the condition and needs of the city;
         f.   If necessary, call on the residents of the city over the age of
twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the state and
ordinances of the city;
         g.   Assign or appoint, with the advice and consent of the city
council, persons to fill city offices or vacancies on commissions or committees
of the city; and
         h.   Report to the city council any release granted under subsection
C3d of this section.
      3.   The mayor may:
         a.   Recommend for city council consideration any measure that the
mayor considers to be in the best interest of the city;
         b.   Remit fines and forfeitures;
         c.   At any reasonable time, examine and inspect the official books,
papers, records or documents of the city or of any officer, employee or agency
of the city; and
         d.   Release any person imprisoned for violation of any city
ordinance. (1989 Code § 3-809; amd. 2012 Code)
   D.   No Veto: The mayor shall have no power to veto an ordinance, tax levy
or appropriation passed by the city council. (1989 Code § 3-404; amd. 2012
Code)
1-5-5: COUNCIL IN SIX MEMBER FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
   A.   The council in a municipality operating under a six (6) member council
form of government:
      1.   Exercises any executive or administrative power and performs or
supervises the performance of any executive or administrative duty or function
that:
         a.   Has not been given to the mayor under Utah Code Annotated section
10-3b-104; or
         b.   Has been given to the mayor under Utah Code Annotated section 10-
3b-104, but is removed from the mayor under subsection A2a(1) of this section;
      2.   May:
         a.   Subject to subsections A3 and B of this section, adopt an
ordinance:
            (1)   Removing from the mayor any power, duty or function of the
mayor under Utah Code Annotated section 10-3b-104; or
            (2)   Reinstating to the mayor any power, duty or function
previously removed under subsection A2a(1) of this section;
         b.   Adopt an ordinance delegating to the mayor any executive or
administrative power, duty or function that the council has under subsection A1
of this section;
         c.   Subject to Utah Code Annotated section 10-3b-302(1)(b)(ii)(A):
            (1)   Appoint a manager to perform executive and administrative
duties or functions that the council by ordinance delegates to the manager,
subject to subsection A3 of this section; and
            (2)   Dismiss a manager appointed under subsection A2c(1) of this
section; and
         d.   Assign any or all council members, including the mayor, to
supervise one or more administrative departments of the municipality; and
      3.   May not remove from the mayor or delegate to a manager appointed by
the council:
         a.   Any of the mayor's legislative or judicial powers or ceremonial
functions;
         b.   The mayor's position as chair of the council; or
         c.   Any ex officio position that the mayor holds.
   B.   Adopting an ordinance under subsection A2a of this section removing
from or reinstating to the mayor a power, duty or function provided for in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3b-104 requires the affirmative vote of:
      1.   The mayor and a majority of all other council members; or
      2.   All council members except the mayor. (2012 Code)
1-5-6: MEETINGS; PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The city council shall hold two (2) regular meetings,
which shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each month, at 20 So.
Hwy 89 (city offices), which meetings shall begin promptly at seven o'clock (7:
00) P.M.
      1.   If the meeting date is a legal holiday, then the meeting shall be
held at the same time and place above described on the next following day which
is not a legal holiday, or as previously adopted by ordinance at the beginning
of the year.
      2.   The city council may, by ordinance, provide for a different time and
place for holding regular meetings of the governing body.
      3.   Closed meetings may be held, but shall comply with all federal and
state laws. Closed meetings, because of their sensitive nature, shall not be
open to the public or media. (1989 Code § 3-502; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Special Meetings:
      1.   The mayor or two (2) council members may order the convening of a
special meeting of the council.
      2.   Each order convening a special meeting of the council shall:
         a.   Be entered in the minutes of the council;
         b.   Provide at least three (3) hours' notice of the special meeting.
      3.   The city recorder shall serve notice of the special meeting on each
council member who did not sign the order by delivering the notice personally
or by leaving it at the member's usual place of abode.
      4.   The personal appearance by a council member at a special meeting of
the council constitutes a waiver of the notice required under subsection B3 of
this section. (2012 Code)
   C.   Compelling Attendance: The governing body may compel the attendance of
its own members at its meetings and provide penalties it considers necessary
for the failure to comply with the attendance requirements. (1989 Code § 3-505;
amd. 2012 Code)
   D.   Quorum: The number of the governing body necessary to constitute a
quorum is three (3), excluding the mayor. (1989 Code § 3-504; amd. 2012 Code)
   E.   How Vote Taken: A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all
ordinances, resolutions and any action which would create a liability against
the municipality and in any other case at the request of any member of the
governing body by a "yes" or a "no" vote and shall be recorded. Every
resolution or ordinance shall be in writing before a vote is taken. (1989 Code
§ 3-506)
   F.   Minimum Vote Required:
      1.   The minimum number of yes votes required to pass any ordinance or
resolution, or to take any action by the governing body, unless otherwise
prescribed by law, is a majority of all voting members of the council, without
considering any vacancy in the council.
      2.   a. Any ordinance, resolution or motion of the governing body having
fewer favorable votes than required in this subsection is defeated and invalid.
         b.   Notwithstanding subsection F2a of this section, a governing body
meeting may be adjourned to a specific time by a majority vote of the governing
body, even though the majority vote is less than that required in this
subsection.
      3.   A majority of the members of the governing body, regardless of
number, may fill any vacancy in the governing body. (1989 Code § 3-507; amd.
2012 Code)
   G.   Reconsideration: Any action taken by the governing body shall not be
reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting unless the number of members
of the governing body present at the special meeting is equal to or greater
than the number of members present at the meeting when the action was approved.
(1989 Code § 3-508)
1-5-7: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROCEDURES:
   A.   Power Exercised By Ordinance: The city council may pass any ordinance
to regulate, require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity,
business, conduct or condition authorized by statute or any other provision of
law. An officer of the city shall not be convicted of a criminal offense where
he relied on or enforced an ordinance he reasonably believed to be a valid
ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for punitive damages that the
official acted in good faith in enforcing an ordinance or that he enforced an
ordinance on advice of legal counsel. (1989 Code § 3-702; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Form Of Ordinance: Any ordinance passed by the city council shall
contain and be in substantially the following order and form:
      1.   A number;
      2.   A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the
ordinance;
      3.   A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance;
      4.   An ordaining clause which states "Be it ordained by North Salt Lake
City:";
      5.   The body or subject of the ordinance;
      6.   When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of
the ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance
which prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of the
city ordinance; or, the penalty may establish a classification of penalties and
refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such violation is established;
      7.   A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the
date when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting as
required by this section;
      8.   A line for the signature of the mayor or mayor pro tempore to sign
the ordinance;
      9.   A place for the city recorder to attest the ordinance and affix the
seal of the city. (1989 Code § 3-704; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Requirements As To Form; Effective Date:
      1.   Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be signed by
the mayor, or if he is absent, by the mayor pro tempore, or by a quorum of the
city council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be
void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3-704(1), (2), (3) or (4). (1989 Code § 3-705; amd.
2012 Code)
      2.   Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication
or posting, or thirty (30) days after final passage by the city council,
whichever is closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become
effective at an earlier or later date after publication or posting if so
provided in the ordinance. (1989 Code § 3-712; amd. 2012 Code)
      3.   Ordinances which do not have an effective date shall become
effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting, or thirty (30) days
after final passage by the city council, whichever is sooner. (1989 Code § 3-
705; amd. 2012 Code)
   D.   Publication And Posting Of Ordinances:
      1.   Before an ordinance may take effect, the legislative body of the
city adopting an ordinance, except an ordinance enacted under Utah Code
Annotated sections 10-3-706 through 10-3-710, shall:
         a.   Deposit a copy of the ordinance in the office of the City
Recorder; and
         b.   Publish a short summary of the ordinance as a class A notice as
provided by Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-711 and 63G-30-102, as amended.
      2.   a. Any ordinance, code or book, other than the state code, relating
to building or safety standards, municipal functions, administration, control
or regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further
publication or posting, if reference is made to the code or book and at least
one copy has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of
the city recorder prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the governing body.
         b.   Any state law relating to building or safety standards, municipal
functions, administration, control or regulations, may be adopted and shall
take effect without further publication or posting if reference is made to the
state code.
         c.   The ordinance adopting the code or book shall be published in the
manner provided in this subsection. (1989 Code § 3-711; amd. 2012 Code)
   E.   Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Passage:
      1.   The city recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for that
purpose, all ordinances passed by the city council. The city recorder shall
give each ordinance a number, if the city council has not already so done.
Immediately following each ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the city
recorder shall make or cause to be made a certificate stating the date of
passage and of the date of publication or posting, as required. The record and
memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage and publication or posting of the ordinance or codification.
(1989 Code § 3-713; amd. 2012 Code)
      2.   The city recorder, insofar as possible, shall assign all ordinances
of a general nature a number, which shall conform to the numbering system used
in this code and shall indicate upon the face of the ordinance the date
adopted.
      3.   The city recorder shall keep all ordinances in a separate book of
ordinances properly indexed and organized according to ordinance number. The
first number of such an ordinance shall be the last two (2) digits of the year
the ordinance is adopted, followed by a dash which is followed by a number
indicating the order in which such special ordinance was adopted during the
year.
      4.   Failure to comply with this subsection shall not affect or render
invalid any ordinance of the city. (1989 Code § 1-008; amd. 2012 Code)
   F.   Resolutions:
      1.   Purpose: Unless otherwise required by law, the city council may
exercise all administrative powers by resolution, including, but not limited
to: a) establishing water and sewer rates; b) charges for garbage collection
and fees charged for city services; c) establishing personnel policies and
guidelines; and d) regulating the use and operation of the city property.
Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution. (1989 Code §
      2.   Form: Any resolution passed by the city council shall be in a form
and contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
(1989 Code § 3-718; amd. 2012 Code)
      3.   Publication; Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective
without publication or posting and may take effect on passage or at a later
date as the city council may determine, but resolutions may not become
effective more than three (3) months from the date of passage. (1989 Code § 3-
719; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2023-09, 8-1-2023)
ARTICLE A. REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
1-5A-1: Redevelopment Agency
1-5A-1: REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY:
The city council is designated as the redevelopment agency of the city, and is
authorized to transact the business and exercise all of the powers provided for
in the Utah redevelopment agencies act, enacted by the Utah legislature as Utah
Code Annotated section 17B-4-101 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 90-3, 6-5-1990;
amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 6
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Appointments; City Recorder And City Treasurer; Vacancies
1-6-2: Compensation
1-6-3: Bond Requirements
1-6-4: Oaths
1-6-5: City Attorney
1-6-6: City Manager
1-6-7: Employment Policy Manual
1-6-1: APPOINTMENTS; CITY RECORDER AND CITY TREASURER; VACANCIES:
   A.   City Recorder, City Treasurer Appointment: On or before the first
Monday in February following a municipal election, the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, shall appoint a qualified person to each of
the offices of City Recorder and City Treasurer.
   B.   City Recorder Ex Officio City Auditor: The City Recorder is ex officio
the City Auditor and shall perform the duties of that office.
   C.   Vacancies: The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council,
may also appoint and fill vacancies in all offices provided for by law or
ordinance.
   D.   Continuation In Office: All appointed officers shall continue in office
until their successors are appointed and qualified. (2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2023-
09, 8-1-2023)
1-6-2: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Specified: The elective and statutory officers of the City shall
receive such compensation for their services as the City Council may fix by
ordinance adopting compensation or compensation schedules enacted after public
hearing. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of the meeting shall be
published, for at least seven (7) days before the day of the meeting as a class
A notice as provided by Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-818 and 63G-30-102,
as amended. The provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-818 are adopted
herein and incorporated by reference.
   B.   Two Or More Positions: Whenever any person serves in two (2) or more
positions either as officers or employees of this City, unless otherwise
specifically provided in the employment agreement or by ordinance, the person
shall receive the salary or compensation of the office or employment paying the
greater amount.
   C.   Benefits: In addition to their salary, the elected City officials shall
receive all benefits, contributions and taxes paid by the City which the City
is required by law to pay. (Ord. 97-1, 2-18-1997; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2023-09,
8-1-2023)
1-6-3: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Bond Required: The elected officers of the city, before taking office,
shall execute a bond with good and sufficient sureties, payable to the city, in
such amounts as are required by the city, conditioned for the faithful
performance of the duties of the respective officers and the payment of all
monies received by such officer according to law and the ordinances of the
city. All other officers of the city may, by resolution or ordinance, be
required to furnish a personal bond with good and sufficient sureties or
corporate surety bond payable to the city in such penal sum as the resolution
or ordinance may establish, conditioned for the faithful performance of the
duties of their office and the payment of all monies received by such officers
according to law and the ordinances of the city, or such officers may be
included within public employee blanket bonds in such amounts as may be
determined by the governing body. (1989 Code § 3-819; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Additional Bonds: The city council may at any time require bonds of any
or all officers elected or appointed. All bonds given by the officers, except
as otherwise provided by law, shall be filed with the city recorder, except
that the bond of the city recorder shall be filed with the city treasurer.
(1989 Code § 3-825; amd. 2012 Code)
1-6-4: OATHS:
   A.   Constitutional Oath Of Office: All officers, whether elected or
appointed, before entering on the duties of their respective offices shall
take, subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office. (1989 Code § 3-827;
amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Filing: The oath of office required under this section shall be
administered by any judge, notary public or by the city recorder. Elected
officials shall take their oath of office at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the
first Monday in January following their election or as soon thereafter as is
practical. Appointed officers shall take their oath at any time before entering
on their duties. All oaths of office shall be filed with the city recorder.
(1989 Code § 3-828; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Acts Of Officials Not Voided: No official act of any city officer shall
be invalid for the reason that he failed to take the oath of office. (1989 Code
§ 3-829; amd. 2012 Code)
1-6-5: CITY ATTORNEY:
The city attorney:
   A.   May prosecute violations of city ordinances;
   B.   May prosecute, under state law, infractions and misdemeanors occurring
within the boundaries of the city;
   C.   Has the same powers in respect to the violations as are exercised by a
county attorney or district attorney, except that a city attorney's authority
to grant immunity shall be limited to:
      1.   Granting transactional immunity for violations of city ordinances;
      2.   Granting transactional immunity under state law for infractions and
misdemeanors occurring within the boundaries of the city;
   D.   Shall represent the interests of the state or the city in the appeal of
any matter prosecuted in any trial court by the city attorney; and
   E.   May cooperate with the office of the county attorney or attorney
general during investigations, including those described in Utah Code Annotated
section 67-5-18(3)(f). (1989 Code § 3-928; amd. 2012 Code)
1-6-6: CITY MANAGER:
   A.   Created: The office of the city manager is hereby created.
   B.   Control: The powers, duties and functions of that office to be
administered and carried out by the city manager shall be subject to the
control of the city council.
   C.   Appointment: The governing body shall appoint a city manager on the
basis of the administrator's ability to adequately perform the duties of the
office.
   D.   Salary: The salary (including wages, vehicle allowances and other forms
of compensation) of the city manager shall be set from time to time by
ordinance of the city council.
   E.   Office And Time Spent: The city manager shall maintain an office in
city hall and shall spend such time (an equivalent minimum of 40 hours a week)
in the performance of his duties as is necessary, or as may be required from
time to time by the city council. The city manager shall not accept other
employment that might interfere in his official capacities with the city (i.e.,
consultant work) without the approval of the city council.
   F.   Residency: The city manager need not be a resident or qualified elector
of the city, but should maintain his residence within a reasonable driving
distance of the city. (1989 Code § 3-924)
   G.   Term Of Office: The city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the
city council and may be removed at any time with or without cause. (1989 Code §
3-925)
   H.   General Duties: The city manager shall:
      1.   Be responsible for the day to day operation of the city and its
services, pursuant to the policies and procedures adopted by the city council;
      2.   Act as the chief administrative officer and direct supervisor of
department heads (e.g., city recorder, city treasurer, public works director,
justice court judge, etc.) and is responsible for implementing all policy
changes and directives of the mayor and the city council through regularly
scheduled staff meetings;
      3.   Prepare plans and programs concerning the development, operation and
needs of the city and submit such plans to the city council to be approved and
developed as policy;
      4.   Set performance standards and exercise administrative control to
ensure that the city government is functioning in the most efficient manner;
      5.   Recommend creation of all necessary departments, divisions, bureaus
and offices necessary for the government of the city to the city council for
their approval prior to implementation;
      6.   Examine the books and official papers of the city departments and
offices;
      7.   Be the budget officer as defined in the uniform fiscal procedures
act for cities;
      8.   Ensure all executive procedures and activities are in compliance
with the provisions of the uniform fiscal procedures act for cities;
      9.   Keep a current inventory accounting for real and personal property
of the city and its location and shall be responsible for the care and custody
of all such property, including equipment, buildings, parks and all other city
property which is not by law assigned to some other officer or governmental
body for control;
      10.   Be the personnel director, and be responsible for the personnel
system of the city, including overall responsibility for recruiting, training
and other matters in the employment policy regulations of the city; (1989 Code
§ 3-926)
      11. Be responsible for hiring and discharging city employees, except
those employees serving in the positions set forth in Utah Code Annotated
section 10-3-1105, as follows:
         a.   An officer appointed by the mayor or other person or body
exercising executive power in the municipality;
         b.   A police chief of the municipality;
         c.   A deputy police chief of the municipality;
            d.   A fire chief of the municipality;
         e.   A deputy or assistant fire chief of the municipality;
         f.   A head of a municipal department.
      12.   Recommend to the city council the hiring and discharging of
employees service in the positions set forth in subsection H11 of this section.
All actions hiring or discharging an employee in those positions will be made
only after city council approval;
      13.   Review all proposed contracts with the city and make
recommendations regarding the contract to the city council;
      14.   Enforce contracts to which the city is a party;
      15.   Be the purchasing agent 1 for the city, and be responsible for all
current resolutions defining policy, and initial all purchase orders;
      16.   Have the powers and duties assigned to him by ordinance or
resolution and carry out the policies and programs established by the city
council.
   I.   Legislative Powers And Official Position Of Mayor Not Delegated: The
governing body may not delegate to the city manager:
      1.   The mayor's legislative or judicial powers;
      2.   The mayor's position as chairperson of the governing body; or
      3.   Any ex officio position that the mayor holds. (1989 Code § 3-927;
amd. Ord. 2010-04, 3-16-2010; 2012 Code; Ord. 2023-15, 11-7-2023)
1-6-7: EMPLOYMENT POLICY MANUAL 1 :
The employment policy manual for the city, as printed by the city and adopted
by the city council, is the personnel and administrative code of the city.
Changes in this policy shall be adopted by resolution of the city council.
(1989 Code § 3-1101)
 
Notes
1 1. Revised 10-12-1990.
CHAPTER 7
OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Name Of City
1-7-2: City Seal
1-7-1: NAME OF CITY:
The name of this city is City Of North Salt Lake. (1989 Code § 1-010; amd. Ord.
2014-04, 5-6-2014)
1-7-2: CITY SEAL:
The seal shall be in circular form, one and two-thirds inches (12/3") in
diameter, the impression of the word "Seal" in the center, and the inscription
"North Salt Lake Corporation, Davis County, Utah".
(1989 Code § 1-011)
CHAPTER 8
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Conduct
1-8-2: Primary Election; When Held
1-8-3: Filing Fee
1-8-1: CONDUCT:
Election for mayor and council members shall be conducted according to the
municipal election section of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-404(1) and (2).
(Ord. 95-4, 3-21-1995)
1-8-2: PRIMARY ELECTION; WHEN HELD:
This section provides for the candidates for mayor and council members to be
nominated at a primary election if required. A primary election will be held
only when the number of candidates filing for an office exceeds twice the
number to be elected. The candidates nominated at the primary election, plus
candidates that were not required to run in the primary, are to be placed on
the November ballot. (Ord. 95-4, 3-21-1995)
1-8-3: FILING FEE:
All elections of city officers and other elections conducted within the city
shall be in accordance with the state election code, as set out in Utah Code
Annotated title 20A. Each candidate for elective office is required to pay a
filing fee in such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule
resolution at the time of the filing of the candidate's declaration of
candidacy. (Ord. 05-9, 7-12-2005; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 9
CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE
SECTION:
1-9-1: Compliance Required
1-9-2: Definitions
1-9-3: Filing Of Disclosure Reports
1-9-4: Time Of Filing
1-9-5: Contents Of Statement
1-9-6: Public Information
1-9-7: Penalty
1-9-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Any candidate for elective municipal office shall comply with the campaign
finance disclosure requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 05-11, 8-23-
2005)
1-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CANDIDATE: Any person who files a declaration of candidacy for an elective
office of North Salt Lake City; or is nominated by a committee, party or
petition; or received contributions or made expenditures or consents to another
person receiving contributions or making expenditures with a view to bringing
about such person's nomination or election to such office; or causes on his/her
behalf, any written material or advertisement to be printed, published,
broadcasted, distributed or disseminated which indicates an intention to seek
such office.
CONTRIBUTION: Monetary and nonmonetary contributions, such as in kind
contributions and contributions of tangible things, but shall not include
personal services provided without compensation by individuals volunteering
their time on behalf of a candidate.
ELECTION: Both primary and final elections.
EXPENDITURE: A purchase, payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit or gift
of money or anything of value made for the purpose of influencing the
nomination or election of any candidate. (Ord. 05-11, 8-23-2005)
1-9-3: FILING OF DISCLOSURE REPORTS:
A candidate for elective office shall file with the city recorder dated and
signed financial reports, which comply with this chapter. Forms shall be made
available by the city recorder's office. Other forms in substantially the same
format are also acceptable. (Ord. 05-11, 8-23-2005)
1-9-4: TIME OF FILING:
The reports required by this chapter shall be filed at least seven (7) days
before both the primary and general elections, and at least once within thirty
(30) days following the final election. A candidate losing in the primary
election shall file the final report within thirty (30) days of the date of the
primary election. (Ord. 05-11, 8-23-2005)
1-9-5: CONTENTS OF STATEMENT:
   A.   The statements filed no later than seven (7) days before the election
shall include:
      1.   A list of all contributions received by the candidate, and the name
of the donor;
      2.   An aggregate total of all contributions received by the candidate;
and
      3.   A list of each expenditure for political purposes made during the
campaign period as of ten (10) days before the date of the election, and the
recipient of each expense.
   B.   The statement filed thirty (30) days after the election shall include:
      1.   A list of each contribution received after the cutoff date for the
statement filed seven (7) days before the election, and the name of the donor;
      2.   A total of all contributions received by the candidate after the
cutoff date for the statement filed seven (7) days before the election;
      3.   A list of all expenditures for political purposes made by the
candidate after the cutoff date for the statement filed seven (7) days before
the election, and the recipient of each expense.
   C.   Any contribution and expenditure related to the candidate's candidacy
should be accounted for between the preelection and postelection statement.
(Ord. 05-11, 8-23-2005)
1-9-6: PUBLIC INFORMATION:
The statements required by this chapter shall be public documents and shall be
available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours.
Appropriate costs may be assessed pursuant to the provisions of government
records access and management act 1 . (Ord. 05-11, 8-23-2005)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 12 of this title.
1-9-7: PENALTY:
Any candidate who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter is guilty
of an infraction, subject to a penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title, which also includes the statutory provision that requires
removal of the candidate's name from the ballot. (Ord. 05-11, 8-23-2005; amd.
2012 Code)
CHAPTER 10
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
SECTION:
1-10-1: Request For Hearing
1-10-2: Form Of Request
1-10-3: Procedure
1-10-4: Not Additional Remedy
1-10-5: Criminal Proceedings
1-10-1: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
Unless otherwise specifically provided in a city ordinance or any state code
provision adopted by reference, a hearing before the city council may be
requested by any person: (1989 Code § 1-411; amd. 2012 Code)
   A.   Who is denied or refused a permit or license by any officer, agent or
employee of this city.
   B.   Whose permit or license is revoked, restricted, qualified or limited
from that for which it was first issued. (1989 Code § 1-411)
1-10-2: FORM OF REQUEST:
The request for hearing must be made in writing to the mayor or city recorder
and made within thirty (30) days following the date notice denying, refusing,
revoking, qualifying or restricting the license or permit is mailed by the city
to the applicant or license holder at his address as it appears on the
application or license. (1989 Code § 4-412)
1-10-3: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Time And Place: Following receipt of a request for hearing, the city
council shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the time and place the
hearing is to be held.
   B.   Witnesses; Evidence: At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall have the
right to hear and examine any witnesses the city may produce to support its
decision and to present his own evidence in support of his contention.
   C.   Decision Of City Council: The city council shall, within ten (10) days
following the conclusion of the hearing, in writing, inform the person who
requested the hearing of the decision of the city council. (1989 Code § 1-413)
1-10-4: NOT ADDITIONAL REMEDY:
This chapter shall not be construed to provide any aggrieved party more than
one hearing on the matter before the city council, nor shall the hearing
provided in this section apply to any criminal complaint or proceeding. (1989
Code § 1-414; amd. 2012 Code)
1-10-5: CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS:
Nothing in this section or in any other provision of this code which requires
that notice be given or received shall preclude the city from initiating a
criminal or administrative hearing under this section, or any other
administrative hearing under any other provision of this code. (1989 Code § 1-
415)
CHAPTER 11
PROCUREMENT OF SUPPLIES, MATERIALS, EQUIPMENT AND CONTRACTUAL SERVICES;
DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
SECTION:
1-11-1: Statutory Authority
1-11-2: Definitions
1-11-3: Administration
1-11-4: Acquisition Of Supplies, Materials And Equipment
1-11-5: Competitive Solicitation Requirements
1-11-6: Exemptions To Competitive Solicitation Requirements
1-11-7: Use Of Purchase Requisitions
1-11-8: Interlocal Agreements Authorizing Contracts For Commodities Or Services
1-11-9: Disposal Of Surplus Property Or Lease Of Public Property
1-11-10: Prohibitions
1-11-1: STATUTORY AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-6-122, and other pertinent
provisions of the state, there is hereby adopted and established a procurement
system (purchasing procedure) for the city, which shall be based on the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-16-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
1-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the terms used in this chapter, or the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
ADEQUATE APPROPRIATION BALANCE: Sufficient fund balance which must exist in the
line item appropriation of the account against which the purchase is to be
charged.
DEPARTMENT HEAD: The individual who administers a city department or their
designee, as specified in writing. This also includes the city manager.
LOCAL BIDDER: A firm or individual who regularly maintains a place of business
and transacts business in, or maintains an inventory of merchandise for sale
in, or is licensed by, or pays business taxes to, the City of North Salt Lake.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: Includes, but is not limited to, professional services
for auditing, banking, insurance, engineering, architectural services and other
forms of consulting.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any item of real or personal property owned by the city.
PURCHASE REQUISITIONS: Standard forms used by departments providing detailed
information as to quantity, description, price, supplier and signature
authorization for purchases. These are also known as "purchase orders".
REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL: Shall mean the same as “Invitation to Bid” as used in
this chapter.
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A bidder who submits a responsive bid; who has furnished
information and data to demonstrate that the financial resources, production or
service facilities, service reputation and experience are adequate, for the
contractual services or work on which is being bid; and who has not violated or
attempted to violate any provisions of this chapter.
RESPONSIVE BID: An offer, submitted by a responsible bidder to furnish
supplies, material, equipment or services in conformity with the
specifications, delivery terms and conditions, and other requirements included
in the invitation for bids.
SERVICES: The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are
merely incidental to the required performance. This term does not include
employment agreements or professional services.
SUPPLIES, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT: The specific end product identified in a
purchase requisition, purchase order, plan or specification prepared by the
city, or in the case of acquisition value at less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
SURPLUS PROPERTY: Any item of personal property or parcel of real property
owned by the city that has been declared surplus by the city council. (Ord.
2010-02, 3-16-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 2-18-2025)
1-11-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The city manager 1  or his designee, as the purchasing agent, shall administer
the purchasing system provided by this chapter. The city manager shall perform
the duties and have powers concerning procurement as follows:
   A.   Administer and maintain the procurement system as provided herein, and
in accordance with any rules and regulations established by the city.
   B.   Recommend to the city from time to time such new or revised procurement
rules and regulations as are desirable and in conformance with other statutory
requirements.
   C.   To interpret the provisions of this chapter and applicable statutes.
   D.   Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of
improvements, supplies, materials, equipment, services and professional
services.
   E.   Seek to obtain as full and open competition as reasonably possible on
all purchases of the city.
   F.   Keep informed of current developments in the field of procurement,
including, but not limited to, market conditions and new products.
   G.   Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the
operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations of the city.
   H.   Supervise the inspection of and accounting for all supplies and
equipment among departments as needed.
   I.   Supervise and maintain a bidders list, vendors catalog file and such
other records as are needed for the efficient operation of the procurement
system. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-16-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-6-6H15 of this title.
1-11-4: ACQUISITION OF SUPPLIES, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Purchases or contracts for the acquisition of supplies, materials or
equipment where the amount to be paid by the city is less than twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) must be approved by the city manager or his
designee.
   B.   Purchases or contracts for the acquisition of supplies, materials or
equipment costing the city twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more
must be approved by the city council.
   C.   Open market procedures as set forth in subsections
1-11-5A and B of this chapter may be used for purchases or contracts for
purchase of supplies, materials or equipment costing the city less than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager
may require any purchase for supplies, materials or equipment to be bid
formally if, in his determination, such actions would be in the best interest
of the city.
   D.   Formal bidding, as set forth in subsection
1-11-5A of this chapter, will be used for purchases or contracts for the
purchase of supplies, materials or equipment where the cost to the city is
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more, except as identified in subsection
E of this section.
   E.   For class C roadway "construction" and "maintenance", as defined in
Utah Code Annotated section 72-6-109, formal bids are required for construction
projects over three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000.00), and for
maintenance projects over three hundred fifty thousand dollars ($350,000).
(Ord. 2010-02, 3-16-2010; amd. Ord. 2025-05, 2-18-2025)
1-11-5: COMPETITIVE SOLICITATION REQUIREMENTS:
Except as hereinafter provided, purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual
services of an estimated value of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more
shall follow one of the following procedures:
   A.   Invitation to Bid or Request for Proposal.
      1.   Public notice of competitive solicitation shall:
         a.   Include a general description of the improvements, supplies,
materials and equipment or services to be acquired,
         b.   State where plans and specifications and other information may be
secured,
         c.   State the time and place for opening bids, and
         d.   Be posted in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 63G-6a-
112, as amended, at least seven (7) days before the day of the deadline for
submission of a solicitation response.
      2.   The invitation to bid or request for proposal shall include all
submission requirements and deadlines which a supplier must be able to produce
or deliver to be considered responsive and responsible for award of a contract,
including:
         a.   Product specifications or scope of work,
         b.   Minimum qualifications and performance requirements,
         c.   Method of award and evaluation criteria, and
         d.   Submission deadline.
      3.   Bid Opening Procedure: Sealed bids shall be submitted as designated
in the notice with the statement "bid for (item)" on the envelope. Bids shall
be opened in public at the time and place stated in the notice inviting bids. A
written description of all bids received shall be available for public
inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty
(30) days after the bid opening.
      4.   Rejection Of Bids: The city council reserves the right to reject any
and all bids for any reason. All notices calling for bids should so state. If
all bids are rejected and the city council decides to make the improvement or
acquire the supplies, materials, equipment or services, it shall advertise anew
in the same manner provided herein. If, after the advertising as herein
provided, no bid shall be received that is satisfactory, the city council may
proceed to negotiate or make the improvement or acquisition, or enter such
other agreements as it deems necessary or desirable.
      5.   Method of Award: Competitive solicitations shall be awarded by the
city council based on one of the following methods:
         a.   Lowest Responsible and Responsive Bid. The lowest responsible and
responsive bid shall be selected based on the lowest cost proposal that
satisfactory meets the minimum requirements identified in the invitation to
bid. Minimum requirements include:
            (1)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract within the specified time requirements,
            (2)   The bidder’s record of performance on previous contracts,
            (3)   The character, integrity, experience, and reputation of the
bidder, including compliance with laws and ordinances related to the contract,
            (4)   The bidder’s ability to provide future maintenance and
service in relation to the contract, and
            (5)   The city’s agreement with any conditions attached to the bid
or proposal.
         b.   Best Value. An evaluation committee shall determine the proposal
or response that demonstrates the best value for the city. Best value shall be
measured using ranked evaluation criteria such as vendor qualifications,
experience, performance data, and cost. Evaluation criteria shall be:
            (1)   Identified and appropriately ranked, prioritized, and
weighted by the department head with respect to the timely and successful
completion of the purchase or project, and
            (2)   Clearly defined and published with the invitation to bid.
         c.   Most Highly Qualified. An evaluation committee shall determine
one firm as the most highly qualified. A bid or proposal deemed most highly
qualified shall be:
            (1)   Evaluated based primarily on qualitative factors, such as
technical expertise, that are clearly defined in the invitation to bid, and
            (2)   Representative of specific success factors related to the
purchase or project.
      6.   Tie Bids: If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total
amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public
interest will not permit the delay or readvertising for bids, the city council
shall accept the lowest bid made by and after negotiation with the tie bidders
after the time of the bid opening.
      7.   Performance Bonds: Before entering a contract, the city council
shall have authority to require performance and payment bonds to be provided in
such amounts as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best
interests of the city and as required by law. The form and amount of said bonds
shall be described in the notice inviting bids.
   B.   Open Market Procedure: Any purchase or acquisition of supplies,
material, equipment, improvements or services of an estimated value of less
than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) may be made without calling for bids.
These purchases or acquisitions shall be made pursuant to the procedure
hereinafter prescribed and without observing the procedure prescribed in
subsection A of this section; provided, however, all bidding may be dispensed
with for purchases of supplies, equipment or contractual services having a
total estimated value of less than seven thousand five hundred dollars
($7,500.00).
      1.   Minimum Number Of Bids: Wherever possible, open market purchases
shall be based on at least three (3) price quotations and shall be awarded to
the lowest responsible bidder. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-16-2010)
      2.   Solicitation Of Bids: Price quotations shall be from prospective
vendors by written or telephone requests. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-16-2010; amd. 2012
Code)
      3.   Budgetary Considerations: All purchases must conform to the annual
budget and there must be an adequate balance in the appropriation for the item
or service to be procured. Any substantial deviation from the annual budget or
any appropriation thereunder shall be approved by the city council.
   C.   Acquisition Of Services:
      1.   Contracts for services costing the city less than fifteen thousand
dollars ($15,000.00) annually must be approved and authorized by the city
manager or his designee.
      2.   Contracts for services costing the city fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) or more annually must be approved by the city council.
      3.   The city manager may require any acquisitions of services to be bid
formally if, in his determination, such actions would be in the best interest
of the city. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-16-2010; amd. Ord. 2023-09, 8-1-2023; amd. Ord.
2025- 05, 2-18-2025)
1-11-6: EXEMPTIONS TO COMPETITIVE SOLICITATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Contracts: Contracts, which by their nature are not well suited to
award by competitive solicitation, shall not be subject to the competitive
solicitation requirements of this chapter. These contracts include, but are not
limited to, the following: contracts for items or services which may be
purchased only from a single source; contracts for additions to and repair and
maintenance of equipment already owned by the city which may be more
efficiently added to, repaired or maintained by a certain person or firm; or
contracts for equipment which, by reason of the training of the personnel or an
inventory of replacement parts, is compatible with the existing equipment owned
by the city.
   B.   Auction, Closeout, Bankruptcy Sales: If the city manager determines
that budgeted supplies, materials or equipment can be purchased at any public
auction, closeout sale, bankruptcy sale or other similar sale, and if a
majority of the city council at a regular or special meeting concurs in such
determination and makes a finding that a purchase at any such auction or sale
will be made at a cost below the market cost in the community, a contract may
be let, or the purchase made, without complying with the competitive
solicitation requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Exchanges: Exchanges of supplies materials or equipment between the
city and any other public agency or private party which are not by sale or
auction shall be by mutual agreement of the respective public agencies or
private parties. Exchanges involving private parties require contractual
approval of the city council.
   D.   Certain Construction Contracts: With the city council’s authorization
at a regular or special meeting, construction projects up to $250,000 may be
authorized, at the council’s sole discretion without competitive solicitation.
These include projects where, due to the small cost of the project or the
specific nature and characteristics of the project, significant cost savings
may be realized by not preparing formal plan and bidding specification
documents or by not having to advertise for bid and go through a formal
selection process. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-16-2010; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 10-3-2023; Ord.
2025-05, 2-18-2025)
1-11-7: USE OF PURCHASE REQUISITIONS:
The city shall employ the use of a purchase requisition:
   A.   When any material, supply, equipment or service costing seven thousand
five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) or more and the formal contract procedure will
not be followed; and
   B.   When a purchase requisition or purchase order is requested or required
by a vendor. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-16-2010)
1-11-8: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS AUTHORIZING CONTRACTS FOR COMMODITIES OR
SERVICES:
The city shall have the power to enter into joint purchase agreements with any
or all other public agencies within the state for the purchase of any commodity
or service wherein it is determined by the city council to be in the best
interest of the city. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-16-2010)
1-11-9: DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY OR LEASE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY 1 :
All disposals, leases and/or subleases of public property of the city shall be
made, as nearly as possible, under the same conditions and limitations as
required by this chapter in the purchase of public property, but the city
council may also authorize, at its discretion the following:
   A.   The sale of any surplus property at public auction if it deems such a
sale desirable and in the best interest of the city;
   B.   A trade of surplus property; and
   C.   The lease or sublease of any property under such terms and conditions
as it may deem to be desirable, fair and appropriate considering intended use,
property tax value and the interests of the city. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-16-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 14 of this title relative to disposal of significant
  parcel of real property.
1-11-10: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Conflicts Of Interest: No member of the city council or city employee
may have an undisclosed pecuniary interest, as per state law, directly or
indirectly, in any contract entered into by the city. A violation of this
provision shall be cause for removal or other disciplinary action.
   B.   Collusion Among Bidders: Any agreement or collusion among bidders or
prospective bidders in restraint of competition by an agreement to bid a fixed
price, or otherwise, shall render any such bids void.
   C.   Gratuities: The acceptance of any gratuity of more than fifty dollars
($50.00) in value in the form of cash, merchandise or any other thing of value
by an official or employee of the city from any vendor or contractor, or
prospective vendor or contractor, shall be deemed to be a violation of this
chapter and shall be cause for disciplinary action.
   D.   Ethics: It is the intent of the city council that procurement by the
city comply in all respects with the requirements of the law of the state
relating to ethics and employees' dealings with the city. Therefore, to the
extent applicable, the Utah municipal officers' and employees' ethics act, Utah
Code Annotated section 10-3-1301 et seq., and the Utah public employees' ethics
act, Utah Code Annotated section 67-16-1 et seq., are adopted herein by this
reference.
   E.   Purchases For Personal Use Or Benefit: Any purchase of supplies or
equipment by the city for the personal use of any official or employee of the
city is prohibited. Any person who violates this requirement will be subject to
disciplinary action by the city. (Ord. 2010-02, 3-16-2010)
CHAPTER 12
RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
1-12-1: Government Records Access And Management Act Adopted By Reference
1-12-1: GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah government records access and management act, Utah Code
Annotated section 63G-2-101 et seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by the
city. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered class B violations of
this section and each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to
penalty provisions as provided in section
1-4-1 of this title. (2012 Code)
CHAPTER 13
PRIVATE PROPERTY PROTECTION REVIEW
SECTION:
1-13-1: Policy Considerations
1-13-2: Constitutional Taking Defined
1-13-3: Guidelines Advisory
1-13-4: Review Of Decision
1-13-5: Reviewing Guidelines
1-13-6: Results Of Review
1-13-1: POLICY CONSIDERATIONS:
There is an underlying policy in the city, strongly favoring the careful
consideration of matters involving constitutional taking claims, in fairness to
the owner of private property bringing the claim and in view of the uncertainty
and expense involved in defending lawsuits alleging such issues. At the same
time, the legitimate role of government in lawfully regulating real property
must be preserved and the public's right to require the dedication or exaction
of property consistent with the constitution. Consistent with this policy, it
is desired that a procedure be established for the review of actions that may
involve the issue of a constitutional taking. These provisions are to assist
governments in considering decisions that may involve constitutional takings.
It is intended that a procedure for such a review be provided, as well as
guidelines for such considerations. This chapter is further intended and shall
be construed to objectively and fairly review claims by citizens that a
specific government action should require payment of just compensation, yet
preserve the ability of the city to lawfully regulate real property and fulfill
its other duties and functions. (Ord. 05-6, 6-14-2005)
1-13-2: CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING DEFINED:
   A.   "Constitutional taking" means an action by the city involving the
physical taking or exaction of private real property that might require
compensation to a private real property owner because of:
      1.   The fifth or fourteenth amendment to the constitution of the United
States;
      2.   Article I, section 22, of the Utah constitution;
      3.   Any court ruling governing the physical taking or exaction of
private real property by a government entity.
   B.   Actions by the city involving the physical taking or exaction of
private real property is not a "constitutional taking" if the physical taking
or exaction:
      1.   Bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest; and
      2.   Is roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an
individualized property basis, both in nature and extent, to the impact of the
proposed development on the legitimate government interest. (Ord. 05-6, 6-14-
2005)
1-13-3: GUIDELINES ADVISORY:
The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter are advisory, and shall not be construed to expand or limit the
scope of the city's liability for a constitutional taking. A court may not
impose liability upon the city for failure to comply with the guidelines
required by this chapter. (Ord. 05-6, 6-14-2005)
1-13-4: REVIEW OF DECISION:
Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a constitutional
taking of their private real property shall request a review of a final
decision of any officer, employee, board, commission or council. The following
are specific procedures established for such a review:
   A.   Final Determination Required: The person requesting a review must have
obtained a final and authoritative determination, internally, within the city,
relative to the decision from which they are requesting review.
   B.   Time Limit For Filing Request For Review: Within thirty (30) days from
the date of the final decision that gave rise to the concern that a
constitutional taking has occurred, the person requesting the review shall file
in writing, in the office of the city recorder, a request for review of that
decision. A copy shall also be filed with the city attorney.
   C.   Review Set: The city council, or an individual, or body designated by
the city council shall immediately set a time to review the decision that gave
rise to the constitutional takings claim.
   D.   Information Required Prior To Review: In addition to the written
request for review, the applicant must submit, prior to the date of the review,
the following:
      1.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant requesting
review;
      2.   Name, address and telephone number of the current owner/owners of
the property, form of ownership, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not
for profit corporation, partnership, joint venture or other, and if owned by a
corporation, partnership or joint venture, name and address of all principal
shareholders or partners;
      3.   A detailed description of the property taken;
      4.   A detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there has
been a constitutional taking;
      5.   Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property taken,
including the date and cost at the date the property was acquired, including
any evidence of the value of that same property before and after the alleged
constitutional taking, the name of the party from whom purchased, including the
relationship, if any, between the person requesting a review and the party from
whom the property was acquired;
      6.   Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such as,
but not limited to, fee simple ownership, leasehold interest;
      7.   All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including
financing or offering for sale within the three (3) years prior to the date of
application;
      8.   The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the property for the
previous three (3) years;
      9.   A statement of whether the property has been for sale or rent during
the last three (3) years, price asked and offers received, if any;
      10.   All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the
petitioner within the previous three (3) years concerning feasibility of
development or utilization of the property;
      11.   For income producing property, itemized income and expense
statements from the property for the previous three (3) years;
      12.   Information from a title policy or other source showing all
recorded liens, easements or other encumbrances affecting the property, and if
there are trust deeds, mortgages or contracts upon the property, a statement as
to how much is currently owed to others for each encumbrance, as well as the
name of the mortgagee or lender, current interest rate, remaining loan balance
and term of the loan and other significant provisions, including, but not
limited to, right of purchasers to assume the loan;
      13.   Any other or additional information reasonably requested by the
city council or its designee to assist in making a determination regarding the
claim of a constitutional taking.
   E.   Complete Application: An application shall not be deemed to be
"complete" or "submitted" until the reviewing body certifies to the applicant
that all the materials and information required above have been received by the
city. The reviewing body shall promptly notify the applicant of any incomplete
application.
   F.   Evidence Heard: The city council or an individual or body designated by
them, shall hear all the evidence related to and submitted by the applicant,
city, or any other interested party.
   G.   Final Decision: A final decision on the review shall be rendered within
fourteen (14) days from the date the complete application for review has been
received by the city recorder. The decision of the city council regarding the
results of the review shall be given in writing to the applicant and the
officer, employee, board, commission or council that rendered the final
decision that gave rise to the constitutional takings claim.
   H.   Failure To Review: If the city council fails to hear and decide the
review within fourteen (14) days, the decision appealed from shall be presumed
to be approved. (Ord. 05-6, 6-14-2005)
1-13-5: REVIEWING GUIDELINES:
The city council shall review the facts and information presented by the
applicant to determine whether or not the action by the city constitutes a
"constitutional taking", as defined in section
1-13-2 of this chapter. In doing so, they shall consider:
   A.   Whether the physical taking or exaction of the private real property
bears an essential nexus to a legitimate government interest.
   B.   Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists for the action taken
by the city.
   C.   Is the property and exaction taken, roughly proportionate or reasonably
related, on an individual property basis, both in nature and extent, to the
impact caused by the activities that are the subject of the decision being
reviewed. (Ord. 05-6, 6-14-2005)
1-13-6: RESULTS OF REVIEW:
After completing the review, the reviewing body shall make a determination
regarding the above issues and where determined to be necessary and
appropriate, shall make a recommendation to the officer, employee, board,
commission or council that made the decision that gave rise to the
constitutional takings claim. (Ord. 05-6, 6-14-2005)
CHAPTER 14
DISPOSAL OF SIGNIFICANT PARCEL OF REAL PROPERTY 1
SECTION:
1-14-1: Authority
1-14-2: Definitions
1-14-3: Notice; Hearing
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-11-9 of this title.
1-14-1: AUTHORITY:
The City shall have the authority to sell, lease, convey or otherwise dispose
of real and personal property for the benefit of the City, as provided by Utah
Code Annotated section 10-8-2(1)(a)(iii) as amended. (Ord. 06-13, 10-10-2006;
amd. Ord. 2023-09, 8-1-2023)
1-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                                     A parcel of one acre or more in size, or a
                                     parcel having a current value of more than
SIGNIFICANT PARCEL OF REAL PROPERTY: two hundred fifty thousand dollars
                                     ($250,000.00). (Ord. 06-13, 10-10-2006;
                                     amd. Ord. 2023-09, 8-1-2023)
 
1-14-3: NOTICE; HEARING:
Before disposing of a significant parcel of real property owned by the City,
the City shall provide notice of the proposed disposition as a class A notice,
as provided by Utah Code Annotated sections 10-8-2(4) and 63G-30-102, as
amended, at least fourteen (14) days before the public hearing to allow an
opportunity for public comment on the proposed disposition. (Ord. 06-13, 10-10-
2006; amd. Ord. 2023-09, 8-1-2023)
CHAPTER 15
WRITTEN MINUTES; POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL
SECTION:
1-15-1: Definitions
1-15-2: Policy For Approval Of Minutes
1-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply so long as
they are consistent with the definitions of the same terms found in the Utah
open and public meetings act. If a term is defined differently in the Utah open
and public meetings act, the definition found in that act shall apply.
CONVENING: The calling of a meeting of a public body by a person authorized to
do so for the express purpose of discussing or acting upon a subject over which
that public body has jurisdiction or advisory power.
MEETING: A. The convening of a public body, with a quorum present, including a
workshop or an executive session whether the meeting is held in person or by
means of electronic communications, for the purpose of discussing, receiving
comments from the public about, or acting upon a matter over which the public
body has jurisdiction or advisory power.
   B.   "Meeting" does not mean:
      1.   A chance meeting;
      2.   A social meeting; or
      3.   The convening of a public body that has both legislative and
executive responsibilities where no public funds are appropriated for
expenditure during the time the public body is convened; and
         a.   The public body is convened solely for the discussion or
implementation of administrative or operational matters for which no formal
action by the public body is required; or
         b.   The public body is convened solely for the discussion or
implementation of administrative or operational matters that would not come
before the public body for discussion or action.
MEETING CLERK: The city recorder (or their authorized designee) for the city,
or shall mean the person assigned by a public body, other than the city
council, to record and to take the written minutes of a meeting of a public
body of the city.
MINUTES OF A MEETING: A written record of the meeting that shall include:
   A.   The date, time, and place of the meeting;
   B.   The names of members present and absent;
   C.   The substance of all matters proposed, discussed, or decided by the
public body which may include a summary of comments made by members of the
public body;
   D.   A record, by individual member, of each vote taken by the public body;
   E.   The name of each person who:
      1.   Is not a member of the public body; and
      2.   After being recognized by the presiding member of the public body,
provided testimony or comments to the public body;
   F.   The substance, in brief, of the testimony or comments provided by the
public under subsection E of this definition; and
   G.   Any other information that is a record of the proceedings of the
meeting that any member requests be entered in the minutes or recording.
PROPOSED MINUTES: The written minutes prepared by the meeting clerk that have
been given to the members of a public body for their review and approval.
PUBLIC BODY: Any administrative, advisory, executive or legislative body of the
city that:
   A.   Is created by the Utah constitution, statute, rule, ordinance, or
resolution;
   B.   Consists of two (2) or more persons;
   C.   Expends, disburses, or is supported in whole or in part by tax revenue;
and
   D.   Is vested with the authority to make decisions regarding the public's
business. (Ord. 2013-06, 3-19-2013)
1-15-2: POLICY FOR APPROVAL OF MINUTES:
The following shall be the policy and procedure for the approval of minutes for
the city of North Salt Lake:
   A.   Written minutes shall be taken for all public meetings of any public
body of the city. The minutes of all public meetings of any public body of the
city shall be recorded and taken down by the meeting clerk during the course of
any public meeting of the public body.
   B.   Within seven (7) working days from the end of the meeting, the meeting
clerk shall prepare proposed minutes for the meeting and give a copy of the
proposed minutes to each member of the public body for his or her review and
corrections.
   C.   Once the proposed minutes have been given to the members of the public
body, the meeting clerk shall immediately make available to the public the
proposed written minutes, which shall be clearly identified as "awaiting formal
approval" or "unapproved" or with some other appropriate notice that the
proposed minutes are subject to change until formally approved and they shall
become a public document available to any member of the public who requests to
read or copy the proposed minutes.
   D.   Each member of the public body shall review the proposed minutes before
the first meeting of the public body that immediately follows the meeting clerk
giving the proposed minutes to the members of the public body. Each member of
the public body may give to the meeting clerk his or her suggested corrections
of the proposed minutes which suggested corrections shall be immediately sent
by the meeting clerk to the other members of the public body. If any member of
the public body objects to a suggested correction, he or she shall communicate
that objection to the meeting clerk who will then put the matter of approving
the minutes on the agenda of the next meeting of the public body for the public
body to either accept as proposed or to correct as suggested.
   E.   If no member of the public body suggests corrections, or if no member
of the public body objects to any suggested correction, on or before the first
meeting of the public body that immediately follows the meeting clerk giving
the proposed minutes to the members of the public body, the proposed minutes
shall be deemed to have been approved by the public body and will stand as
proposed.
   F.   Once the proposed minutes have either been approved by the public body,
or have been deemed to have been approved by the inaction of the public body,
they shall become the official record of the proceedings of the public body and
shall be signed by the clerk of the meeting and the mayor, or chairman, and
shall be retained in the official records of the city and shall be a public
document available for the inspection and copying by members of the public as
appropriate under Utah law.
(Ord. 2013-06, 3-19-2013)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Creation Of Planning Commission
2-1-2: Term Of Office
2-1-3: Compensation
2-1-4: Vacancies And Removals
2-1-5: Organization
2-1-6: Powers And Duties
2-1-7: Examinations And Surveys
2-1-1: CREATION OF PLANNING COMMISSION:
The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members to be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. All members of the
Planning Commission shall be residents of the City. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-2-2018)
2-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The terms of the appointed members of the Planning Commission shall be four (4)
years and until their respective successors shall have been appointed. An
effort should be made to stagger the terms of members. Each member can serve no
more than two (2) consecutive terms. The Planning Commission existing at the
time of passage of the ordinance codified herein shall continue to serve and
the terms of its members shall be fixed by the City Council in such a manner as
to comply with the above provisions for staggering terms of service. (Ord.
2018-01, 1-2-2018)
2-1-3: COMPENSATION:
The members of the Planning Commission shall serve as such without
compensation, except that the City Council may fix a per diem compensation for
the members of the Planning Commission based on necessary and reasonable
expenses and on meetings actually attended. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-2-2018)
2-1-4: VACANCIES AND REMOVALS:
Vacancies of appointed members occurring otherwise than through the expiration
of terms shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. The City
Council shall have the right to remove any member of the Planning Commission
for misconduct and may remove any member for nonperformance of duty. Unexcused
absences from three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of the
Planning Commission may be considered by the City Council as nonperformance of
duty. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-2-2018)
2-1-5: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Organization: The Planning Commission shall be organized and exercise
its powers and duties as follows:
      1.   Chair, Vice Chair: Members of the Planning Commission shall select
one of its members as Chair and one of its members as Vice Chair to oversee the
proceedings and activities of the Planning Commission.
         a.   The Chair and Vice Chair shall serve for a term of one year.
         b.   The Chair and Vice Chair may serve consecutive terms.
      2.   Adoption Of Policies And Procedures: The Planning Commission may
adopt policies and procedures, consistent with the provisions of title 10 of
this Code and applicable law, to govern the conduct of its meetings, the
processing of applications, and for any other purposes considered necessary for
the functioning of the Planning Commission. All such policies and procedures
shall be submitted to the City Council for review and approval.
      3.   Meetings: The Planning Commission shall meet on a regular basis, as
determined by the City Council, and at such other times as the Planning
Commission may determine necessary. All meetings shall be properly noticed as
required by law, and held in accordance with the Open Meetings Law set forth in
Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-1 et seq., as amended. At the beginning of
each year, the Community and Economic Development Department shall create and
post in its office a schedule of Planning Commission meetings and application
deadlines.
      4.   Quorum: No official business shall be conducted by the Planning
Commission unless a quorum of its members is present. Four (4) members of the
Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum. Any action taken shall require a
minimum of four (4) yes votes from members of the commission, unless otherwise
prescribed by law.
   B.   Application To Appear:
      1.   Any person desiring to appear before the Planning Commission shall
complete an application and submit all required materials and fees to the
Community and Economic Development Department. An application that does not
include all of the required signatures, materials, fees or other necessary
information shall be deemed incomplete and will not be acted on by the City
until the necessary information is submitted and deemed to render the
application complete.
      2.   After an application has been found to be complete by the Community
and Economic Development Director, it will be placed on the next available
Planning Commission agenda, unless the applicant and the commission Chair agree
to postpone placing the item on the agenda or agree to continue the item to a
subsequent meeting. An applicant may request that an item be postponed or
continued a maximum of one meeting (i.e., once) or for forty five (45) days
from the date of application, whichever is longer. If the matter is not heard
within this deadline, the application is deemed to have expired or been
withdrawn, and must be resubmitted. This shall not apply to completed
applications that have been placed on an agenda, reviewed and discussed by the
Planning Commission, and then continued for reasons determined by the
commission.
      3.   The Planning Commission may not reconsider a previous action unless
the applicant resubmits a new proposal with substantive changes from the
previous proposal.
   C.   Effect Of Decisions: Decisions of the Planning Commission shall take
effect on the date of the meeting or hearing where the decision is made, unless
a different date is designated in the commission rules or at the time the
decision is made. The approval of written findings shall relate back to the
date of decision.
   D.   Minutes, Records: The Planning Commission shall keep written minutes of
its proceedings, showing the vote upon each question, or if absent or failing
to vote, indicating that fact, and keep records of its examinations and other
official actions. The Planning Commission shall have its proceedings
contemporaneously transcribed by a Court Reporter or a tape recorder.
      1.   The Planning Commission shall report, either verbally or in writing,
its official acts and recommendations to the City Council. Any member of the
commission may also make a concurring or dissenting report or recommendation to
the City Council.
      2.   The minutes of all meetings of the Planning Commission shall be
prepared and filed in the Offices of City Recorder. All such records are public
records and shall be available for public review and access in accordance with
the Government Records and Access Management Act, Utah Code Annotated section
63G-2-101 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-2-2018)
2-1-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties, explicit or
implied, given Planning Commissions by State law and title 10 of this Code,
including, but not limited to, the following. Each of such powers and duties
shall be exercised pursuant to the procedural and other provisions of title 10
of this Code and of State law:
   A.   Prepare and recommend a General Plan and amendments to the General Plan
to the City Council;
   B.   Recommend land use ordinances and maps, amendments to land use
ordinances and maps, to the City Council;
   C.   Administer applicable provisions of title 10 of this Code and of State
law;
   D.   Recommend subdivision ordinances and amendments thereto to the City
Council;
   E.   Recommend approval or denial of subdivision applications;
   F.   Advise the City Council on matters requested by the City Council;
   G.   Hear or decide the approval or denial of, or recommendations to approve
or deny, conditional use permits;
   H.   Hear or decide any other matter that the City Council designates;
   I.   Exercise any other powers that are necessary to enable the Planning
Commission to perform its function or that are delegated to it by the City
Council; and
   J.   Perform any other power or duty set forth in title 10 of this Code or
in State law relating to Planning Commissions. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-2-2018)
2-1-7: EXAMINATIONS AND SURVEYS:
The Planning Commission and its authorized agents may enter upon any land at
reasonable times to make examinations and surveys as necessary to enable it to
perform its function to promote City planning, development and enforcement of
the provisions of title 10 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-01, 1-2-2018)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS LICENSE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: License Required; Leasing To Unlicensed Business Prohibited
3-1-3: License Assessor And Collector
3-1-4: Application For License
3-1-5: Fee For License
3-1-6: Exemptions To License Fee
3-1-7: Payment Dates
3-1-8: License Fee Declared Debt
3-1-9: License Additional To Regulatory Licenses
3-1-10: Display Of License
3-1-11: Unlawful To File False Return
3-1-12: Revocation Or Denial Of Business License
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
BUSINESS: Means and includes all activities engaged in within the city carried
on for the purpose of gain or economic profit, except that the acts of
employees rendering service to employers shall not be included in the term
"business" unless otherwise specifically provided.
EMPLOYEE: The operator, owner or manager of a place of business and any persons
employed by such person in the operation of said place of business in any
capacity.
ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tangible
personal property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods or
property, and the rendering of personal services for others for a consideration
by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business, occupation or
other service, except the rendering of personal services by an employee to his
employer under any contract of personal employment.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate location maintained or operated by the
licensee within the city from which business activity is conducted or
transacted. (1989 Code § 9-111; amd. 2012 Code)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; LEASING TO UNLICENSED BUSINESS PROHIBITED:
   A.   License Required; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in business within the city without first having procured a license as
provided in this chapter, and any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 9-112; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Unlawful To Lease To Unlicensed Business; Penalty:
      1.   It is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for any individual, business or other entity to lease, rent
or otherwise provide premises to another individual, business or entity for the
conducting of business when the lessee or renter does not possess or obtain a
current city business license.
      2.   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this subsection that
the lessee actually obtains a current city business license within fifteen (15)
days of the date of the signed lease agreement. (Ord. 07-25, 12-4-2007; amd.
2012 Code)
3-1-3: LICENSE ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR:
The city recorder is designated and appointed as ex officio assessor of license
fees for the city. Upon receipt of any application for a license, the city
recorder shall assess the amount due thereon and shall collect all license fees
based upon the amounts as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule
resolution. The city recorder shall enforce all provisions of this title, and
shall cause to be filed complaints against all persons violating any of the
provisions of this title. (1989 Code § 9-113; amd. 2012 Code)
3-1-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Requirements: All applications for license shall include:
      1.   The name of the person desiring a license.
      2.   The kind of license desired, stating the business, service, trade or
profession to be performed, practiced or carried on.
      3.   The class of license desired.
      4.   The place where such business, service, trade or profession is to be
carried on, giving the street number if the business, service, trade or
profession is to be carried on in any building or enclosure having such number.
      5.   The period of time for which such license is desired to be issued.
      6.   In compliance with the city of North Salt Lake's Utah pollutant
discharge elimination system (UPDES) permit, all properties that contain on
site stormwater facilities shall be required to submit a stormwater maintenance
facilities agreement in accordance with subsection
10-20-3C10 of this code. In accordance to that agreement the property owner
shall submit annually on June 30 an inspection form provided by the city
engineer. Owners or designated representatives who fail to submit annual
inspections forms prior to October 31, shall be notified in writing with their
business license renewal that submission of the inspection report is required
prior to issuance of business license for the following calendar year.
   B.   Coin Operated Machines Or Devices: In the event that the license
application is related to a coin operated machine or device, the application
shall identify the machine or device to which it applies and the location
thereof. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
3-1-5: FEE FOR LICENSE:
Unless a different sum is provided in the ordinances of the city, the annual
business license fee shall be in such amount as specified in the comprehensive
fee schedule resolution. (1989 Code § 9-116; amd. 2012 Code)
3-1-6: EXEMPTIONS TO LICENSE FEE:
No license fee shall be imposed under this chapter upon any person engaged in
business for solely religious, charitable, or other type of strictly nonprofit
purpose, who is tax exempt in such activities under the laws of the United
States and the state, nor shall any license fee be imposed on any person
engaged in business specifically exempted from municipal taxation and fees by
the laws of the United States or the state. (1989 Code § 9-123; amd. 2012 Code)
3-1-7: PAYMENT DATES:
All license fees shall be due and payable as follows, except as may be
otherwise provided:
   A.   The application and fees provided for herein shall be due and payable
on or before January 2 of each year, or before commencing a new business,
trade, service or profession.
   B.   Penalties for delinquent fees shall be as specified in the
comprehensive fee schedule resolution. (1989 Code § 9-114; amd. 2012 Code)
3-1-8: LICENSE FEE DECLARED DEBT:
Any license fee due and unpaid under this chapter, and all penalties thereon,
shall constitute a debt to the city and shall be collected by court proceedings
in the same manner as any other debt in like amount, which remedy shall be in
addition to all other existing remedies. (1989 Code § 9-121)
3-1-9: LICENSE ADDITIONAL TO REGULATORY LICENSES:
The license fee imposed by this chapter shall be in addition to any and all
other taxes or licenses imposed by any other provisions of the ordinances of
the city. (1989 Code § 9-119)
3-1-10: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
   A.   Required: Every certificate of license issued under this title shall be
posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place upon the wall of the building,
room or office of the place of business so that the same may be easily seen.
When such certificate of license has expired, it shall be removed by the
licensee from such place in which it has been posted, and no certificate of
license which is not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted
upon the wall or any part of any room within the place of business. If the
licensee's business is such that a license cannot be displayed due to the
transient or mobile nature of the business, then the licensee shall carry the
license on his person ready to be shown on request by an authorized officer
during all such time or times while the licensee is engaged in or pursuing the
business for which a license is granted.
   B.   Coin Operated Machine Or Device: In the event the license is for a coin
operated machine or device, the certificate shall be attached or displayed in
the immediate vicinity of the machine for which it has been issued. (1989 Code
§ 9-117)
3-1-11: UNLAWFUL TO FILE FALSE RETURN:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false return or
application. (1989 Code § 9-121; amd. 2012 Code)
3-1-12: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
   A.   Revocation: Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this code
or of any ordinance of the city may be revoked by the governing body because
of:
      1.   The failure of the licensee or applicant to comply with conditions
and requirement of this code or any ordinance of the city;
      2.   Unlawful activities conducted or permitted on the premises where the
business is conducted. (1989 Code § 9-118)
   B.   Notice; Hearing; Applicability:
      1.   Prior to the revocation of a license or denial of an application to
renew business license, the licensee or applicant shall be given a written
notice which shall state in substance that the governing body intends to revoke
the business license or deny the application to renew, together with the reason
or reasons therefor. The licensee shall be informed of the appeals hearing
process, which shall occur at a regular or special meeting of the governing
body, at least ten (10) days and not more than thirty (30) days from the date
notice is sent. The licensee or applicant shall be notified of and has a right
to appear, to be represented by counsel, to hear the evidence against him, to
cross examine witnesses and to present evidence regarding why the license
should not be revoked or the application denied. (1989 Code § 9-118; amd. 2012
Code)
      2.   Subsection B1 of this section shall not apply to applications for
licenses for businesses which have not previously been licensed by the city,
and such applicants need only be informed that their application has been
denied. (1989 Code § 9-118)
CHAPTER 2
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 1
SECTION:
3-2-1: Adoption Of Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act
3-2-2: Definitions
3-2-3: License Required
3-2-4: Classifications Of Licenses
3-2-5: Brewery
3-2-6: Bar Establishment
3-2-7: Beer Retailer, Off Premises
3-2-8: Beer Retailer, On Premises
3-2-9: Banquet, On Premises
3-2-10: Reception Center
3-2-11: Restaurant, Beer Only
3-2-12: Restaurant, Full Service
3-2-13: Restaurant, Limited Service
3-2-14: Single Event Permit
3-2-15: Premises; Light And Open Space Requirements
3-2-16: Application For License
3-2-17: Required Investigations
3-2-18: Issuance Procedures
3-2-19: Renewals
3-2-20: State License Required
3-2-21: Local Consent
3-2-22: Qualifications Of License
3-2-23: Bond Required
3-2-24: Fee For License
3-2-25: Establish Name Change; Fee And Notice To City
3-2-26: Transfer To New Location; Fee
3-2-27: Sublease, Transfer Or Assignment Prohibited
3-2-28: Forfeiture Conditions
3-2-29: Restrictions
3-2-30: Premises Subject To Inspection
3-2-31: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-2-32: Criminal Offense
3-2-33: Civil Fine
 
3-2-34: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-7-3 of this code for prohibitions in public parks.
3-2-1: ADOPTION OF UTAH ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT:
The Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Utah Code Annotated sections 32B-1-101 et
seq., as amended from time to time (the "Act"), is hereby adopted by this
reference in its entirety as if set forth in full herein. The Act as adopted
herein shall be construed to apply only to the incorporated areas of the City
and shall be interpreted and constructed where necessary to carry out the
intent of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-18, 10-21-2010; amd. Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-
2024).
3-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meaning given to
them in the Act. In addition, the following words and phrases used in this
chapter shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly
appears from the context:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE:       "Beer" and "liquor" as those terms are defined herein.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE        A license issued pursuant to this Chapter, including:
LICENSES:
   Bar Establishment   A license issued in accordance with Chapter 5, Retail Income Act, and Chapter 6,
License:                  Part 4, Bar Establishment license of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Utah
                          Code Ann. § 32B-1-101, et seq.
                          Includes:
   Bar Establishment   A.   An equity license (such as a country club),
                          B.   A fraternal license, or
                          C.   A Bar license
   Off Premises Beer   A place of business wherein beer is sold in original containers for consumption
Retailer:                 off the premises in accordance with the state's liquor control act and the
                          licensing ordinance of the city.
                          A business licensed by the UDABS to sell liquor, wine, heavy beer and beer to
   On Premises Banquet:public patrons for consumption on the premises for contracted banquet activities
                          in conjunction with a hotel, resort, sports facility or convention center.
   On Premises Beer    A business licensed by the UDABS for the sale of beer (not liquor) to public
Retailer:                 patrons for consumption on the premises, including restaurants, sports facilities
                          and other food/beverage facilities.
                          A business owned and operated by an individual and/or company, typically located
   Package Agency:     in a hotel or resort, licensed by the UDABC on a contract basis which sells a
                          limited selection of alcoholic beverage products for consumption off the agency's
                          premises.
                          A business licensed by the UDABS for the storage, sale, service, and consumption
                          of liquor, wine, heavy beer, and beer for contracted third party private events
                          on the premises. The reception center must be at least 5,000 sq. ft. and must
   Reception Center:   have adequate culinary facilities to prepare full meals on the premises and under
                          the control of the licensee. The reception center may not maintain more than
                          thirty percent (30%) of its total annual gross receipts from the sale of
                          alcoholic products.
                          A business licensed by the UDABC for the sale of alcoholic beverages for
   Restaurant; Full    consumption on the premises of a restaurant that is engaged primarily in serving
Service:                  food to the general public, and maintains at least seventy percent (70%) of its
                          total restaurant business from the sale of food.
                          A business licensed by the UDABC for the sale of wine, beer and heavy beer for
   Restaurant; Limited consumption on the premises of a restaurant that is engaged primarily in serving
Service:                  food to the general public, and maintains at least seventy percent (70%) of its
                          total restaurant business from the sale of food.
                          A business licensed issued by the UDABC for the sale of beer and for consumption
   Restaurant; Beer Onlon the premises of a restaurant that is engaged primarily in serving food to the
                          general public and maintains at least seventy percent (70%) of its total
                          restaurant business from the sale of food.
                          A permit issued by the city for a specific event for a specific period of time
                          and location and only available to groups, partnerships, limited liability
   Single Event Permit:corporations, churches, lodges or chapters of fraternal and social organizations
                          or other bona fide organization and licensed by the UDABC for the sale of a
                          specific range of alcoholic beverages to the general public or to the
                          organization's invited guests for the duration of the event.
   State Store:        A facility for the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages located on premises owned
                          or leased by the state and operated by state employees.
APPLICATION:              A formal written request for the issuance of a permit or license.
                          Any beverage containing at least one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by
                          volume, but not more than five percent (5%) of alcohol by volume or four percent
BEER:                     (4%) by weight; and is obtained by fermentation, infusion or decoction of malt or
                          a malt substitute. Beer includes products clearly marketed, labeled, and
                          identified as beer, ale, porter, stout, lager, a malt, a malted beverage, or
                          seltzer.
BEER, HEAVY:              "Heavy beer" means beer containing more than five percent (5%) of alcohol by
                          volume.
BREWER:                   Means a person engaged in manufacturing beer, heavy beer, or a flavored malt
                          beverage.
CITY:                     The municipal corporation of the City of North Salt Lake.
CITY COUNCIL:             The city council of the City of North Salt Lake.
COMMISSION:               The Utah Alcoholic Beverage Service Commission.
COMMUNITY LOCATION:       Means a public or private school, a church, a public library, a public
                          playground, or a public park.
                          Any room. House, building, structure or place occupied by any person licensed to
                          sell beer or licensed to allow the consumption of liquor on such premises under
                          this title. Multiple beer or liquor dispensing facilities located in one building
LICENSED PREMISES:        and owned or leased by one licensed applicant shall be deemed to be only one
                          licensed premises; provided, that each dispensing point must be designated and
                          the appropriate fee paid and the license prominently displayed at each dispensing
                          point.
                          Any person issued a license by the Commission and the City to sell, manufacture,
LICENSEE:                 store, or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises owned or
                          controlled by the person.
                          Means and includes alcohol, or any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented,
                          malt, or other liquid or combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous,
                          vinous, or fermented, and all other drinks or drinkable liquids, containing at
LIQUOR:                   least one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume; and all mixtures,
                          compounds or preparations, whether liquid or not, which contain at least one-half
                          of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume, and is suitable to use for beverage
                          purposes. The term "liquor" shall not include " beer". The term "liquor" includes
                          heavy beer, wine, and flavored malt beverage.
LOCAL AUTHORITY:          The Governing Body of the City of North Salt Lake.
                          As used herein means a request for the City to give consent to the Utah
LOCAL CONSENT:            Department of Alcoholic Beverage Service for the Department to issue a license or
                          permit to an applicant.
MANUFACTURE:              Means to distill, brew, rectify, mix, compound, process, ferment, or otherwise
                          make an alcoholic product for personal use or for sale or distribution to others.
MINOR:                    Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
                          Any room, house, building, structure, place or licensed premises where:
                          A.   Alcoholic beverages are manufactured, sold, kept, bartered, stored, given
                          away or used, or where persons resort for drinking alcoholic beverages contrary
                          to the alcoholic beverage service act of Utah or this title; or
                          B.   Any persons are allowed to perform or simulate sexual intercourse,
                          masturbation, oral copulation, anal copulation, bestiality, flagellation or any
                          sexual acts prohibited by law; or
                          C.   Any persons are allowed to simulate or actually touch, caress or fondle
                          female breasts, or the buttocks, anus or genitalia of either sex; or
NUISANCE:                 D.   Any persons are allowed to actually display or simulate the display of pubic
                          hair, buttocks, vulva, anus, genitalia or female breasts below a point
                          immediately above the top of the areola; or
                          E.   Intoxicated persons are permitted to loiter about, or profanity, indecent,
                          immoral, loud or boisterous language or immoral or lewd conduct is permitted or
                          carried on; or
                          F.   Minors are permitted to purchase or drink alcoholic beverages; or
                          G.   Laws or ordinances are violated by the licensee or his agents or patrons
                          with consent or knowledge of licensees upon such premises which tend to affect
                          the public health, peace or morals.
OPEN BOTTLE, CAN OR OTHER As used in this chapter, means a container having within it an alcoholic
RECEPTACLE:               beverage, which container has been opened, its seal broken or the contents of
                          which have been partially consumed.
                          Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, business trust,
PERSON:                   limited liability company, or other form of business enterprise, including a
                          receiver or trustee, and the plural as well as the singular number, unless the
                          intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context.
                          Shall include cafes, restaurants, public dining rooms, cafeterias, taverns,
                          cabarets, and any other place where the general public is invited or admitted for
                          business purposes, and shall be deemed to include private clubs, corporations and
PLACE OF BUSINESS:        associations operating under charter or otherwise wherein only the members,
                          visitors and their guests are invited. Occupied hotels and motels that are not
                          open to the public shall not be deemed to be "places of business" as herein
                          defined.
                          Means and refers to any of the following which are open to and generally used by
                          the public; streets, roads and alleys of incorporated cities and towns; state or
                          county highways or roads; buildings and grounds used for school purposes, and
                          public dance halls and adjacent grounds; any place of public resort or amusement;
PUBLIC PLACE:             lobbies, halls and dining rooms of hotels, restaurants, theaters, stores,
                          garages, and service stations; any public conveyance and its depots and waiting
                          rooms which are open to unrestricted use and access by the public; publicly owned
                          bathing beaches, parks or playground; and all other places which under this title
                          have been declared to be a public place.
                          Means and includes any building or part of a building where a person resides, but
                          shall not include any part of a building which is not actually and exclusively
                          used as a private residence, nor any part of a hotel other than a private
                          guestroom, nor a club or any part thereof, nor any place from which there is
RESIDENCE:                access to a club or hotel through a street or lane or other open and unobstructed
                          means of access, nor any portion of a building used in part for business purposes
                          unless such portion is separated from the part used for business purposes by a
                          wall or walls having no doors or other means of access opening into such part
                          used for business purposes.
RESTAURANT:               A place of business where food is prepared and served to the public for
                          consumption on or off the premises.
RETAILER:                 Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages to the
                          consumer.
                          Any transaction, exchange, or barter whereby, for any consideration, an alcoholic
                          beverage is either directly or indirectly transferred, solicited, ordered,
SELL, SALE AND TO SELL:   delivered for value, or by any means or under a pretext is promised or obtained,
                          whether done by a person as a principal, proprietor, or as an agent, servant, or
                          employee, unless otherwise defined in this title or the rules adopted by the city
                          or the commission.
                          A facility for the sale of packaged liquor located on premises owned or leased by
STATE STORE:              the state of Utah and operated by state employees. This term does not apply to
                          restaurants, private clubs or package agencies.
                          A.   As used in this chapter, means:
                          1.   Any street, right of way, sidewalk, alley, publicly owned property or city,
                          state or county road located within the city limits and which abuts upon: a) any
                          county or city owned real property; or b) any business required to have a city
                          business license pursuant to this title;
                          2.   Boarded or abandoned commercial buildings;
UNPERMITTED PUBLIC PLACE: 3.   Vacant lots in areas zoned for commercial or manufacturing uses; or
                          4.   Any publicly owned building or publicly owned real property.
                          B.   "Unpermitted public place" shall not mean or include a premises or area
                          identified in a license or permit issued by the City as authorizing the
                          possession or consumption of alcohol, when there is conformance with the
                          applicable license or permit restrictions; businesses specifically permitted
                          under this title; businesses licensed as "home occupations", as defined in this
                          title; or "apartments", as defined in accordance with title 10 of this code.
                          Any person other than a manufacturer engaged in the importation for sale, or in
WHOLESALER:               the sale of alcoholic beverages in wholesale or jobbing quantities to the
                          Commission or to retailers. (1989 Code § 9-411; amd. Ord. 93-6, 9-22-1993; 2012
                          Code; Ord. 2021-01, 2-2-2021)
 
Any term used herein but not specifically defined shall have the meaning set
forth within the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, or, if not defined therein,
shall have the meaning commonly applied to the term within the context of this
Chapter and the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of the
manufacturing, selling, or wholesaling of alcoholic beverages, within the
corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a general business
license pursuant to this title and the appropriate alcoholic beverage license.
. A separate license shall be required for each place of manufacture, sale, or
wholesale and the license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in the
place to which it shall refer or for which it shall be issued. All licenses
shall comply with the alcoholic beverage control act of the state and the
regulations of the alcoholic beverage services commission, and every license
shall recite that it is granted subject to revocation as hereinafter provided.
(1989 Code § 9-412)
   B.   Possession And Consumption: Except as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 32A-12-213(1), it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any place
of business, association, establishment, restaurant, club or similar business
which allows customers, members, guests, visitors or other persons to possess
or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises without first procuring a retail
alcoholic beverage license therefor as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2024-
05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-4: CLASSIFICATIONS OF LICENSES:
   A.   Classes And Privileges: Retail licenses for alcoholic beverages issued
under issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be classified into the
following types and shall be defined as set forth in the Act. Each respective
license shall carry the privileges and responsibilities hereinafter set forth
in this chapter.
      1.   Bar Establishment License which may include:
         a.   Equity License.
         b.   Fraternal License.
         c.   Bar License.
      2.   Beer retailer, off premises.
      3.   Beer retailer, on premises.
      4.   Banquet, on premises.
      5.   Restaurant.
         a.   Full Service.
         b.   Limited service.
         c.   Beer-only.
      6.   Reception Center.
      7.   Hotel.
      8.   Resort.
      9.   Single event permit.
   B.   Lawful Purchases Required: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to
purchase or acquire or to have or possess for the purpose of sale or
distribution, any alcoholic beverage except that which lawfully purchased from
a brewer or wholesaler licensed under the privileges of the alcoholic beverage
control act of the state. (1989 Code § 9-413; amd. Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-5: BREWERY:
   A.   Sales: A brewery license may be issued to a business for the
manufacture, brewing, storage, transportation or export of beer and heavy beer
as allowed by the title R81 of the Utah state administrative code - alcoholic
beverage control administration. For the purposes of this title, a brewery
license shall only be issued in conjunction with a bona fide on premises beer
retail license.
   B.   Applicability Of Limited Service Restaurant Requirements: A brewery
shall abide by all requirements imposed on limited service restaurant licenses.
(Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-6: BAR ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   Sales: a bar establishment license shall entitle the licensee, such as
an equity club, fraternal club, or a bar, to sell alcohol, wine, heavy beer and
beer for consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale of food as
allowed by the title R81 of the Utah state administrative code - alcoholic
beverage control administration.
   B.   Presence Of Minors Prohibited: It is unlawful and shall constitute an
offense of strict liability for minors to be admitted to an equity, fraternal,
or social club under any circumstances except that:
      1.   A minor may be permitted on the premises of an equity or fraternal
club as allowed by the bylaws of that club but cannot be in a bar area, or
serve, purchase or consume alcohol.
Proximity Requirements: No bar establishment license shall be issued unless it
satisfies the proximity requirements of Utah Code Ann. § 32B-1-202, as amended.
(Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-7: BEER RETAILER, OFF PREMISES:
An off premises beer retail license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer in
original containers, for consumption off the premises. An off premise beer
retailer licensee shall comply with all operational restrictions of the State
of Utah. (Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-8: BEER RETAILER, ON PREMISES:
   A.   An on premises beer retailer license shall entitle the licensee to sell
and serve beer for consumption on the premises. An on premises beer retailer
licensee shall comply with all the operation restriction of the State of Utah.
   B.   No on premises beer retailer license shall be issued unless it
satisfies the proximity requirements of Utah Code Ann. § 32B-1-202, as amended.
(Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-9: BANQUET, ON PREMISES:
Sales: An on premises banquet license allows the sale of liquor, wine, heavy
beer and beer for contracted banquet activities in conjunction with a hotel,
resort, sports facility, or convention center. An on premises banquet licensee
shall comply with all the operational restrictions of the State of Utah. (Ord.
2024-05, 9- 17-2024)
3-2-10: RECEPTION CENTER:
   A.   A reception center license shall entitle the licensee to sell an
alcoholic product on the premises of a reception center of an event for
consumption on the premises.
   B.   No reception center license shall be issued unless is satisfies the
Proximity Restrictions of Utah Code Ann. § 32B-1-202, as amended. (Ord. 2024-
05, 9-17- 2024)
3-2-11: RESTAURANT, BEER ONLY:
   A.   A beer only restaurant license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer
for consumption only on the premises of a restaurant that is engaged primarily
in serving food to the general public. A bar only restaurant shall comply with
all operational restrictions of the Act which are applicable to the license.
   B.   No limited service restaurant license shall be issued unless it
satisfies the Proximity Restrictions of Utah Code Ann. § 32B-1-202, as amended.
(Ord. 2024- 05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-12: RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE:
   A.   Sales: A full service restaurant alcohol sales license shall entitle
the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of a
restaurant that is engaged primarily in serving food to the general public. A
full service restaurant licensee shall comply with all operational restrictions
of the Act which are applicable to the licensee.
   B.   No full service restaurant license shall be issued unless it satisfies
the Proximity Restrictions of Utah Code Ann. § 32B-1-202, as amended. (Ord.
2024- 05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-13: RESTAURANT, LIMITED SERVICE:
   A.   Sales: a limited service restaurant shall entitle the licensee to sell
wine, heavy beer and beer for consumption only on the premises of a restaurant
that is engaged primarily in serving food to the general public. A limited
service restaurant licensee shall comply with all operational restrictions of
the Act which are applicable to the license.
   B.   No limited service restaurant license shall be issued unless it
satisfies the Proximity Restrictions of Utah Code Ann. § 32B-1-202, as amended.
(Ord. 2024- 05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-14: SINGLE EVENT PERMIT:
A single event permit shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic beverage in
conjunction with a single event in temporary nonglass containers not exceeding
one liter (1 l) in size for consumption on the premises as set forth below. A
single event permitee shall comply with all operational restrictions of the Act
which are applicable to the permit.
   A.   Time Limit: A single event permit shall be issued for a specific period
of time but in no event shall it be valid for more than fifteen (15)
consecutive days.
   B.   Barrier Required: Alcoholic beverage shall be sold in an area separated
from the event by a barrier, approved by the city or its designated agent. It
is unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict liability for a class E
licensee, operator, agent or employee to permit or to allow any person under
the age of twenty one (21) years to be in the separated area.
   C.   Estimate Of Participants; Security: All holders of a single event
permit must provide an estimate of the number of participants attending such
single event, must provide an adequate number of licensed security personnel
for the facility or location and provide the names of such personnel or
security agency to the City or its designated agent at the time of application.
   D.   Removal Of Materials And Refuse; Bond Required: All materials and
refuse accompanying the facility or location must be removed immediately upon
the expiration of the license or end of the event. Each person seeking a single
event permit shall submit to the City a cash deposit in the amount specified in
the Comprehensive Fee Schedule to assure compliance with the provisions of this
subsection, including, but not limited to, the removal of all materials and the
cleaning of the site. In the event the licensee does not comply or remove the
materials or clean the site, the City may do so, or cause the same to be done
by other persons, and the reasonable cost plus an administrative fee shall be
charged against the licensee and the deposit. (Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-15: PREMISES; LIGHT AND OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict liability for any
person to own or operate any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages without complying with the following lighting and view requirements:
   A.   Lighting: During business hours, a minimum of one (1) candlepower
light, measured at a level of five feet (5') above the floor, shall be
maintained, except in gender segregated restaurants.
   B.   Booths Prohibited: No enclosed booths, blinds or stalls shall be
erected or maintained.
Access: There shall be a clear and unobstructed access to all portions of the
interior where patrons are permitted or served. (Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-16: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Information Required: All applications for alcoholic beverage retail
licenses or for renewal or reissuance of alcoholic beverage retail licenses
authorized herein shall be filed and verified with the City Business License
Department and shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name, current address and telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   The age and date of birth of the applicant.
      3.   The social security number of the applicant.
      4.   The state sales tax identification number of the applicant.
      5.   The citizenship and/or place of permanent residency of the
applicant.
      6.   All addresses of the applicant for the previous five (5) years.
      7.   All names, addresses and the names of the licensing authorities of
all businesses previously and presently owned or operated by the applicant.
      8.   The type of license desired.
      9.   The location of the premises to be licensed.
      10.   A statement verifying that the applicant meets all the requirements
of the alcoholic beverage control act.
      11.   A statement verifying that the applicant is of good moral
character.
      12.   Proof of training approved by the State.
      13.   An affirmative statement by the applicant that any employees who
serve or sell beer shall be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      14.   A sworn statement signed by the applicant that all the facts
included in the application are true.
      15.   Any other information that the City may require.
   B.   Partnerships And Similar Businesses: If the applicant is a firm,
partnership, association, group, corporation or a person with any other
business interest in receiving a license hereunder, the above information shall
be provided with respect to each partner, association member or corporate
officer, director or member provided; however, that the application need only
be signed by a single partner, member, corporate officer or person who is
indicated as an applicant on the application.
   C.   Operator: If the business is to be operated by a person other than the
applicant, said operator must join in the application and file the same
information required of an applicant. It shall be grounds for revocation of the
license for any business required to be licensed by this title, to be operated
by any person who has not filed his operator's information at the time of
renewal of the license, or, if operation is assumed during the license period,
at least ten (10) days prior to assuming operation of the business.
   D.   Statement Under Oath: The application and operator's information must
be subscribed by the applicant and operator who shall state under oath that the
information contained therein is true. (Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-17: REQUIRED INVESTIGATIONS:
   A.   Public Safety: Any application filed in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter shall be referred to the chief of police for inspection and
report. The chief of police, or designee, shall within ten (10) days after
receiving the application, file with the business license clerk the report
findings. The report shall include:
      1.   The results of a criminal background or other required application
verification of the applicant, or of any partner, officer, director, member,
shareholder, or manager required to meet the qualifications of a licensee;
      2.   The results of any police inspection made of the proposed license
premises;
      3.   The general reputation and character of the applicant, the premises
and of the persons who habitually frequent the same;
      4.   The nature and kind of business conducted in the place by the
applicant, or by any other person, or by the applicant at any other place;
      5.   Whether the place is or has been conducted in a lawful, quiet and
orderly manner; the nature and kind of entertainment, if any, at the place;
      6.   Whether gambling is or has been permitted on the premises or by the
applicant at any other place;
      7.   The proximity of such premises to any school or church; and
      8.   Whether there are any grounds to believe that any statement made in
the application is untrue.
      9.   Any information deemed to be pertinent along with a recommendation
as to whether or not the application should be granted. (1989 Code § 9-415)
   B.   Health Department: No license under this chapter shall be issued until
the applicant therefor shall have first procured from the department of health
of the county, or an agency acting as the department of health for the county,
a permit which shall show that the premises to be licensed is in a sanitary
condition and that the equipment used in the storage, distribution or sale of
alcoholic beverages and food, if any, complies with all the health regulations
of the city and the state. (1989 Code § 9-419)
   C.   Fire District: The application shall be referred to the South Davis
Metro Fire District for inspection and report. Within ten (10) days, the Fire
Marshal, or designee, shall report in writing to the business license clerk
whether the proposed licensed premises complies with all applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations relating to safety in the event of fire or panic,
and whether the same is reasonably safe for use as licensed premises of the
class of license applied for. The Fire Marshal shall have a continuing duty to
inform the business license clerk of known fire safety violations regarding the
licensed premises which have not been corrected.
   D.   Building Official: The application shall also be referred to the City
Building Official for inspection and report. Within ten (10) days, the Building
Official, or designee, shall report in writing to the business license clerk
whether the proposed licensed premises complies with all applicable building,
electrical and mechanical codes and regulations, and whether the premises is
reasonably safe for its intended use. The Building Official shall have a
continuing duty to inform the business license clerk of known building code
violations regarding the licensed premises which have not been corrected.
   E.   Community Development Director: The application shall also be referred
to the Community Development Director, or designee, for inspection and report.
Within ten (10) days, the director or designee shall report in writing to the
business license clerk whether the proposed licensed premises complies with all
applicable land use ordinances and is a permitted or conditionally permitted
use in the zone. If the proposed use is conditional, the Director shall not
authorize approval of the license until a conditional use permit has been
approved by the Land Use Authority. The Director, or designee, shall have a
continuing duty to inform the business license clerk of known zoning violations
regarding the licensed premises which have not been corrected. (Ord. 2024-05,
9- 17-2024)
3-2-18: ISSUANCE PROCEDURES:
Upon receipt of the reports from the Chief of Police, the County Health
Department, and, for the initial application only, the Fire District, Building
Official and Community Development Director, the Business License Clerk shall
consider the application, and, if the applicant has complied with all
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, shall approve and issue the
license to the applicant for the retail sale of alcohol upon the licensed
premises. (Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-19: RENEWALS:
Any application for renewal licenses filed by the holders of existing licenses
shall be filed with the city business license clerk at least thirty (30) days
prior to its expiration. Any person who fails to file an application within the
time limit shall close his licensed premises on the expiration date and shall
keep the premises closed for any and all business for the sale of alcoholic
beverages until the date a new license is issued. (1989 Code § 9-416; amd. 2012
Code; Ord. 2024-05, 9-17- 2024)
3-2-20: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
A license granted hereunder is issued by the City only in conjunction with an
applicable State license, except as specifically provided otherwise. During any
period an applicable State license is not in effect for a given premises,
whether by reason of suspension, revocation or any other reason, the City
license for the premises shall automatically terminate. Upon presentation of
written proof that the Commission has reinstated or otherwise revalidated the
applicable State license, the City license shall be deemed to be valid and in
full force and effect. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to
prohibit or restrict the City from enforcing State law or City ordinance as
allowed by law regarding alcoholic beverage sales and licensing in the City.
(Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-21: LOCAL CONSENT:
The issuance of a business license or conditional use permit for any on
premises beer retailer, bar establishment or restaurant liquor licensee shall
constitute local consent for the issuance of that license pursuant to the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. No alcohol retail license issued pursuant to
this chapter shall be effective until the State has issued an alcohol retail
license to the applicant pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord.
2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-22: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
   A.   Specified: No license shall be granted unless the applicant is a lawful
resident of the United States, is age twenty one (21) or over, of good moral
character, a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident of the United
States (alien registration card required) and the applicant satisfies the
qualifications set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 32B-1-304.
   B.   Partnership Or Similar Business: If the applicant is a firm,
partnership, association, group, corporation, limited liability company, or any
other business entity, each partner, association member, corporate officer,
director or any other person having ownership interest in the business that is
applying for a license shall meet all of the foregoing restrictions as if such
individuals were the applicant. The operator or person having management
responsibilities shall also meet all of the foregoing restrictions.
   C.   No license or local consent shall be issued to an applicant if the
applicant is not fully compliant with applicable Federal, State, County, and
North Salt Lake City regulations. (1989 Code § 9-417; amd. 2012 Code; Ord.
2021-01, 2-2-2021; Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-23: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued until the applicant has
filed with the city a bond as specified in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule
resolution, conditioned on the faithful observance of the ordinances of the
City in relation to the sale of alcoholic beverages and conduct of such
business in conformity therewith.
   B.   The bond required in subsection A of this section shall be payable to
the city and due upon revocation of the license. (1989 Code § 9-418; amd. 2012
Code; Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-24: FEE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Required With Application: The license fee shall be in such amount as
specified in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule resolution, which are in addition
to the general business license fees required herein. Fees shall be accompanied
by the application or any renewal thereof, and shall be returned to the
applicant if the application is denied.
   B.   Expiration Of License; Prorating Of Fee: All licenses shall expire
December 31 of each year, unless sooner canceled, revoked or suspended.
Licenses shall be issued for one year. License fees may not be prorated. (1989
Code § 9-420; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.    Single event permits shall be valid for the period set forth in the
permit. (Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-25: ESTABLISH NAME CHANGE; FEE AND NOTICE TO CITY:
The licensee shall not change the name of the business establishment until the
licensee has given written notice to the license department ten (10) days prior
to the name change, and has paid a name change fee as specified in the
Comprehensive Fee Schedule. (Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-26: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred to a new property
location or new owner upon new application with review and approval by the City
as provided in this chapter as a new license and upon the payment of the
transfer fee specified in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule, which shall be
refunded if the application is denied. (Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-27: SUBLEASE, TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT PROHIBITED:
   A.   No license may be transferred, assigned or subleased in any manner. Any
violations of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license or
refusal to renew the license.
   B.   A person, having been granted a license hereunder, may not sell,
exchange, barter, give, or attempt in any way to dispose of the license,
whether for monetary gain or not. A license granted hereunder has no monetary
value for the purpose of any type of disposition. (Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-28: FORFEITURE CONDITIONS:
If any licensee under this chapter sells the place of business, together with
the assets of such business, his license shall expire and be forfeited. (Ord.
2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-29: RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages to any person
intoxicated, or under the influence of any intoxicating beverage.
   B.   No license shall be granted to sell alcoholic beverages at locations
which do not meet the required distances from community locations as provided
in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Utah Code Annotated 32B-1-202, as
amended.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic beverages to any person under
the age of twenty one (21), or to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on
the premises or to permit the drinking of alcoholic beverages on such premises.
   D.   It shall be unlawful to sell or otherwise furnish or dispose of
alcoholic beverages, or allow it to be drunk or consumed on the premises or to
allow alcoholic beverages out of original containers to remain on the licensed
premises, whether or not open to the public, after the specified closing or
service hours permitted by the Alcoholic Beverages Control Act.
   E.   Any person having an alcoholic beverage license, or his agents or
employees, shall remove or cause to be removed from the licensed premises all
patrons, customers or individuals not employed on the premises by the time
stated in subsection D of this section.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any person having an alcoholic beverage
license or for his agents or employees to permit any patron, customer or
individual not employed on the premises to remain on such premises after the
closing time provided in subsection D of this section; but no licensed premises
may employ more than two (2) persons on the premises after the closing hour
without the permission of the chief of police.
   G.   Licensed premises shall be kept brightly illuminated at all times while
it is occupied or open for business, and no booth or kind of stall shall be
maintained unless all tables, chairs and occupants are kept open to full view
from the main floor and the entrance of such licensed premises. It shall be
unlawful to advertise the sale of alcoholic beverages except under such
regulations as are made by the alcoholic beverage service commission of the
State, but a simple designation of the fact that alcoholic beverages are sold
under a City license may be placed in or upon the window or front of the
licensed premises.
   H.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages except
in the manner for which he has been so licensed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
   I.   It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain a "nuisance", as defined in
section 3-2-2 of this chapter. (1989 Code § 9-421)
   J.   No person, business entity or corporation shall be issued a license to
sell beer within the City if the person, corporation, partnership, limited
partnership or other business entity, or principal therein, has been convicted
of an offense under any ordinance of the City involving the unlawful sale of
beer, drugs or any alcoholic beverage. As used in this subsection, "principal"
means a limited partner, a partner, an officer or director of the corporation,
or person owning five (5) or more percent of the shares of the corporation. A
person is deemed to be the owner of the shares of a corporation which the
person, his spouse, the person's parents or the person's children own. (1989
Code § 9-421; amd. 2012 Code)
   K.   A minor employed by an off premise beer retailer may not sell beer
except under the supervision of a person twenty one (21) years of age or older
who is on the premises. (Ord. 90-5, 9-4-1990; amd. Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-30: PREMISES SUBJECT TO INSPECTION:
Any licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by any officer, agent or
peace officer of the city, the alcoholic beverage control commission, the state
department of health, or the Davis County department of environmental health,
and every licensee shall, at the request of the city, or the Davis County
department of environmental health, furnish to it a sample of beer which is for
sale. (1989 Code § 9-422; amd. Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-31: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Authorized: The city council may, after hearing, revoke or suspend any
alcoholic beverage license upon a finding by it that the licensee, his
officers, agents or employees have violated any provision of this chapter, or
any ordinance of this City, which in any way relates to the operation of the
business or the safety of the public. (1989 Code § 9-424; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Hearing: A hearing may be requested by any person:
      1.   That is denied or refused an alcoholic beverage license by any
officer, agent or employee of the city;
      2.   Whose license is revoked, restricted, qualified or limited from that
for which it was first issued.
   C.   Request For Hearing; Time Limit To File: The request for hearing must
be made in writing to the city recorder within thirty (30) days following the
date notice denying, refusing, qualifying, restricting or revoking the license
is mailed by the City to the applicant or license holder at his address as it
appears on the application or license.
   D.   Hearing: Following receipt of a request for hearing, the City Recorder
shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the time and place the hearing
is to be held. At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall have the right to hear
and examine any witnesses the City may produce to support its decision and to
present his own evidence in support of his contention. The City Council shall,
within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the hearing, in writing,
inform the person who requested the hearing of the decision of the City
Council.
   E.   Construction: This section is not to be construed so as to afford any
aggrieved party more than one hearing before the City Council, nor shall the
hearing provided in this section apply to any criminal complaint or proceeding.
(1989 Code § 9-424; amd. Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-32: CRIMINAL OFFENSE:
   A.   State Provisions Applicable: Utah Code Annotated sections 32B-4-201
through 32B-4-210, regarding the applicability of the Utah Criminal Code,
special burdens of proof, inferences and presumptions, criminal responsibility
for the conduct of another, and prosecutions shall govern the prosecution by
the City of an offense defined in this chapter or in any proceeding brought to
enforce this chapter.
   B.   Prohibited Acts: It is unlawful to:
      1.   Drink an alcoholic beverage in a public building, park or stadium
unless a single event permit or other special permit is issued pursuant
thereto; or
      2.   Be under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, or any
substance having the property of releasing toxic vapors to a degree that the
person may endanger themselves or another, if such person is in a public place
or in a private place where the person unreasonably disturbs other persons.
   C.   Release From Custody Authorized: A law enforcement officer may release
from custody an individual arrested under this section, if he believes
imprisonment is unnecessary for the protection of the individual or another; or
a law enforcement officer may take a person arrested under this section to a
detoxification center or other special facility designated by the courts of
Utah or by State law, as an alternative to jail incarceration for such
offenses.
   D.   Alcoholic Beverages In Public Places: No person shall open, possess, or
consume from an open bottle, can or other receptacle containing an alcoholic
beverage in an unpermitted public place. (Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-33: CIVIL FINE:
In addition to any civil or criminal remedy available to the City to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, a person who violates any provision of this
chapter is subject to a civil fine as specified in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule. A civil fine is due and payable within twenty (20) days of the date
of citation from the City giving notice of the civil fine. Notice of a civil
fine shall be given by personal service or by posting in the United States
mail, postage paid, certified mail, return receipt requested. Unpaid civil
fines are a debt owed to the City and may be the subject of a civil action
filed in any court having legal jurisdiction. (Ord. 2024- 05, 9-17-2024)
3-2-34: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 9-425; amd. 2012 Code;
Ord. 2024-05, 9-17-2024)
CHAPTER 3
TAXES
ARTICLE A. TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3-3A-1: Transient Room Tax Imposed
3-3A-1: TRANSIENT ROOM TAX IMPOSED:
The city imposes a transient room tax of one percent (1%), pursuant to Utah
Code Annotated section 59-12-352, which is incorporated herein by this
reference, on amounts paid or charged for the accommodations and services as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-103(1)(i) for tourist homes,
hotels, motels or trailer courts that are regularly rented for less than thirty
(30) consecutive days. (2012 Code)
ARTICLE B. SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3B-1: Title
3-3B-2: Adoption Of State Statutes
3-3B-3: Reservation Of Right To Levy Sales And Use Tax
3-3B-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE OF NORTH SALT
LAKE CITY. (Ord. 90-1, 2-6-1990, eff. retroactive to 1-1-1990)
3-3B-2: ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES:
Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of the sales and use tax act, all of the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as amended, insofar as they relate to
sales and use taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as
though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 90-1, 2-6-1990, eff. retroactive to 1-1-
1990; amd. 2012 Code)
3-3B-3: RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO LEVY SALES AND USE TAX:
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-203, the city reserves the right
to levy a use and sales tax under this article and Utah Code Annotated title
11, chapter 13, the interlocal cooperation act. (2012 Code)
ARTICLE C. MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-3C-1: Intent
3-3C-2: Definitions
3-3C-3: Municipal Energy Sales And Use Tax
3-3C-4: Adoption Of State Statutes
3-3C-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city to adopt the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to, and in conformance with, Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-301 et
seq., the municipal energy sales and use tax act. (Ord. 99-4, 5-18-1999, eff.
7-1-1999)
3-3C-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE:
   A.   A fee:
      1.   Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
      2.   That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
   B.   1.   A fee similar to subsection A of this definition; or
      2.   Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
DE MINIMIS AMOUNT: An amount of taxable energy that does not exceed the greater
of:
   A.   Five percent (5%) of the energy supplier's estimated total Utah gross
receipts from sales of property or services; or
   B.   Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
DELIVERED VALUE:
   A.   The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for sale or use
in the city and includes:
      1.   The value of the energy itself; and
      2.   Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service
charges or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable
form to each class of customer in the city.
   B.   "Delivered value" does not include the amount of a tax paid under part
1 or part 2 of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12.
ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except that the state tax
commission may by rule exclude from this definition persons supplying a de
minimis amount of taxable energy.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract or agreement
granting a franchise.
FRANCHISE TAX:
   A.   A franchise tax;
   B.   A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
   C.   Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability company,
joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust,
receiver, syndicate, this state, any country, city, municipality, district, or
other local governmental entity of the state, or any group or combination
acting as a unit.
TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity. (Ord. 99-4, 5-18-1999, eff. 7-1-1999)
3-3C-3: MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this article, a tax on
every sale or use of taxable energy made within the city equaling six percent
(6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax
shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax. (Ord. 99-4, 5-18-
1999, eff. 7-1-1999; amd. 2012 Code)
3-3C-4: ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES:
The city adopts and incorporates the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section
10-1-301 et seq. (2012 Code)
ARTICLE D. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS TAX
SECTION:
3-3D-1: Definitions
3-3D-2: Levy Of Tax
3-3D-3: Rate
3-3D-4: Adoption Of State Statutes
3-3D-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
CITY: North Salt Lake City, Utah.
COMMISSION: The state tax commission.
CUSTOMER:
   A.   The person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications
provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "customer" means:
      1.   The person who is obligated under a contract with a
telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received
under the contract; or
      2.   If the end user is not the person described in subsection B1 of this
definition, the end user of the telecommunications service.
   C.   "Customer" does not include a reseller:
      1.   Of telecommunications service; or
      2.   For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an
agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's
licensed service area.
END USER: The person who uses a telecommunications service. For purposes of
telecommunications service provided to a person who is not an individual, "end
user" means the individual who uses the telecommunications service on behalf of
the person who is provided the telecommunications service.
GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE CITY: Those gross receipts from a transaction
for telecommunications services that is located within the city for purposes of
sales and use taxes under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, the sales
and use tax act and determined in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section
59-12-207.
GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered,
except for amounts collected or paid as:
   A.   A tax, fee or charge:
      1.   Imposed by a governmental entity;
      2.   Separately identified as a tax, fee or charge in the transaction
with the customer for the telecommunications service; and
      3.   Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
   B.   Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a
customer under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, the sales and use tax
act; or
   C.   Interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications
provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when
payment is due.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE:
   A.   For telecommunications service, other than mobile telecommunications
service, means the street address representative of where the customer's use of
the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which shall be:
      1.   The residential street address of the customer; or
      2.   The primary business street address of the customer; or
   B.   For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
SERVICE ADDRESS: Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, means:
   A.   If the location described in this subsection of this definition is
known, the location of the telecommunications equipment:
      1.   To which a call is charged; and
      2.   From which the call originates or terminates;
   B.   If the location described in subsection A of this definition is not
known but the location described in this subsection of this definition is
known, the location of the origination point of the signal of the
telecommunications service first identified by:
      1.   The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
      2.   If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications
provider from its service provider; or
   C.   If the locations described in subsection A or B of this definition are
not known, the location of a customer's place of primary use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER:
   A.   A person that:
      1.   Owns, controls, operates or manages a telecommunications service; or
      2.   Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition
for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications
service.
   B.   A person described in subsection A of this definition is a
telecommunications provider whether or not the public service commission of
Utah regulates:
      1.   That person; or
      2.   The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls,
operates or manages.
   C.   "Telecommunications provider" does not include an "aggregator", as
defined in Utah Code Annotated section 54-8b-2.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE:
    A.   "Telephone service", as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-
102, other than mobile telecommunications service, that originates and
terminates within the boundaries of this state; and
   B.   "Mobile telecommunications service", as defined in Utah Code Annotated
section 59-12-102:
      1.   That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state;
and
      2.   Only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act, 4 USC section 116 et seq.; or
      3.   An "ancillary service", as defined in Utah Code Annotated section
59-12-102. (Ord. 04-3, 5-4-2004; amd. 2012 Code)
3-3D-2: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to the city. (Ord. 04-3, 5-
4-2004)
3-3D-3: RATE:
The rate of the tax levy shall be three and one-half percent (31/2%) of the
telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service
that are attributed to the city, subject to the following:
If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than this city, then
the rate imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications services shall be
determined pursuant to the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-407.
(Ord. 04-3, 5-4-2004; amd. 2012 Code)
3-3D-4: ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES:
The city adopts and incorporates the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section
10-1-401 et seq. (2012 Code)
ARTICLE E. RAP TAX
SECTION:
3-3E-1: Imposed; Purpose
3-3E-2: Transactions Taxed; Use Of Funds
3-3E-3: Effective Date
3-3E-1: IMPOSED; PURPOSE:
The city hereby imposes a 0.1 percent sales and use tax, referred to as the
"RAP tax", pursuant to the city or town option funding for botanical, cultural,
recreational and zoological organizations or facilities, Utah Code Annotated
section 59-12-1401 et seq. (the "act"), for the purpose of financing the
Foxboro North Park and the Bonneville Shoreline Park within the city. The RAP
tax will be levied and administered under the terms of the act. (Ord. 09-14,
11-17-2009)
3-3E-2: TRANSACTIONS TAXED; USE OF FUNDS:
The RAP tax will be imposed upon the transactions described in Utah Code
Annotated section 59-12-103(1) of the act, that are located within the city,
except as such transactions are exempt from sales and use taxes under Utah Code
Annotated section 59-12-104 of the act. The RAP tax shall be used to fund the
Foxboro North Park and the Bonneville Shoreline Park described in the act. The
RAP tax supplements, but does not replace, the sales and use tax established
under article B of this chapter. (Ord. 09-14, 11-17-2009)
3-3E-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The RAP tax will take effect on April 1, 2010, and will remain effective for
eight (8) years after that date. For transactions subject to the RAP tax
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-103(1)(b)-(k), the effective date
shall be the first day of the billing period that begins after April 1, 2010,
if the billing period for the transaction begins before April 1, 2010. For
"catalog sales", as defined by the state tax commission, where the amount of
the tax due is based on tax rates published in the catalog, the effective date
shall be June 1, 2010. (Ord. 09-14, 11-17-2009)
CHAPTER 4
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose
3-4-2: License Required
3-4-3: Application For License
3-4-4: Investigation; Issuance Or Denial
3-4-5: Fee For License
3-4-6: Term Of License
3-4-7: Form Of License
3-4-8: Nontransferable License
3-4-9: Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
3-4-10: Duties Of Solicitors And "No Soliciting" Notices
3-4-11: Time Of Day Restrictions
3-4-12: Exception For Invited Solicitor
3-4-13: Exemptions From Chapter
3-4-14: Revocation Of License
3-4-15: Appeal
3-4-16: Penalty
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
The city has an interest in protecting the privacy of the home. The city also
has an interest in protecting consumers from deceptive or fraudulent practices
and to protect its citizens from criminal activity such as disorderly conduct,
theft, trespass and assault. (Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct the business of a solicitor without
first securing a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The city
may impose an appropriate fee, in an amount determined by resolution of the
city council, to cover the costs of servicing, regulating and policing business
licenses issued to solicitors. The city council may adjust the fee from time to
time to cover these costs as it deems appropriate after enactment of this
chapter. (Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Information Required: Applicants for a solicitor's license shall file
an application stating the following information:
      1.   Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former names
or aliases (verified by identification with a photograph such as a current and
valid driver's license);
      2.   The name of any organization for which applicant will be soliciting;
      3.   The applicant's home address and applicant's headquarters or place
of organization contact;
      4.   The names and addresses of applicant's officers and managers, if
any;
      5.   The purpose for which soliciting will be done;
      6.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or
services to be sold and from whom and where the applicant obtains the goods or
services to be sold;
      7.   The dates for which soliciting is planned;
      8.   A statement as to whether an applicant's permit, license or
certificate of registration in connection with soliciting has ever been revoked
by any jurisdiction and if so, an explanation of the circumstances;
      9.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any of
applicant's employers, have been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or
violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the
punishment or penalty imposed;
      10.   If the applicant is employed by another person, firm or
corporation, documents showing that the person, firm or corporation for which
the applicant proposes to do business is authorized to do business within the
state;
      11.   If the applicant desires to sell fresh vegetables, fruits, meats or
other foodstuffs, a statement by a reputable physician in the state, dated not
more than ten (10) days prior to submission of the application, certifying the
applicant to be free of infectious, contagious or communicable diseases.
   B.   Background Investigation: In addition to the above, the applicant
shall, at his/her own expense, obtain a personal background investigation from
the bureau of criminal identification (BCI) and submit a certified copy of said
report with the application. Further, the applicant shall provide two (2)
photographs of the applicant, taken within six (6) months immediately prior to
the date of filing the application. The photographs shall be one and one-half
inches by one and one-half inches (11/2" x 11/2"), showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishable manner. (Ord. 06-10,
6-13-2006)
3-4-4: INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
   A.   Referral To Chief Of Police: Upon receipt of an application, the
director of licensing shall refer the application to the chief of police, who
shall review the information provided, including the background report.
   B.   Satisfactory Result: If the applicant's background and business
responsibility are found to be satisfactory by the chief of police, the chief
of police shall endorse such upon the application and return it to the director
of licensing.
   C.   Unsatisfactory Result: If the applicant's background and business
responsibility are found to be unsatisfactory by the chief of police, the chief
of police shall endorse such upon the application, together with a statement of
the reasons therefor, and return the application to the director of licensing.
   D.   Reasons For Refusal: The director of licensing shall review the
application and the comments of the chief of police and shall make a decision
as to whether a license will be issued or denied. The director of licensing may
refuse to issue a license to the applicant for any of the following reasons:
      1.   The location and time of solicitation would endanger the safety and
welfare of the solicitors or their customers;
      2.   The applicant falsified information on the application;
      3.   There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as
an agent of the principal;
      4.   The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude, any violation involving trafficking in controlled substances,
or any violation involving violent acts against persons or property, such
conviction being entered within five (5) years preceding the date of the
application;
      5.   The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or
conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within the
five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application;
      6.   The applicant has been denied a permit under this chapter within the
immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction
of the license officer the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist;
      7.   In the case of soliciting involving food sales, the finding of a
reputable physician that the applicant is not free from infectious, contagious
or communicable diseases; or
      8.   Any other reason rendering it manifestly inappropriate to issue a
license.
   E.   Notice Of Denial: If any application for a license is denied, the
director of licensing shall specify the reasons justifying the denial and the
applicant shall be notified that his/her application is not approved and that
no license will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the
address shown on the application form, or at the applicant's last known
address.
   F.   Notice Of Approval: If an application for a license is approved, the
director of licensing shall, upon payment of the appropriate fee, issue the
license to the applicant. Notice of approval shall be mailed to the applicant
at the address shown on the application form, or at the applicant's last known
address. (Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-5: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The license fee shall be in such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee
schedule resolution. (Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006; amd. 2012 Code)
3-4-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under this chapter shall be for a period not to exceed one
hundred twenty (120) days. (Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-7: FORM OF LICENSE:
   A.   Each license issued by the city shall be in the form of a badge, shall
have the picture of the solicitor permanently attached thereto, shall be
numbered, shall list the name of the individual solicitor, the name of any
organization on whose behalf the solicitor is authorized to solicit, the date
on which the license expires and shall be dated and signed by the license
officer or designee.
   B.   Each solicitor shall, at all times while the solicitor is soliciting,
wear prominently on his or her person the license issued by the city. (Ord. 06-
10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-8: NONTRANSFERABLE LICENSE:
Licenses shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and the firm,
corporation or association on whose behalf the applicant is authorized to
solicit. The license is nontransferable from an individual to another
individual, from individual to firm, from firm to firm, and firm to individual.
It is unlawful for a solicitor whose license authorizes soliciting on behalf of
a firm named in the application to solicit on behalf of any other firm,
organization or association, or for any purpose other than that specified on
the application. Any license used by a person other than the person for whom it
was originally issued shall be forfeited, confiscated and immediately canceled.
(Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-9: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
   B.   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to
face solicitation the name of the solicitor, the name and address of the entity
with whom the solicitor is associated and the true purpose of the solicitor's
contact with the consumer.
   C.   No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other
than his or her true and correct name.
   D.   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the city
endorses the solicitation or that the granting of a license implies any
endorsement by the city of the solicitor's product or service or of the
individual solicitor. (Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-10: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS AND "NO SOLICITING" NOTICES:
   A.   Any resident who has displayed a clearly visible placard stating "No
Soliciting" or words to that effect, shall not be disturbed.
   B.   The display of the placard shall be deemed to constitute notice to any
solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to invite
solicitors.
   C.   Every solicitor shall, upon entering premises on which a residence is
located, examine the door and areas near the door for any "No Soliciting"
placard, and if one is posted, desist in any efforts to solicit at the
residence. Possession of a solicitation license does not relieve any solicitor
of this duty.
   D.   It is unlawful for any solicitor to knock on the door of a residence
that bears a "No Soliciting" placard and, with the purpose of circumventing the
intention of this chapter through ruse, deception or concealment of a purpose
to solicit, to take action calculated to secure an audience with the occupant
of a residence that has posted a "No Soliciting" notice. Possession of a
solicitation license does not relieve any solicitor of this duty.
   E.   It is the duty of any solicitor who is asked to leave any residence by
the occupant to immediately and peacefully depart. Failure to depart
immediately can result in prosecution for criminal trespass as set forth in
Utah Code Annotated section 76-6-206. Possession of a solicitation license does
not relieve any solicitor of this duty nor preclude prosecution.
   F.   It is the duty of solicitors to comply with all state law provisions
pertaining to the buyer's right to cancel a home solicitation sale. (Ord. 06-
10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-11: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit any person
at a residence before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M., or after seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. Mountain time, or on holidays, unless the solicitor has express permission
from the resident to do so. (Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-12: EXCEPTION FOR INVITED SOLICITOR:
The prohibition under section
3-4-2 of this chapter shall not apply if the owner or occupant of the residence
or place of employment has previously and specifically invited the solicitor to
the residence or place of employment. Such invitation shall not relieve the
solicitor from complying with all other terms and provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-13: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER:
The terms and provisions of this chapter do not apply to persons engaged in
noncommercial distribution of religious tracts and information, the door to
door canvassing and pamphleteering as vehicles for the dissemination of ideas
or engaged in political activities as a candidate, or on behalf of a candidate,
in a recognized national, state or local election; provided, however, that no
such solicitation is permitted if the occupant of the residence has posted a
"No Soliciting" placard in accordance with the provisions of section
3-4-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-14: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The license officer shall revoke any license issued pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter if the licensee is convicted of a violation of this chapter or
otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a license. Notice of
revocation shall be immediately given to the licensee by personal service or by
certified mail to the address listed on the application and to the organization
for which the licensee was soliciting. Immediately upon the giving of such
notice, the license is null and void and shall remain so unless the revocation
order is rescinded. (Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-15: APPEAL:
An applicant whose application was denied or a licensee whose license was
revoked shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Any appeal must be
demanded in writing, delivered in person or sent by certified mail to the city
recorder with a copy to the director of licensing within ten (10) calendar days
of the decision from which the appeal is taken. The written demand shall
describe in detail the nature of the appeal, the action complained of and the
grounds for appeal. (Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006)
3-4-16: PENALTY:
Any person who engages in soliciting without complying with the requirements of
this chapter or violates any other terms or provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 06-10, 6-13-2006; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 5
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION:
3-5-1: Purpose
3-5-2: Definitions
3-5-3: License Required
3-5-4: Application For License
3-5-5: Fee For License
3-5-6: Inspection And Report
3-5-7: Display Of License
3-5-8: Gambling Devices Prohibited
3-5-9: Maximum Number Of Devices Permitted
3-5-10: Suspension, Revocation Or Refusal Of License
3-5-11: Penalty
3-5-1: PURPOSE:
The city council finds that in order to preserve the peace, health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the city, that the public patronage and use of
amusement devices be licensed and be subject to certain regulations as set
forth in this chapter. (1989 Code § 9-140)
3-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any amusement device, whether mechanically or electronically
operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, for the
purpose of amusement or skill and for the play of which a fee is charged, or
device similar to any such machine or device but which has been manufactured,
altered or modified so that operation is controlled without the insertion of a
coin, token or similar object. The term does not include coin operated
phonographs, ride machines designed primarily for the amusement of children, or
vending machines in which are not incorporated features of chance or skill.
PERSON: Includes individuals, partnerships, joint ventures, societies,
associations, clubs, trustees or corporations or other entities. (1989 Code §
9-141)
3-5-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall display for public patronage or operation any amusement device
within this city without having first obtained a license therefor. (1989 Code §
9-142)
3-5-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for license shall be filed in writing with the city recorder on
forms provided by the city. (1989 Code § 9-143)
3-5-5: FEE FOR LICENSE:
The license fee shall be in such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee
schedule resolution. (1989 Code § 9-144; amd. 2012 Code)
3-5-6: INSPECTION AND REPORT:
The application for such license, together with such information as is required
by the city to be attached thereto, shall be referred to the chief of police
for inspection and report. The chief of police shall, within fifteen (15) days
after receiving such application, make a report to the governing body. (1989
Code § 9-145)
3-5-7: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every licensee under this chapter shall post and maintain such license upon the
licensed premises in a place where it may be seen at all times. (1989 Code § 9-
146)
3-5-8: GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED:
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or
permit any gambling device whatsoever, as provided in Utah Code Annotated
section 76-10-1101. (1989 Code § 9-147; amd. 2012 Code)
3-5-9: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DEVICES PERMITTED:
The maximum number of amusement devices which are allowed in or on any business
premises for public patronage, shall be eight (8), unless otherwise approved by
the planning commission. (1989 Code § 9-148)
3-5-10: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR REFUSAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Causes: The governing body may suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any
license for any of the following causes:
      1.   Fraud or misinterpretation in the procurement of the license.
      2.   Violation or failure to comply with all of the provisions of this
chapter.
      3.   Failure to pay any license fee levied when due.
      4.   Conviction of any city ordinance, or state or federal statute
involving moral turpitude.
      5.   Any conduct or act of the licensee or his employees on the premises
where such business is conducted tending to render such business or such
premises where the same is conducted a public nuisance or menace to the health,
peace or general welfare of the city.
      6.   A violation of city ordinance or federal or state statute relating
to the business or activity licensed and resulting from the conduct of such
business or activity.
      7.   For good cause shown. (1989 Code § 9-149)
   B.   Hearing:
      1.   Required: Before the governing body shall suspend, revoke or refuse
the renewal of any license, they shall first afford the licensee an opportunity
in a hearing to show cause why such license should not be suspended or revoked,
or why such license should not be renewed.
      2.   Notice: The licensee shall be given notice of such hearing, which
notice shall indicate the time, place and date of such hearing; location of
such hearing; a statement of the purpose of such hearing; and a reasonably
definite statement setting forth the causes, grounds or basis of any complaint.
Such notice shall either be personally served on or mailed to the address of
the licensee indicated in his last application filed, at least ten (10) days
before the date set for the hearing. (1989 Code § 9-149; amd. 2012 Code)
      3.   Hearing Procedure: At the hearing, the licensee or applicant shall
have the right to appear personally and/or by counsel; to cross examine
witnesses appearing; and to produce evidence and witnesses in his behalf.
      4.   Notice Of Action Taken: After such hearing, on due deliberation, the
governing body shall notify the licensee of their findings and determination.
(1989 Code § 9-149)
3-5-11: PENALTY:
Any person that violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 9-150; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 6
SWAP MEETS AND FLEA MARKETS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: License Requirements
3-6-3: Sales Subject To Law
3-6-4: Ordinances Posted
3-6-5: Records Required
3-6-6: Lists Of Lost Or Stolen Property
3-6-7: Stolen Goods
3-6-8: Pawnbrokers And Secondhand Dealers
3-6-9: Liability Of Principal
3-6-10: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-6-11: Penalty
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
FLEA MARKET: Shall be considered a "swap meet", as defined in this section.
SWAP MEET: A place where temporary sellers meet and use to barter or exchange
goods.
SWAP MEET LICENSEE: Any person that rents, lends or leases premises to
temporary sellers for use as a market place to barter and exchange goods. (1989
Code § 9-181; amd. 2012 Code)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation or charity to hold a swap meet or flea market without having first
obtained a license therefor as provided in this chapter. The license fee for a
charity may be waived by the mayor upon application.
   B.   Application; Investigation:
      1.   An application for a swap meet license shall be made to the city
recorder and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the place of
business, and the number of employees intended to be engaged. The chief of
police or any other officer designated by the city council shall investigate
each applicant for such license and shall report back to the city council
whether or not such applicant is a person who has been convicted of the offense
of receiving stolen goods or of burglary, larceny or robbery, and the license
of any swap meet licensee presently in business so convicted shall be revoked.
      2.   All sellers shall apply for a license to sell on the premises of the
swap meet licensee. Along with the fee in such amount as specified in the
comprehensive fee schedule resolution, each seller must furnish to the swap
meet licensee a signed statement containing the required information outlined
in section
3-6-5 of this chapter, along with the certification:
I certify that I am the lawful and legal owner of the listed property which is
free and clear from all liens and encumbrances. I further certify that the
property descriptions are true and correct and I am aware that a copy of this
application shall be forwarded to the chief of police within twenty four (24)
hours after it is submitted to the licensee or owner or manager of the premises
where the sale is held.
      3.   Upon receiving the required fee and certified application form, the
swap meet licensee shall furnish to the seller a daily, monthly or semiannual
business license permit, which will allow the seller to sell on the day, month
or six (6) month period requested, subject to revocation by the chief of police
for the violation of any provisions of this chapter. All sellers having their
license revoked by the chief of police may petition the city council within ten
(10) days of the revocation for review of the action by the chief of police.
The city council, upon reviewing the action of the chief of police, may rescind
the revocation or make the revocation permanent by prohibiting the seller from
selling at a swap meet for a period of up to one year.
   C.   Report To Chief Of Police: It shall be unlawful for any swap meet
licensee to fail to deliver on the day of application to the chief of police, a
legible and accurate copy of the records required under subsection B2 of this
section, along with the seller's daily business license permit fee.
   D.   Right To Issue Daily, Weekly Or Semiannual Business Licenses: A swap
meet licensee shall have the right to issue daily, weekly and semiannual
business licenses to resident sellers upon receiving the required fees and the
signed, certified license applications listing the goods to be sold or
exchanged.
   E.   Time Of Sale: Resident sellers must apply for a daily business license
seven (7) days in advance of the day they will use a swap meet licensee's
premises. Nonresident sellers must apply to the chief of police for the
screening of all goods to be sold on a swap meet licensee's premises, and the
issuance of a nonresident sellers license prior to the date of the sale.
However, if the swap meet licensee employs at its own expense a city police
officer to enforce and administer the licensing provision of this chapter, then
resident sellers may utilize the swap meet licensee's premises on the same day
application is made for daily business permits. For purposes of this chapter, a
resident is deemed to be a person or entity who has a valid state driver's
license, a state university or college ID containing a resident seller's
picture, or a state business license. (Ord. 91-3, 3-5-1991)
3-6-3: SALES SUBJECT TO LAW:
All sales shall be in accordance with law. No sales of firearms, pyrotechnics,
ammunition, explosives, alcoholic beverages or medicines shall be made by daily
sellers on the swap meet licensee's premises. "Firearms" mean pistols,
revolvers, sawed off shotguns or sawed off rifles, and/or any device which
could be used as a weapon from which is expelled a projectile by any force. No
seller under the age of eighteen (18) shall be entitled to sell or dispose of
goods at the swap meet without the written notarized permission of his parents
or legal guardian. (1989 Code § 9-183)
3-6-4: ORDINANCES POSTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a swap meet unless he shall keep
conspicuously posted in his place of business copies of this chapter and Utah
Code Annotated section 76-6-407, dealing with lost property converted by a
finder. (1989 Code § 9-184)
3-6-5: RECORDS REQUIRED:
Every swap meet licensee doing business in the city shall keep a record in
triplicate of all sellers using the premises. One copy shall be delivered to
the chief of police and one copy shall be delivered to the seller. The licensee
shall retain the remaining copy. The record shall contain:
   A.   A description of the seller, including:
      1.   Name, including middle initial;
      2.   Address;
      3.   Sex;
      4.   Nationality;
      5.   Height;
      6.   Weight;
      7.   Color of hair;
      8.   Color of eyes;
      9.   Driver's license number and state of issue;
      10.   Occupation;
      11.   Date of birth.
   B.   A description of the seller's vehicle, including:
      1.   Make;
      2.   Model;
      3.   Year;
      4.   Color;
      5.   License number and state;
      6.   Registered owner, if different than person offering articles for
sale or exchange.
   C.   A description of articles offered for sale, including:
      1.   Name of article;
      2.   Size;
      3.   Color;
      4.   Serial number or ID mark.
   D.   The number of seller's sales tax permit, if any.
   E.   The number of the seller's daily business license permit.
   F.   The date a seller applied to sell. (1989 Code § 9-185)
3-6-6: LISTS OF LOST OR STOLEN PROPERTY:
The chief of police shall circulate a list of reported lost or stolen property
to all swap meet licensees. (1989 Code § 9-186)
3-6-7: STOLEN GOODS:
It shall be the duty of every swap meet licensee to report to the chief of
police any article he has reason to believe was stolen or lost and found by the
person attempting to sell it. (1989 Code § 9-187)
3-6-8: PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 1 :
No swap meet licensee shall conduct the business of pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer without having obtained the permission of the city council in addition
to his license. (1989 Code § 9-189)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 7 of this title.
3-6-9: LIABILITY OF PRINCIPAL:
The holder of a swap meet license is liable for any and all acts of his
employees and for any violation by them of the provisions of this chapter.
(1989 Code § 9-191)
3-6-10: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any swap meet licensee
violating the provisions of this chapter may have his license revoked or
suspended. (1989 Code § 9-188)
3-6-11: PENALTY:
   A.   In addition to other penalties provided by law, any person violating
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 9-190; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   No seller shall be deemed to have substantially complied with these
provisions if:
      1.   He fails to list all property proposed to be sold or exchanged; or
      2.   He fails to list the correct serial number or identifying marks of
said property; and
      3.   He gives false information as to his identity or the property's
identity even though such information is not specifically required by this
chapter. (1989 Code § 9-190)
CHAPTER 7
SECONDHAND, JUNK AND ANTIQUE DEALERS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Exemptions To Chapter
3-7-3: Application For License By Individuals; Fee For License
3-7-4: Prior Convictions
3-7-5: Bond Required
3-7-6: Records Maintained
3-7-7: Legibility And Inspection Of Records And Premises
3-7-8: Property Kept Thirty Days Before Disposition
3-7-9: Hours Of Business
3-7-10: Solid Visual Barriers
3-7-11: Partition Separating Businesses
3-7-12: Sale Restrictions For Secondhand Dealers
3-7-13: Stolen Goods Reporting
3-7-14: Junk Dealer Vehicle Identification
3-7-15: Junkyard Premises
3-7-16: Business Location; Supplemental License
3-7-17: Prohibited Acts And Activities
3-7-18: Liability Of Principal
3-7-19: Ordinances Posted
3-7-20: Computer Reporting Of Information
3-7-21: Reporting Changed Information
3-7-22: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-7-23: Penalty
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
ANTIQUE DEALER: Any person engaged in the business of selling old or archaic
items which are indicative of an older culture.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS: Any organization, group or church which receives
personal property or secondhand goods from persons, groups or businesses, but
does not pay money or any other thing of value in return for received personal
property or secondhand goods, except a donation receipt for income tax
reporting purposes. Charitable organizations are not be licensed or regulated
by this chapter.
COIN DEALER: Any person who engages in the business of buying or selling coins
having numismatic value. Coin dealers, when purchasing coins having numismatic
value from members of a recognized numismatic society or customers registered
with the dealer, need not comply with the provisions of section
3-7-5 or
3-7-8 of this chapter.
DEALER: All businesses or persons licensed under this chapter.
JUNK COLLECTOR: Any person not having a fixed place of business in the city who
goes from house to house or place to place gathering, collecting, buying,
selling or otherwise dealing in old rags, papers, metals or other articles
commonly known as "junk". They shall not be subject to the provisions of
section
3-7-6 or
3-7-8 of this chapter.
JUNK DEALER: Any person who engages in buying or selling old metals (other than
precious metals), glass, rags, rubber, paper or other junk from a fixed place
of business. They shall not be subject to the provisions of section
3-7-6 or
3-7-8 of this chapter.
PAWNBROKER: Any person who loans money on deposit of personal property or deals
in the purchase, exchange or possession of personal property on condition of
selling the same back again to the pledgor or depositor, or who loans or
advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon
and takes or receives such personal property into his possession, and who sells
the unredeemed pledges, together with such new merchandise as will facilitate
the sale of same. This definition shall also include "secondhand dealers",
"secondhand precious metal dealer/processor and/or precious gem dealers",
"antique dealers", "coin dealers", and "processors", as defined in this
section.
PAWNSHOP: Any location where a person loans money on deposit of personal
property or deals in the person's exchange or possession of personal property
on condition of selling the same back again to the pledgor or depositor, or who
loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage
security thereon and takes a receipt of such personal property into his
possession and who sells the unredeemed pledges, together with such new
merchandise, as will facilitate the sale of same.
PROCESSOR: Any person who engages in refining or otherwise altering the form of
precious metal not found in a natural state, i.e., raw ore.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person who keeps a store, office or place of business
for the purchase, barter or exchange or sale of any secondhand merchandise of
value, or who engages in the business of dealing in secondhand goods. For the
purpose of this chapter, a "secondhand dealer" shall not be meant to include
any person who deals in the purchase, barter, exchange or sale of used motor
vehicles and trailers, but shall include any person who buys or sells five (5)
or more firearms per year.
SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METAL DEALER/PROCESSOR AND/OR PRECIOUS GEM DEALER: Any
person who engages in buying, selling or processing gold, silver (excluding
coins), platinum, other precious metals, secondhand articles containing any of
such metals, secondhand precious gems or any articles containing any precious
gems.
SECONDHAND STORE: Any location a person keeps as a store, office or place of
business for the purchase, barter or exchange or sale of any secondhand
merchandise of value, or who is engaged in the business of dealing in
secondhand goods. "Secondhand store" shall not be meant to include any person
who deals in the purchase, barter, exchange or sale of used motor vehicles and
trailers, but shall include any person who buys or sells five (5) or more
firearms per year. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-2: EXEMPTIONS TO CHAPTER:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter are inapplicable to:
      1.   Any merchant or dealer whose principal business is the selling of
new merchandise and secondhand merchandise is taken in as a trade incident to
the sale of new merchandise; or
      2.   Any dealer who receives secondhand merchandise in trade for other
secondhand merchandise of a higher value.
   B.   Any dealer licensed by this chapter when dealing with other licensed
dealers, other licensed or registered businesses or persons, or when the dealer
travels to the seller's residence to bid on and subsequently purchase goods
other than gold, silver or precious metals, need not comply with the provisions
of section
3-7-6 or
3-7-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE BY INDIVIDUALS; FEE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Corporation Or Limited Partnership: If an application for a license is
made on behalf of a corporation or limited partnership, the license shall be
applied for by and issued to the president of the corporation or members of the
limited partnership who are authorized to act for it.
   B.   Partnership: If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the
license shall be applied for by and issued to all of the partners who are
authorized to act for the partnership.
   C.   Requirements Applicable To Individuals: Any individual who applies for
a dealer's license under this section assumes, as an individual, all
responsibilities of the dealer and, as an individual, is subject to all
conditions, restrictions and requirements imposed on dealers.
   D.   Fee For License: License fees shall be in such amounts as specified in
the comprehensive fee schedule resolution. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998; amd. 2012
Code)
3-7-4: PRIOR CONVICTIONS:
Any applicant applying for a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or secondhand
precious metal/gem dealer license shall not be issued a license if the
applicant has been convicted of theft or receiving stolen property, or has
completed serving a sentence for any conviction of theft or receiving stolen
property, whichever is most recent, within the last five (5) years. (Ord. 98-2,
2-3-1998)
3-7-5: BOND REQUIRED:
Any person licensed under this chapter, except junk collectors, shall be
required as a condition prerequisite to their obtaining a license or renewing a
license provided for under this chapter, to deliver a surety bond of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in a form and with sufficient sureties as is
determined by the city attorney for the faithful compliance with the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-6: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
   A.   Format; Information Required: It shall be unlawful for any person
licensed by this chapter to fail to use a standardized pawn card format
specified by the police department, using computer software approved by the
police department, which the licensee shall use to enter at the time of
purchase, in the English language:
      1.   The name, date of birth, address and physical description of the
person selling the secondhand property;
      2.   The driver's license number or any other positive form of
identification containing a numerical identifier and a photograph of the person
selling the secondhand property;
      3.   The date and time of the transaction;
      4.   The identification of the person making the record entry;
      5.   A description of the item purchased or obtained by the dealer,
including, but not limited to, a description of the metallic composition, any
jewels, stones or glass, and a listing of all numbers, marks, monograms,
trademarks, manufacturer's names, serial numbers, and any other marks of
identification appearing on the item;
      6.   The weight of the items, where payment is based on weight; and
      7.   The consideration paid for the item, or if pawned, the amount of
money loaned or advanced.
   B.   Additional Requirements For Specific Businesses: In addition to the
requirements of subsection A of this section, a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer,
antique dealer, coin dealer and a secondhand precious metal/gem dealer shall
also obtain and keep the following:
      1.   A written certificate, on forms prescribed by the police department,
that the person delivering the property has the legal right to sell such
property and produces at least one positive form of identification containing a
numerical identifier and photograph;
      2.   The secondhand dealer, pawnbroker, precious metal/gem dealer or
persons receiving said property shall also require the seller or person
delivering the property, whether known or not, to give a legible print,
preferably the right thumb, at the bottom of the certificate next to his
signature;
      3.   Signature of the purchasing agent who received the property from the
person whose name is on the card as the pawner or seller.
   C.   Copies To Police Department: It shall be unlawful for any person
licensed by this chapter to fail to submit the certificates required to be
maintained by subsection B of this section to the police department on the
business day following the entry, except that the records regarding merchandise
purchased from other dealers need not be so submitted, but shall be retained by
the dealer at his place of business for inspection by any police officer. (Ord.
98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-7: LEGIBILITY AND INSPECTION OF RECORDS AND PREMISES:
   A.   All entries shall be made with ink in a legible manner and all records
of all "dealers", as defined in section
3-7-1 of this chapter, shall be open to inspection by any police officer at any
time. Police officers shall also be permitted to have access to the premises
licensed under this chapter for the purpose of inspection of said premises
during normal business hours.
   B.   If requested to do so by a police officer, all goods, articles or
things pawned, pledged, sold or delivered to said dealer must be retained and
held until released by the police department or delivered to the police officer
to be placed in evidence if requested. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-8: PROPERTY KEPT THIRTY DAYS BEFORE DISPOSITION:
   A.   Requirements: It shall be unlawful for any dealer licensed by this
chapter to sell, melt, change (except for customary testing), take apart,
destroy, obliterate identification marks, or dispose of any secondhand property
purchased or obtained by a dealer until thirty (30) days have elapsed from the
date of compliance with the reporting requirements of sections
3-7-6 and
3-7-7 of this chapter, or for such additional time as to any specific item or
items as may be directed by the police department, or its designee. All items
being so stored shall be segregated from other items and shall be identified by
a tag attached to the property, numbered in a manner to correspond with the
number of the transaction description in the business records required to be
kept by this chapter. Items purchased in bulk may be tagged in bulk. Items may
be stored at other locations in the city approved by the police department. The
dealer shall produce these items at the business location within one hour of a
request to do so by a police officer. Where compliance is impossible because of
the close of business hours, the item shall be produced within one hour of the
opening of business on the next business day.
   B.   Exception: The requirements of subsection A of this section shall not
be applicable to any unidentifiable secondhand precious metals which have been
inspected and received written clearance for earlier disposition by the police
department, or its designee.
   C.   Modification: The police department may, by written directive, modify
the recordkeeping or reporting requirements of this section. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-
1998)
3-7-9: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
It shall be unlawful for any "dealer", as defined in section
3-7-1 of this chapter, to keep his place of business open for trade before the
hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday
through Saturday of any week, unless prior written permission is received from
the chief of police. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-10: SOLID VISUAL BARRIERS:
Any "dealer", as defined in section
3-7-1 of this chapter, who is the owner of, occupant of or has control of any
lot, yard or any other premises within the city limits and who keeps, collects,
permits, maintains or stores in the open thereon, any metal, glass, bottles,
rags, cans, sacks, rubber, paper or other articles commonly known as "junk", or
any articles known as "secondhand goods", "wares" or "merchandise", shall
comply with all applicable board of health rules and regulations, and the city
zoning ordinances mandating solid visual barriers enclosing said lot, yard or
premises. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-11: PARTITION SEPARATING BUSINESSES:
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to keep or maintain his pawnbroker
business in the same room or rooms with any other business whatsoever unless
prior approval of the police department has been first obtained. The partition
walls separating said pawnbroker's business from other places of business must
be of solid material, and all connecting doors or other openings must be
securely closed and locked at all times. Gratings, lattice or similar open work
or contrivance will not be a sufficient partition under the provisions of this
chapter. Patrons must enter and take their exit from all pawnbroker places of
business through outside doors or entrances. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-12: SALE RESTRICTIONS FOR SECONDHAND DEALERS:
A person licensed under this chapter as a secondhand dealer shall not purchase,
barter, exchange or sell any secondhand merchandise other than that of the same
type and character which comprise his principal business. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-13: STOLEN GOODS REPORTING:
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker or dealer to report to the police
department any article pledged with him or sold, or which is sought to be
pledged with him, or sold, if he shall have reason to believe that the article
was stolen or lost, or found by the person attempting to pledge it or sell it
in the case of a lost article. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-14: JUNK DEALER VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION:
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business, shall bear
thereon, in legible characters, the name and address of the owner and
proprietor thereof. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-15: JUNKYARD PREMISES 1 :
Any premises, area or piece or parcel of land licensed and used as a junkyard
shall have not more than two (2) entrances and two (2) exits, each of which
shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in width at the perimeter of the premises.
Such premises, areas, pieces or parcels of land shall be enclosed with either a
solid nontransparent wall or fence or link-weave steel wire, or combination
thereof, with a minimum height of seven feet (7') from the ground level,
excepting for entrances and exits. The fence or wall shall not contain any
poster or advertising of any kind, except one sign of the licensee not
exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in size. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See also definition of "junkyard" in section
  10-1-47 of this Code.
3-7-16: BUSINESS LOCATION; SUPPLEMENTAL LICENSE:
   A.   A dealer may conduct the licensed business only from the fixed
permanent location as specified in the application for the license, which shall
be other than a motel or hotel room generally used by transients.
   B.   A dealer may not remove or relocate the location specified in the
license for the business or open any additional locations unless the person has
applied for and obtained a supplemental license from the City. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-
1998)
3-7-17: PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Receiving Items From Certain Persons: It is unlawful for any person
licensed pursuant to this chapter, or any employee of any person licensed
pursuant to this chapter, to receive any items from a person who is under
eighteen (18) years of age, or who is either intoxicated or obviously mentally
deficient.
   B.   Employment Of Persons Under Eighteen: It is unlawful for any pawnbroker
to employ any clerk or person under the age of eighteen (18) years to receive
any pledge or make any loan.
   C.   Receiving Goods From Minors; Exception: No person licensed as set forth
in this chapter shall take or receive any bond or pledge for money loaned, any
property, bonds, notes or securities, articles or other valuable things, or
purchase any such property from any minor, or the ownership of which is in or
is claimed by any minor, or which may be in the possession of, or under the
control of, any minor, without the written consent or authority of the parent
or guardian of said minor. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-18: LIABILITY OF PRINCIPAL:
The holder of a pawnbroker or dealer's license is liable for any and all acts
of his employees, and for any violation by them of any of the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-19: ORDINANCES POSTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or transact any business
licensed under this chapter unless he shall keep conspicuously posted in his
place of business a copy of this chapter. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-20: COMPUTER REPORTING OF INFORMATION:
The Police Department is authorized to transfer the information received
pursuant to this chapter into a computer information system and to report the
information in such form as the Police Department may determine is useful for
law enforcement purposes. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-21: REPORTING CHANGED INFORMATION:
If, during any license year, there is a change in the information that a person
gave in obtaining or renewing a license under this chapter, the person shall
report the change to the City Recorder within thirty (30) days after the change
occurs and certify that the information given is true and correct under the
penalties of perjury. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-22: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In addition to the grounds provided in this chapter, a license may be denied,
suspended or revoked if: (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998; amd. 2012 Code)
   A.   A similar license issued to the dealer has been suspended, revoked or
refused in another jurisdiction for a reason which would justify such action
under this section.
   B.   Any officer, manager, agent or employee of the individual or dealer has
violated or is attempting to violate any provisions of this chapter, unless the
person or dealer:
      1.   Had no knowledge of the wrongful conduct and in the exercise of
reasonable diligence could not have known of the conduct; and
      2.   Was unable to prevent the violation or attempted violation with the
exercise of reasonable diligence.
   C.   The person or dealer has been convicted of theft or receiving stolen
property on one or more occasions, or has completed serving a sentence for any
conviction of theft or receiving stolen property, whichever is most recent
within the last five (5) years. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998)
3-7-23: PENALTY:
Any person that violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 98-2, 2-3-1998; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 8
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Title
3-8-2: Purpose
3-8-3: General Applicability
3-8-4: Obscenity
3-8-5: Definitions
3-8-6: Zoning
3-8-7: Business License Required; Number Of Licenses
3-8-8: Legitimate Artistic Modeling
3-8-9: Business Categories
3-8-10: Employee License Required
3-8-11: State Licensing Exemptions
3-8-12: Application For License
3-8-13: Change In Information
3-8-14: Transfer Of Ownership Of Business License Prohibited
3-8-15: Fee For License
3-8-16: Bond Required
3-8-17: Term Of Licenses
3-8-18: Single Location And Name
3-8-19: Display Of License
3-8-20: Issuance Of License
3-8-21: Expiration Of License
3-8-22: General Regulations
3-8-23: Outcall Services; Duties To Patrons
3-8-24: Adult Business Interior Design
3-8-25: Nude Entertainment, Sexual Encounter Center Business Interior Design
Area
3-8-26: Nude Entertainment And Sexual Encounter Center Or Business; Additional
Location Requirements
3-8-27: Defense To Prosecution
3-8-28: Seminude Entertainment Bars; Establishment Selling Alcohol
3-8-29: Seminude Entertainment In Licensed Business
3-8-30: Nude And Seminude Entertainment Agencies
3-8-31: Activities Of Entertainers
3-8-32: Activities Of Patrons
3-8-33: Costume Requirements
3-8-34: Stage Requirements
3-8-35: Entertainer Regulations
3-8-36: Seminude Entertainment Prohibited
3-8-37: License Statement In Advertisements
3-8-38: Applicability Of Regulations To Existing Businesses
3-8-39: Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses
3-8-40: Effects Of Revocation
3-8-41: Appeal Procedures
3-8-42: Civil Fines And Criminal Violations
3-8-43: Injunctions
3-8-44: Criminal Penalty
3-8-1: TITLE:
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as
the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 96-1, 3-
5-1996)
3-8-2: PURPOSE:
It is the objective of this chapter that the city establish reasonable and
uniform regulations governing the operation of sexually oriented businesses and
their employees in the city. This chapter shall be construed to protect the
governmental interests recognized by this chapter in a manner consistent with
the constitutional protection provided by the United States and Utah
constitutions. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-3: GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
This chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain
business activities which are characterized as sexually oriented businesses,
and certain employees of those businesses characterized as sexually oriented
business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions require,
this chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related ordinances. (Ord.
96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-4: OBSCENITY:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of any matter which
is contrary to the provisions of this code, or other applicable federal or
state statutes prohibiting obscenity. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-5: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment:
   A.   Which excludes minors from more than fifteen percent (15%) of the
retail floor or shelf space of the premises; or
   B.   Which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental, for
any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed matter; or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations,
the central theme of which depicts or describes "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas"; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which
are designated for use in connection with "specified sexual activities", except
for legitimate medically recognized contraceptives.
ADULT BUSINESS: An adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore or adult video
store.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment which:
   A.   Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions
(repeated showings of any single presentation shall not be considered a
consecutive exhibition); or
   B.   Shows for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are primarily
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which:
   A.   Holds itself out as such a business; or
   B.   Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions; or
   C.   Features persons who appear in live performances in a state of nudity
or which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or
by "specified sexual activities".
BUSINESS LICENSE AUTHORITY: The city business license supervisor or designee.
EMPLOY: Hiring an individual to work for pecuniary or any other form of
compensation, whether such person is hired on the payroll of the employer as an
independent contractor, as an agent, or in any other form of employment
relationship.
ESCORT: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, dates, socializes, visits,
consorts with, or accompanies or offers to date, consort, socialize, visit or
accompany another or others to or about social affairs, entertainment or places
of amusement, or within any place of public or private resort, or any business
or commercial establishment or any private quarters. "Escort" shall not be
construed to include persons who provide business or personal services, such as
licensed private nurses, aides for the elderly or handicapped, social
secretaries or similar service personnel whose relationship with their patron
is characterized by a bona fide contractual relationship having a duration of
more than twelve (12) hours, and who provide a service not principally
characterized as dating or socializing. "Escort" shall also not be construed to
include persons providing services such as singing telegrams, birthday
greetings or similar activities characterized by appearances in a public place,
contracted by a party other than the person for whom the service is being
performed, and of a duration not longer than one hour.
ESCORT SERVICE: An individual or entity who, for pecuniary compensation,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or provides or offers to introduce
patrons to escorts.
ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER: Any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary
compensation, acts in the capacity of an agent or broker for an escort service,
escort or patron by contacting or meeting with escort services, escorts or
patrons at any location within the city, whether or not such third person is
employed by such escort service, escort, patron or by another business, or is
an independent contractor or self-employed.
NUDE AND SEMINUDE DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation,
partnership, or any other entity or individual, which furnishes, books or
engages or offers to furnish, book or otherwise engage the service of a
professional dancer licensed pursuant to this chapter for performance or
appearance at a business licensed for nude entertainment, seminude dancing bars
or adult theaters.
NUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including an adult theater, where
employees perform or appear in the presence of patrons of the business in a
state of nudity or seminudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a nude
entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: A state of dress in which the nipple and areola of
the female breast, or male or female genitals, pubic region or anus are covered
by less than the covering required in the definition of "seminude".
OUTCALL SERVICES: Services of a type performed by a sexually oriented business
employee outside of the premises of the licensed sexually oriented business,
including, but not limited to, escorts, models, dancers and other similar
employees.
PATRON: Any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or escort,
or the customer of any business licensed pursuant to this chapter.
PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire,
profit, reward, or any other form of consideration.
PERSON: Any person, unincorporated association, corporation, partnership or
other legal entity.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the
nipple and areola of the female breast; and the male or female genitals, pubic
region and anus shall be fully covered by an opaque covering no narrower than
four inches (4") wide in the front and five inches (5") wide in the back, which
shall not taper to less than one inch (1") wide at the narrowest point.
SEMINUDE DANCING BARS: Any business licensed as a class C private club or class
C tavern, which permits dancing, modeling or other performance or appearance,
however characterized, in a state of seminudity.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER OR BUSINESS: A business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
   A.   Activities between male and female persons, between persons of the same
sex, or both, when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminude; or
   B.   Which allows its customers and employees to touch themselves or each
other in "specified anatomical areas", as defined in this section.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: "Nude entertainment businesses", "sexually oriented
outcall services", "adult businesses", "seminude dancing agencies" or "sexual
encounter center or business", as defined in this section.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEES: Those employees who work on the premises
of a sexually oriented business in activities related to the sexually oriented
portion of the business. This includes all managing employees, dancers,
escorts, models and other similar employees, whether or not hired as employees,
agents or as independent contractors. Employees shall not include individuals
whose work is unrelated to the sexually oriented portion of the business, such
as janitors, bookkeepers and similar employees. Sexually oriented business
employees shall not include cooks, serving persons, bartenders and similar
employees, except where they may be managers or supervisors of the business.
All persons making outcall meetings under this chapter, including escorts,
models, guards, escort runners, drivers, chauffeurs and other similar
employees, shall be considered sexually oriented business employees.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human male or female pubic area, anus with less
than a full opaque covering, or the human female breast with less than full
opaque covering.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Acts of, or simulating:
      1.   Masturbation;
      2.   Sexual intercourse;
      3.   Sexual copulation between a person and a beast;
      4.   Fellatio;
      5.   Cunnilingus;
      6.   Bestiality;
      7.   Pederasty;
      8.   Buggery; or
      9.   Any anal copulation between a human male and another human male,
human female or beast.
   B.   Manipulating, caressing or fondling by any person of:
      1.   The genitals of a human;
      2.   The pubic area of a human;
      3.   The female breast.
   C.   Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a
mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed.
TOUCH OR TOUCHING: To be or become so close to someone that there is no
intervening space. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-6: ZONING 1 :
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business at any
location within the city not zoned for such business. Sexually oriented
businesses licensed as adult businesses, nude entertainment businesses,
seminude dancing bars or sexual encounter centers or businesses, pursuant to
this chapter, shall only be allowed in areas zoned for their use. Businesses
regulated by this chapter shall not be located closer than six hundred feet
(600') to each other and not closer than six hundred feet (600') to residences,
churches or schools. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  10-11-3 of this code.
3-8-7: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED; NUMBER OF LICENSES:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business, as
specified below, without first obtaining a sexually oriented business license.
The business license shall specify the type of business for which it is
obtained.
   A.   Sexually oriented business licenses will be limited to one for each
twenty five thousand (25,000) residents of the city.
   B.   Any available license will be issued on a first come, first served
basis. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
3-8-8: LEGITIMATE ARTISTIC MODELING:
The city does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit legitimate
modeling which may occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected by the
first amendment or similar state protections. The city does intend to prohibit
prostitution and related offenses occurring under the guise of nude modeling.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section
3-8-23 of this chapter, a licensed outcall employee may appear in a state of
nudity before a customer or patron, providing that a written contract for such
appearance was entered into between the customer or patron and the employee and
signed at least twenty four (24) hours before the nude appearance. All of the
other applicable provisions of this chapter still apply to such nude
appearance. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-9: BUSINESS CATEGORIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be licensed for
more than one category of sexually oriented business, except that a business
may have a license for both outcall services and nude entertainment or nude and
seminude dancing agency on the same premises.
   B.   The categories of sexually oriented businesses are:
      1.   Outcall services;
      2.   Adult businesses;
      3.   Nude entertainment businesses;
      4.   Seminude dancing bars;
      5.   Nude and seminude dancing agency;
      6.   Escort services;
      7.   Sexual encounter center or business. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-10: EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to employ or for any
individual to be employed by a sexually oriented business in the capacity of a
sexually oriented business employee, unless that employee first obtains a
sexually oriented business employee license. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-11: STATE LICENSING EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sex therapist or similar
individual licensed by the state to provide bona fide sexual therapy or
counseling, a licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse, psychiatrist or
psychologist, nor shall it apply to any educator licensed by the state for
activities in the classroom. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-12: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually oriented business or
as a sexually oriented business employee pursuant to this chapter, the
applicant shall submit, on a form to be supplied by the city license authority,
the following:
   A.   The correct legal name of each applicant, corporation, partnership,
limited partnership or entity doing business under an assumed name;
   B.   If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or limited partnership,
or individual or entity doing business under an assumed name, the information
required below for individual applicants shall be submitted for each partner
and each principal of an applicant, and for each officer, director and any
shareholder (corporate or personal) of more than ten percent (10%) of the stock
of any applicant. Any holding company, or any entity holding more than ten
percent (10%) of an applicant, shall be considered an applicant for purposes of
disclosure under this chapter;
   C.   All corporations, partnerships or noncorporate entities included on the
application shall also identify each individual authorized by the corporation,
partnership or noncorporate entity to sign the checks for such corporation,
partnership or noncorporate entity;
   D.   For all applicants or individuals, the application must also state:
      1.   Any other names or aliases used by the individual;
      2.   The age, date and place of birth;
      3.   Height;
      4.   Weight;
      5.   Color of hair;
      6.   Color of eyes;
      7.   Present business address and telephone number;
      8.   Present residence and telephone number;
      9.   Utah driver's license or identification number;
      10.   Social security number;
   E.   Acceptable written proof that any individual is at least eighteen (18)
years of age, or in the case of employees to be employed in businesses where a
different age is required, proof of the required age;
   F.   Attached to the form, as provided above, four (4) color photographs of
the applicant clearly showing the individual's face and the individual's
fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. For persons not
residing in the city, the photographs and fingerprints may be on a form from
the law enforcement jurisdiction where the person resides;
   G.   For any individual applicant required to obtain a sexually oriented
business employee license as an escort or as a nude entertainer, a certificate
from the Davis County health department, stating that the individual has,
within thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of the application, been
examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable diseases;
   H.   A statement of the business, occupation or employment history of the
applicant for three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of
the application;
   I.   A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant
for the five (5) year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of
the application, including whether such applicant previously operated or was
seeking to operate a sexually oriented business, in this or any other county,
city, state or territory, or has ever had a license, permit or authorization to
do business denied, revoked or suspended, or has had any professional or
vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any
such denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing
or denying jurisdiction, and state in full the reasons for the denial,
revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or
suspension shall be attached to the application;
   J.   All criminal convictions or pleas of nolo contendere, except those
which have been expunged, and the disposition of all such arrests for the
applicant, individual or other entity subject to disclosure under this chapter,
for five (5) years prior to the date of the application. This disclosure shall
include identification of all ordinance violations, excepting minor traffic
offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be construed as
a minor traffic offense), and must include the date, place and nature of each
conviction or plea of nolo contendere, and the sentence of each conviction or
other disposition; the disclosure must identify the convicting jurisdiction and
sentencing court and provide the court identifying case numbers or docket
numbers. Application for a sexually oriented business or employee license shall
constitute a waiver of disclosure of any criminal conviction or plea of nolo
contendere for the purposes of any proceeding involving the business or
employee license;
   K.   In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real
property upon which the business or proposed business is or is to be located,
the application must be accompanied by a notarized statement from the legal or
equitable owner of the possessory interest in the property specifically
acknowledging the type of business for which the applicant seeks a license for
the property. In addition to furnishing such notarized statement, the applicant
shall furnish the name, address and the phone number of the owner of record of
the property, as well as the copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining
to the premises in which the service is or will be located;
   L.   A description of the services to be provided by the business, with
sufficient detail to allow reviewing authorities to determine what business
will be transacted on the premises, together with a schedule of usual fees for
services to be charged by the licensee, and any rules, regulations or
employment guidelines under or by which the business intends to operate. This
description shall also include:
      1.   The hours that the business or service will be open to the public,
and the methods of promoting the health and safety of the employees and patrons
and preventing them from engaging in illegal activity;
      2.   The methods of supervision preventing the employees from engaging in
acts of prostitution or other related criminal activities;
      3.   The methods of supervising employees and patrons to prevent
employees and patrons from charging or receiving fees for services or acts
prohibited by this chapter or other statutes or ordinances;
      4.   The methods of screening employees and customers in order to promote
the health and safety of employees and customers, and prevent the transmission
of disease, and prevent the commission of acts of prostitution or other
criminal activity. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-13: CHANGE IN INFORMATION:
Any change in the information required to be submitted under this chapter for
either a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business
employee license shall be given, in writing, to the business license authority
and the police department within fourteen (14) days after such change. (Ord.
96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-14: TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF BUSINESS LICENSE PROHIBITED:
Sexually oriented business licenses granted under this chapter shall not be
transferable. It is unlawful for a license held by an individual to be
transferred. It is unlawful for a license held by a corporation, partnership or
other noncorporate entity to transfer any part in excess of ten percent (10%)
thereof, without filing a new application and obtaining prior city approval. If
any transfer of the controlling interest in a business license occurs, the
license is immediately null and void, and a new license must be issued by the
city as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-15: FEE FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Specified: License fees for businesses regulated by this chapter shall
be in such amounts as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution.
   B.   Fees Additional: These fees shall be in addition to the other licenses
and fees required to do business in the city. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996; amd. 2012
Code)
3-8-16: BOND REQUIRED:
Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall post with the
city treasurer a cash or corporate surety bond payable to the city in the
amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Any fines assessed against the
business, officers or managers for violations of city ordinances shall be taken
from this bond if not paid in cash within ten (10) days after notice of the
fine, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this chapter. In the event the
funds are drawn against the cash or surety bond to pay such fines, the bond
shall be replenished to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) within fifteen (15)
days of the date of notice of any draw against it. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996; amd.
2012 Code)
3-8-17: TERM OF LICENSES:
   A.   Business License: A sexually oriented business license may be obtained
at any time throughout the year, however, all licenses expire December 31.
   B.   Employee License: Sexually oriented employee licenses may be obtained
at any time throughout the year. All employee licenses will expire December 31.
   C.   Nude Modeling And Sexual Encounter Or Business Employee License:
      1.   Nude modeling and sexual encounter or business licenses expire twice
a year, July 1 and December 31. Licenses issued prior to July 1 may be extended
to December 31 if the license holder presents the results of their current
medical examination to the licensing department. The licensing department will
issue a sticker extending the expiration date from July 1 to December 31. No
additional fees will be charged for the July renewal.
      2.   Before any new nude, seminude or sexual encounter center or business
employee license is approved, the following documents will be provided by the
applicant to the city license authority:
         a.   Health certificate from a government agency;
         b.   One fingerprint card completed by a government agency.
      3.   The applicant will also supply the following identification to the
city business license authority:
         a.   A state driver's license or identification card;
         b.   A copy of their birth certificate; or
         c.   Social security card.
      4.   The license fees required under section
3-8-15 of this chapter shall not be prorated for any portion of the year,
except that fees for applications made after July 1 of each year will be
reduced by one-half (1/2). (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-18: SINGLE LOCATION AND NAME:
   A.   It is unlawful to conduct business under a license issued pursuant to
this chapter at any location other than the licensed premises. Any location to
which telephone calls are automatically forwarded by such business shall
require a separate license.
   B.   It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business in the
city under any name other than the business name specified in the application.
(Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-19: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Any sexually oriented business location within the boundaries of the city must
display the license granted pursuant to this chapter in a prominent location
within the business premises. Any individual licensed pursuant to this chapter
must at all times while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate
boundaries of the city, have their employee license on their person or on the
premises where they are performing. When requested by police, city licensing or
other enforcement personnel or health officials, it is unlawful to fail to show
the appropriate licenses while engaged in licensed activities within the
corporate boundaries of the city. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-20: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The city shall approve the issuance of a license to the applicant within thirty
(30) days after receipt of a completed application, unless the reviewing
official finds one or more of the following:
   A.   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age or any higher age, if
the license sought requires a higher age;
   B.   The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines
or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed on the applicant in
relation to a sexually oriented business;
   C.   The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request for
information as authorized by this chapter;
   D.   The applicant has been convicted of a violation or a provision of this
chapter within two (2) years immediately preceding the application; however,
the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
denial;
   E.   The premises to be used for the business has been disapproved by the
Davis County health department, the fire department, the police department, the
building officials or the zoning officials as not being in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances of the city or county. The total time for the
city to approve or deny a license shall not exceed forty five (45) days from
the receipt of an application. In the event that a license for any business
described in this chapter has not been processed within the thirty (30) days
allowed, the city shall issue the temporary license pending completion of the
city review, except that this period may be extended to forty five (45) days
for good cause shown;
      1.   Businesses located outside of the corporate boundaries of the city,
but requiring a license under this chapter, may be denied a license pursuant to
this chapter if the business does not have a valid business license to conduct
business at the business location from the appropriate jurisdiction;
      2.   A copy of each license application submitted will be distributed to
the police department, business licensing department, planning and zoning
department, fire department and building department. Each department will
determine within seven (7) working days if the application is complete.
Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant;
      3.   The time of processing applications specified in this section shall
begin to run from the time a completed application is received;
      4.   Any license issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the
city, pursuant to the revocation procedures provided for herein, if the
completed review determines that the license is denied;
   F.   The license fees required by this chapter or by other ordinances have
not been paid;
   G.   All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid;
   H.   An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or not in
compliance with this chapter;
   I.   1. An applicant has been convicted or pled nolo contendere to a crime
involving prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated promotion of
prostitution; aggravated exploitation of prostitution; solicitation of sex
acts; sex acts for hire; compelling prostitution; aiding prostitution; sale,
distribution or display of material harmful to minors; sexual performance by
minors; possession of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure;
any crime involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a child; sexual assault or
aggravated sexual assault; rape; forcible sodomy; forcible sexual abuse;
incest; harboring a runaway child; criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation
to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar elements
from any jurisdiction, regardless of the exact title of the offense; for which:
         a.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of conviction,
if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense, or less than five (5) years, if
the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors within the five (5) years;
or
         b.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed from the date of
conviction, if the offense is of a felony;
      2.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification pursuant to this section. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-21: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
Any business license issued pursuant to section
3-8-20 of this chapter expires no later than ten (10) days following the
continuous closure or cessation of business operations for which the license
was issued, except when cessation or closure is required to repair damage
caused by flood, fire, earthquake or other natural disaster. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-
1996)
3-8-22: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business
employee to:
   A.   Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years, or the age of
twenty one (21) years if required by applicable liquor ordinance, on the
licensed premises, except that in adult businesses which exclude minors from
less than all of the business premises, minors shall not be permitted in
excluded areas;
   B.   Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the licensed premises;
   C.   Allow, offer or agree to any sexually oriented business employee
touching or being touched by any patron or customer while performing; except
that outcall employees and customers may touch, except that any touching by
sexually oriented business employees or customers of specified anatomical
areas, whether clothed or unclothed, is prohibited at any time;
   D.   Allow, offer or agree to the illegal possession, use, sale or
distribution of controlled substances on the licensed premises;
   E.   Permit, commit, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor or commit activities harmful to the minor
to occur on the licensed premises;
   F.   Permit, commit, offer or agree to any sex act as validly defined by
city ordinances or state statute in the presence of any customer or patron;
   G.   Appear nude, or permit, offer or agree to any outcall employee
appearing before any customer or patron in a state of nudity;
   H.   Allow, offer or agree to a patron or customer to masturbate within or
upon the premises of a sexually oriented business. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-23: OUTCALL SERVICES; DUTIES TO PATRONS:
It is unlawful for any business or employee providing outcall services
contracted for in the city to fail to comply with the following requirements:
   A.   All businesses licensed to provide outcall services pursuant to this
chapter shall provide to each patron a written contract in receipt of pecuniary
compensation for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of
services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed,
the total amount such services shall cost the patron, and any special terms or
conditions relating to the services to be performed. The contract need not
include the name of the patron. The business licensee shall keep and maintain a
copy of each written contract entered into pursuant to this section for a
period not less than one year from the date of provision of services
thereunder. The contracts shall be numbered and entered into a register listing
the contract number, date, names of all employees involved in the contract, and
pecuniary compensation paid.
   B.   All outcall businesses licensed pursuant to this chapter shall maintain
an open office or telephone at which the licensee or licensee's designated
agent may be personally contacted during all hours outcall employees are
working. The phone number and business license number of the license location
shall appear and be included in all patron contracts and published
advertisements. For outcall businesses which premises are licensed within the
corporate limits of the city, private rooms or booths where the patrons may
meet with the outcall employee shall not be provided at the open office or any
other location by the service, nor shall patrons meet outcall employees at the
business premises.
   C.   Outcall services shall not advertise in such a manner that would lead a
reasonably prudent person to conclude that specified sexual activities would be
performed by the outcall employee. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-24: ADULT BUSINESS INTERIOR DESIGN:
   A.   In addition to the general requirements of disclosure for a sexually
oriented business, any applicant for a license as an adult business shall also
submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises of the license. The design
and construction, prior to granting a license or opening for business, shall
conform to the following:
      1.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms.
      2.   Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment or any of
the business merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only one person being
allowed in the restroom per stall, and only one person in any stall at a time,
and requiring that patrons shall not be allowed access to manager's station
areas.
      3.   For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all
windows, doors and other apertures to the premises shall be darkened or
otherwise constructed to prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the
inside of the premises. Businesses which exclude minors from less than all of
the premises shall be designed and constructed so that minors may not see into
the area from which they are excluded.
      4.   The diagram required shall not necessarily be a professional
engineer's or architect's blueprint; however, the diagram must show marked
internal dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures, and ratings for
illumination capacity.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees to
ensure that the views from the manager's station in subsection A of this
section remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or
any other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises,
and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
   C.   The premises shall at all times be equipped and operated with overhead
lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which
patrons are permitted access. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-25: NUDE ENTERTAINMENT, SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER BUSINESS INTERIOR DESIGN
AREA:
   A.   It is unlawful for business premises licensed for nude entertainment,
sexual encounter center or business to:
      1.   Permit a bed, sofa, mattress or similar item in any room on the
premises, except that a sofa may be placed in the reception room open to the
public or in any office to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in
an adult theater, such items may be on the stage as part of a performance. If a
chair or object is provided for the patron to sit on in rooms in which the
patron and performer are alone together, the following shall apply:
         a.   The chair or object shall be made of or covered with a
nonabsorbent material;
         b.   A four foot by four foot (4' x 4') area beneath the chair or
object shall be made of or covered with a nonabsorbent material;
         c.   The area where the patron sat shall be cleaned and disinfected
after every session where bodily fluids were expelled;
         d.   Any material containing bodily fluids shall be disposed of in a
manner approved by the Davis County board of health.
      2.   Allow any door on any room used for the business, except for the
door to an office to which patrons shall not be admitted. Outside doors and
restroom doors to be lockable from the inside;
      3.   Provide any room in which the employee or employees and the patron
or patrons are alone together without a separation by a solid physical barrier
at least four feet (4') high, three feet (3') of which must be above the
dancing surface. The patron or patrons shall remain on one side of the barrier.
         a.   A video camera will be installed in every room in which a patron
and entertainer are left alone. The video camera will be placed in such a way
that the performer can be observed at all times. The video camera will be
connected to a monitor which will be placed outside the room in such a way that
it can be observed by a third party. The video camera must remain on during the
entire session in which the performer and patron are left alone.
         b.   In addition to subsection A3a of this section, a third party, who
is not a licensed entertainer, will be required to physically observe the
monitor as frequently as possible.
         c.   A log shall be kept of all private sessions. The log will list
the performer's stage name, date and time of the session. The business must
also make available the logs upon request of any law enforcement officer who is
primarily involved in the investigation and enforcement of sexually oriented
business ordinances, laws or statutes in the city.
   B.   Adult theaters shall also require that the performance area shall be
separated from the patrons by a minimum of three feet (3'), which separation
shall be delineated by a physical barrier at least three feet (3') high. (Ord.
96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-26: NUDE ENTERTAINMENT AND SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER OR BUSINESS; ADDITIONAL
LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any business licensed for nude entertainment to be located
within six hundred feet (600') of a business licensed for the sale or
consumption of alcohol. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-27: DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION:
It is a defense to prosecution or violation under this chapter that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
   A.   By a proprietary school licensed by the state, or a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
   B.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. (Ord. 96-1, 3-
5-1996)
3-8-28: SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BARS; ESTABLISHMENT SELLING ALCOHOL:
It is unlawful for any business licensed for the sale or consumption of alcohol
pursuant to city ordinances to allow any person on the premises to dance, model
or perform in a state of seminudity without first obtaining a license pursuant
to this chapter. Seminude dancing shall be allowed only in class C private
clubs and class C taverns. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-29: SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT IN LICENSED BUSINESS:
It is unlawful for any person to perform or appear in a state of seminudity as
a professional dancer, model, performer or otherwise on the premises of a
business licensed as a seminude dancing bar, either gratuitously or for
compensation, unless that person is licensed as a sexually oriented business
employee. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-30: NUDE AND SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT AGENCIES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or
otherwise engage the services of a professional dancer, model or performer to
appear in a state of seminudity or nudity for pecuniary compensation in or for
any nude entertainment business, adult theater or seminude dancing bar pursuant
to this chapter unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or
otherwise engage or permit any person to perform as a professional dancer,
model or performer in a state of seminudity or nudity, either gratuitously or
for compensation, in or for any business licensed pursuant to this chapter,
unless such person is licensed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-31: ACTIVITIES OF ENTERTAINERS:
It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model or performer, while
performing in any business licensed pursuant to this chapter, to:
   A.   Throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
   B.   Accept any money, drink or any other object directly from any person;
or
   C.   Allow another person to place any money or object on the performer or
within the costume or person of the performer;
   D.   For the performer to place anything within the costume or adjust or
move the costume while performing so as to render the performer in a state of
nudity (this subsection applies to seminude dancers only). (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-
1996)
3-8-32: ACTIVITIES OF PATRONS:
It is unlawful for any person or any patron of any business to place any money
or object on or within the costume or person of any performer; or to give or
offer to give to any such performer any drinks, money or object while such
performer is performing; except that money may be placed on the stage, which
shall not be picked up by the performer except by hand. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-33: COSTUME REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for performers in seminude dancing bars to fail to comply with
the following costume requirements:
   A.   Performers shall at all times be costumed during performances in a
manner not to violate any city ordinance concerning disorderly or obscene
conduct, and such performers shall not perform or conduct themselves in such a
manner as to violate the provision of any city ordinance. No performer shall
appear in any business licensed as a seminude dancing bar during a performance
or appearance, with less than opaque clothing which meets the definition of
seminude, and, in the case of a female performer, covers the specified
anatomical areas of such performer in a shape and color other than the natural
shape and color of the specified anatomical areas.
   B.   While on the portion of a business licensed as a seminude dancing bar
used by patrons, performers shall be dressed in opaque clothing covering the
performer's buttocks and pubic area and, in the case of a female, the breast
and nipples. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-34: STAGE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any performer in a business licensed as a seminude dancing
bar to appear in costume other than on a stage which shall be at least three
feet (3') from the portion of the premises on which patrons are allowed, and
which shall be separated from the patrons by a solid barrier or railing, the
top of which shall be at least two feet (2') from the floor. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-
1996)
3-8-35: ENTERTAINER REGULATIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an offense of strict
liability of any owner, operator, manager, lessee or licensee, or any agent,
employee or person acting with the consent of such owner, operator, manager,
lessee or licensee of any place of business licensed to sell beer in the city
to permit any dancer, entertainer or other person to appear in or on said place
of business naked or so clothed as to expose in any way the specified
anatomical areas of said dancer, entertainer or other person.
   B.   It shall also be unlawful and constitute an offense of strict liability
for any such dancer or entertainer or other person to appear in said place of
business naked or so clothed as to expose at any time of appearance the
specified anatomical areas. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-36: SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT PROHIBITED:
   A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance of the city, it
shall be unlawful for a professional entertainer to appear in any establishment
not licensed as a sexually oriented business in a state of "seminudity", as
defined in section
3-8-5 of this chapter.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a professional entertainer, while on the
portion of the premises of an establishment used by patrons, to be dressed in
anything other than opaque clothing, covering the entertainer's body from the
shoulders to the knees excluding the entertainer's arms and hands, at all times
other than during the entertainer's performance. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-37: LICENSE STATEMENT IN ADVERTISEMENTS:
It is unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually oriented business or
employee to fail to state that the business or employee is licensed by the
city, and shall include the city license number. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-38: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS TO EXISTING BUSINESSES:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described herein, whether the herein described activities were
established before or after the effective date hereof, and regardless of
whether such persons and businesses are currently licensed to do business in
the city.
   A.   All such persons and businesses requiring outcall service licenses
shall have forty five (45) days from the effective date hereof, or until their
current license expires, whichever is first in time, to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   All nude entertainment businesses shall have one hundred five (105)
days from the effective date hereof, or until their current license must be
renewed, whichever is first, to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   All adult businesses shall have one hundred thirty five (135) days from
the effective date hereof, or until their current license must be renewed,
whichever is first in time, to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-39: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
   A.   The city may issue a notice suspending or revoking a sexually oriented
business or employee license granted under this chapter if a licensee or an
employee of the licensee has:
      1.   Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter;
      2.   Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually
oriented business specifically authorized by this chapter or by any other
statute or ordinance;
      3.   Failed to replenish the cost bond as provided in this chapter (such
a suspension shall extend until the bond has been replenished);
      4.   a.   Given materially false or misleading information in obtaining
the license;
         b.   In the case of an employee license, the employee gave false or
misleading information in obtaining the license;
      5.   Knowingly operated the sexually oriented business or worked under
the employee license during the period when the business licensee or employee
licensee's license was suspended;
      6.   Committed an offense which would be grounds for denial of a license
for which the time period required has not elapsed;
      7.   On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a
person or persons committed in or on, or solicited for on the licensed
premises, or an outcall employee solicited or committed on or off the premises,
an offense which would be grounds for denial of a license for which a
conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees, whether
or not licensed, of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses
were committed;
      8.   A licensee has been delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem
taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
   B.   Suspension or revocation shall take effect within fifteen (15) days of
the issuance of notice, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this chapter.
   C.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the revocation of the license. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-40: EFFECTS OF REVOCATION:
When a license issued pursuant to this chapter is revoked, the revocation shall
continue for one year from its effective date, and the licensee shall not be
issued a sexually oriented business or employee license for one year from the
date of such revocation. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-41: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Appeal Authorized: If the license is denied or approved with
qualifications, or if a notice of suspension, revocation or citation of a civil
fine is imposed, the applicant or licensee may file an appeal with the city.
   B.   Time Limit For Filing: Filing of an appeal must be within ten (10)
working days of the date of service of the notice of any denial, qualified
approval, suspension, revocation or civil fine. Upon receiving the notice of
such appeal, the city shall schedule a hearing before a designated hearing
officer within twenty (20) calendar days from the date of the appeal unless
such time shall be extended for good cause.
   C.   Public Hearing: The hearing officer shall hold a public hearing on the
record, and receive evidence as necessary to determine whether the denial,
qualified approval, suspension, revocation or civil fine was proper under the
law.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: The burden of proof shall be on the city.
   E.   Opinion And Recommendation: After the hearing, the hearing officer
shall have seven (7) working days, unless extended for a good cause, in which
to render an opinion and make recommendations to the mayor. The mayor will
notify both parties by registered mail of the recommendation within ten (10)
working days.
   F.   Objections: Either party may object to the recommendation of the
hearing officer by filing their objection in writing to the mayor within ten
(10) working days following their notification of the recommendation. In the
event the hearing officer recommends upholding a suspension or revocation, the
license shall be immediately suspended, and shall remain suspended until any
subsequent appeal is decided. If no objections are received within ten (10)
days, the mayor may immediately adopt the recommendation of the hearing
officer.
   G.   Consideration Of Objections: If objections are received, the mayor
shall have ten (10) working days to consider such objections before issuing a
final decision. The mayor may, at his/her discretion, take additional evidence
or require written memorandum on issues in question. The standard used by the
mayor in his review is whether substantial evidence exists in the record to
support the hearing officer's recommendation.
   H.   Judicial Review: An applicant aggrieved by the mayor's decision may
have judicial review of such decision pursuant to rule 65(B), Utah rules of
civil procedure, or any other applicable ordinance, statute or rule providing
for such review. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-42: CIVIL FINES AND CRIMINAL VIOLATIONS:
In addition to revocation or suspension of a license, as provided in this
chapter, each violation of this chapter shall, upon citation by the city
business license authority, require the licensee to pay a civil penalty in the
amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such fines shall be deducted from the
cost bond posted pursuant to this chapter, unless paid within ten (10) days of
notice of the fine or the final determination after any appeal. In addition to
the civil fines provided in this chapter, the violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-43: INJUNCTIONS:
An entity or individual who operates or causes a sexually oriented business to
be operated without a valid license, or who employs or is employed as an
employee of a sexually oriented business, or who operates such a business or
functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to the civil and criminal
violations provided herein, and any other remedy available at law or in equity.
(Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996)
3-8-44: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
An entity or individual who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 96-1, 3-5-1996; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 9
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-9-1: Purpose
3-9-2: Contractor Defined
3-9-3: Registration And License Required
3-9-4: Form Of Registration; Fee
3-9-5: Fee For License
3-9-6: Records; Inspection
3-9-7: Regulations Adopted
3-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of imposing license fees
upon persons engaging in business within the limits of the city as contractors.
(1989 Code § 9-431)
3-9-2: CONTRACTOR DEFINED:
"Contractor" means any person, firm, copartnership, corporation, association,
or other organization, or any combination thereof, who for a fixed sum, price,
fee, percentage or other compensation other than wages, undertakes any
building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project,
development or improvement; provided, that the term "contractor", as used in
this chapter, shall include anyone who builds more than one structure on his
own property during any one year for the purpose of sale and shall include
subcontractors, but shall not include anyone who merely furnishes material or
supplies without fabricating the same into, or consuming the same in the
performance of the work of the "contractor", as herein defined. (1989 Code § 9-
432; amd. 2012 Code)
3-9-3: REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person desiring to engage in business as a contractor within the corporate
limits of the city must comply with the following requirement: Prior to
engaging in subject business activity during any calendar year, he must
register for the calendar year as a contractor by completing and filing a
registration form in the office of the city recorder, and receiving a business
license. (1989 Code § 9-433)
3-9-4: FORM OF REGISTRATION; FEE:
   A.   Any person desiring to engage in business as a contractor shall
complete and file in the office of the city recorder a registration form
provided to him by the city, which shall show:
      1.   The name of the contractor.
      2.   The address and telephone number of the contractor.
      3.   The type of organization, e.g., corporation, partnership or sole
proprietor.
      4.   If a partnership or a corporation or other artificial person, the
name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for the functions
of the organization:
         a.   Whether or not licensed under the contractor's license law of the
state; if so, the license number of the contractor.
         b.   Type of business in which registrant seeks to engage, e.g.,
general contractor or one of the specialty contractors.
         c.   Such other information as the governing body may by regulation
require.
   B.   Any person seeking to register for the privilege of doing business as a
contractor within the limits of the city for any calendar year, or any part
thereof, shall pay an annual registration fee. The registration fee shall be in
such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution. (1989
Code § 9-434; amd. 2012 Code)
3-9-5: FEE FOR LICENSE:
Every contractor, for the privilege of engaging in the business of performing
the service, shall pay the amount specified in the comprehensive fee schedule
resolution. (1989 Code § 9-435; amd. 2012 Code)
3-9-6: RECORDS; INSPECTION:
All persons registered pursuant to this chapter for the privilege of doing
business as contractors, and all persons who engage in doing business as
contractors, shall maintain records of all services performed by them as
contractors within the corporate limits of the city. The records shall disclose
the person for whom the services are performed and the contract price or charge
made for the services and such other information as the governing body may, by
regulation, require. The persons shall maintain such records at their office or
principal place of business and shall permit officials or agents of the city to
inspect said records for the purpose of determining whether or not said persons
have complied with the requirements of this chapter. (1989 Code § 9-436)
3-9-7: REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The governing body may adopt such regulations as in its opinion are necessary
to implement this chapter and the objectives thereof. (1989 Code § 9-437)
CHAPTER 10
GOOD LANDLORD PROGRAM ACT
SECTION:
3-10-1: Title
3-10-2: Definitions
3-10-3: License And Fee Required
3-10-4: Program Terms
3-10-5: Inspections
3-10-6: Real Property Maintenance
3-10-7: Site Appearance Requirements
3-10-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be referred to as the GOOD LANDLORD PROGRAM ACT. (Ord. 2011-
09, 7-19-2011)
3-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to this chapter in addition to the other
definitions set forth in this title:
AGREEMENT: The binding agreement entered into by participants of the good
landlord program and the city.
BUSINESS LICENSE: That license required by the North Salt Lake City under
chapter 1 of this title for any individuals engaging in business within the
city. A business license in this chapter is not synonymous with approval of or
participation in the good landlord program.
CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city.
FEES OR FEE SCHEDULE: The city's comprehensive fee schedule as it relates to
base business license fees, disproportionate rental dwelling unit fees and the
discount fees associated with the good landlord program.
OWNER: The person having ownership.
OWNER OCCUPIED: A person having ownership of a rental unit(s) who also occupies
the same location as a primary residence.
PERSON: Includes any individual, group of individuals, partnership,
corporation, association or other legal entity.
PROGRAM: The good landlord program of the city.
PROGRAM PARTICIPANT: Any owner or authorized landlord, property or mobile home
park manager or representative of rental dwelling units who participates in the
good landlord program.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT: Any individual dwelling unit or mobile home pad that is
rented, leased, or hired out to be used or occupied as a home or residence.
This definition is inclusive of any buildings or apartment buildings so
arranged, designed, built, rented, let or hired out to be used or occupied as
the home, residence, or dwelling unit of one or more families living
independently of each other. (Ord. 2011-09, 7-19-2011; amd. Ord. 2011-21, 11-
15-2011)
3-10-3: LICENSE AND FEE REQUIRED:
   A.   License: An owner of four (4) or more rental dwelling units shall
obtain and maintain current a city business license. Business license
applications shall include, at a minimum, all owner contact information, as
well as a current, complete list of all rental dwelling units owned.
   B.   Fee Schedule: There is hereby imposed upon the owner of four (4) or
more rental dwelling units a disproportionate per rental unit fee based upon a
study conducted by the city in accordance with state statute.
      1.   Disproportionate Per Rental Unit Fee And Study: The disproportionate
per rental unit fee shall be adopted by resolution as part of the city's
comprehensive fee schedule only after completion of a study in accordance with
state law and updated accordingly as required by state law. No disproportionate
rental fee shall be collected by the city until such study is complete and
adopted as provided in this subsection.
      2.   Time Of Payment: An owner of four (4) or more rental dwelling units
shall pay the business license fee and disproportionate per rental unit fees
set forth in the fee schedule at the time of application for a new or renewal
license.
      3.   Failure To Make Payment: Failure to timely make a payment of
required fees will result in the suspension or revocation of the business
license and the imposition of penalty fees as set forth in chapter 1 of this
title relating to business licenses.
      4.   Fee Discount: A discount from the per rental unit fees is available
to members of the good landlord program as set forth in this chapter.
      5.   Joint And Several Liability: If there is more than one owner of a
rental dwelling unit, including purchases under contract, each owner shall be
jointly and severally liable to pay the business license fees and per rental
unit fees set forth in the fee schedule. (Ord. 2011-09, 7-19-2011)
3-10-4: PROGRAM TERMS:
   A.   Program Participation: The owner, or an authorized designee for and in
behalf of an owner, of four (4) or more rental dwelling units, may apply for
admission into the good landlord program.
   B.   Program Admission Requirements:
      1.   Completion and approval of the good landlord program application.
      2.   Completion of at least eight (8) hours of property management
education that is:
         a.   Sponsored by the city or its designated provider; or
         b.   Sponsored by another jurisdiction with curriculum and a program
similar to the program set forth in this chapter; or
         c.   Another third party provided curriculum or program, including
evidence of compliance with another Utah municipality's good landlord program
and that is preapproved by the city before making application.
      3.   The program participant is current as to any and all fees, fines or
penalties theretofore assessed by or due to the city.
      4.   Execution of a written, binding agreement with the city regarding
program participant's obligations as set forth in this chapter.
   C.   Program Participant's Obligations: Program participants shall perform
the following:
      1.   Tenant Screening: Program participants shall perform all of the
following screening requirements for all tenants prior to move in:
         a.   Application: Program participants shall require each prospective
tenant to complete a rental application which shall include the tenant's
personal and pertinent financial information. Program participants shall keep
the application on file for the full term of the lease.
         b.   Criminal Background Check: Program participants shall obtain a
criminal history for each tenant as well as each occupant of the premises who
is eighteen (18) years or older. Program participants shall keep all criminal
histories on file for the full term of the lease.
         c.   Driver's License Or State Identification: Program participants
shall require every prospective tenant, as well as each occupant of the
premises who is eighteen (18) years or older, to provide a driver's license or
state identification card, which program participants shall copy and keep on
file for the full term of the lease.
         d.   Credit Check: Program participants shall obtain a credit history
from every prospective contract signing tenant over the age of eighteen (18).
Program participants shall keep the credit application on file for the full
term of the lease, including renewal periods.
         e.   Income/Employment Verification: Program participants shall obtain
income/employment verification from every prospective contract signing tenant.
         f.   Rental References: Program participants shall obtain contact
information for all of a prospective tenant's previous landlords within the
last three (3) years, and the program participants shall contact these previous
landlords to determine the credit and tenant history of each prospective
tenant.
      2.   Tenant Selection: Program participants shall consider the following
criteria, at a minimum, for tenant selection and unless otherwise required by
federal statutes, such as the fair housing act or the Americans with
disabilities act, etc., will refuse to rent to any prospective tenant or other
proposed occupant who:
         a.   Provided false information to the program participant on the
application or otherwise;
         b.   Within the past three (3) years has been convicted of: 1) any
felony; or 2) any drug or alcohol related crime, sex crime, violence of any
kind, assault, or crimes that involve weaponry of any kind; or 3) is currently
on probation or parole.
      3.   Eviction: Program participants will promptly evict tenants that do
not meet the requirements of this chapter or are or become involved in illegal
activities.
      4.   Executed Lease: Program participants shall execute a valid, written
lease agreement or rental agreement with each tenant, which shall include the
provisions listed in any program participant's training packet provided by the
city and those set forth in this chapter.
      5.   Program Participant Training: As part of the continuing education
requirement in subsection B2 of this section, program participants agree to
attend and complete a city approved four (4) hour program participants training
program every two (2) years.
      6.   Compliance With City Ordinances: Program participants shall comply
with the property maintenance provisions of this chapter together with all
other ordinances of the city related to nuisances, property maintenance,
signage, business licensing, utility billing and any other applicable city
codes.
   D.   City's Obligations: The city shall perform the following for each
program participant in the good landlord program:
      1.   If admitted into the program, the program participant shall receive
the discounted per rental unit fees for members of the program as set forth in
the fee schedule.
      2.   The city reserves the right to waive, amend or otherwise forgive a
program participant's violation of their agreement, if, at the city's sole
discretion, grounds exist for such a determination.
      3.   The city will promptly notify the program participant concerning any
criminal activity or city code violations by a tenant.
   E.   Program Eligibility: An owner, or authorized designee, is eligible to
seek admission into the good landlord program at any time. An owner, or
authorized designee, who is admitted into the program at any time other than at
the beginning of a calendar year when business licenses are renewed, may pay a
prorated per rental unit fee from the date of full compliance with the good
landlord program or the issuance of a business license, or an amended business
license, whichever is later.
   F.   Removal From Good Landlord Program:
      1.   Conditions: Any program participant may be removed from the good
landlord program if:
         a.   Program participant fails to fulfill its obligations under the
written, binding agreement with the city;
         b.   Program participant has more than two (2) unresolved violations
of this chapter, other provisions of city codes related to property
maintenance, and/or any other law of a governing authority, in any calendar
year.
      2.   Investigation: The city may, on its own initiative or in response to
complaints from the general public, investigate and gather evidence of
violations of this chapter or other circumstances which may give rise to
adverse action by the city, up to and including involuntary removal from the
good landlord program.
      3.   Fees Due: Program participants who have been involuntarily removed
from the good landlord program shall immediately pay the city its accrued
annual per rental unit business license fee, less the discount already paid,
plus any other penalties provided by this chapter for breach or violation.
      4.   Loss Of Business License: Program participants who have been
involuntarily removed from the good landlord program shall not automatically
lose their business license. Prior to the revocation of any business license
for owners of rental dwelling units, the city's actions shall be subject to the
provisions of section
3-1-12 of this title governing the revocation or denial of business licenses.
   G.   Appeal: A program participant may appeal any decision administering the
good landlord program, including involuntary removal, by filing a written
notice of appeal with the city recorder. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt
of such an appeal, the city manager or his designee will review the appeal and
shall uphold, reverse or change the decision and state the reasons therefor in
writing. The decision of the city manager or his designee shall be final. (Ord.
2011-09, 7-19-2011)
3-10-5: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Generally: City officials shall be permitted to make an inspection to
enforce any of the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable statute
or ordinance, and may enter any building or may enter upon any premises during
regular business hours; or, if there are no regular business hours, the
officers or their authorized representatives shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner, landlord, property manager or other persons having
charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If the owner,
landlord, property manager or other responsible person refuses to allow the
city officials to enter and inspect the property, the officer may obtain and
execute a search warrant.
   B.   Entry Upon Proper Request: No owner, landlord, property manager,
occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or
premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request or warrant is made, to
properly permit entry therein by the city officials for the purpose of
inspection and enforcement of this title. (Ord. 2011-09, 7-19-2011)
3-10-6: REAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
All program participants shall be required to consent by agreement with the
city to the following provisions related to real property maintenance:
   A.   Prevention of fire hazards.
   B.   Prevention of insect, rodent and other vermin harborage.
   C.   Prevention of introduction of hazardous pollutants into the air.
   D.   Prevention of spreading of vegetation that threatens the public health,
safety, or welfare.
   E.   Fostering or improvement of the city's image, property values, and
neighborhood success.
   F.   Lawfully disposing of cuttings from grass, weeds or solid waste.
   G.   Effectively securing any vacant structure.
   H.   Lawfully disposing of any unsightly or deleterious objects or
structures.
   I.   Prompt removal of graffiti and/or repair of vandalism on any structure
located on the premises.
   J.   Other site appearance provisions. (Ord. 2011-09, 7-19-2011)
3-10-7: SITE APPEARANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Program participants shall maintain their properties in conformance to all
applicable site appearance requirements in the city's land use development and
management act (LUDMA) or other pertinent city ordinances, including, but not
limited to, landscaping, lighting, house numbering, signage, driveways, parking
lots, clear vision areas and property maintenance. (Ord. 2011-09, 7-19-2011)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC HEALTH
SECTION:
4-1-1: Designated
4-1-2: Powers And Duties
4-1-3: Permit Required
4-1-1: DESIGNATED:
The Davis County Board of Health is hereby designated as the Board of Health
for the City. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-1-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Contract Authorized: The City may contract with the Davis County Board
of Health on such terms and conditions as the parties may agree, to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and such other ordinances of the City which
authorize or require action or impose any duty on the Board of Health.
   B.   Adoption Of Rules And Regulations: The Board of Health shall adopt such
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary to govern its meetings and
conduct.
   C.   Permit Review And Approval: The Board of Health shall review and
approve all applications for permits to operate any business or engage in any
construction for which a permit is required from the Board of Health pursuant
to any ordinances or regulations of the City.
   D.   Recommend Health Rules: The Board of Health shall recommend to the
Mayor for promulgation by the City Council such health rules, regulations and
ordinances as it deems necessary for the health of the persons within the City.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-1-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following
businesses or activities without first obtaining a permit from the Board of
Health:
   A.   Handling, selling, offering for sale, preparing or serving any food or
food products or beverages or water intended for human consumption.
   B.   Operating or permitting public access to any public swimming pool.
   C.   Commercially operating any public dump, garbage or refuse collection or
disposal facility or place, or slaughterhouse, animal disposal facility, or
cleaning out or installing any privy, cesspool or septic tank.
   D.   Fumigating or eradicating nests, insects, vermin or any other
infestation from any building occupied or to be occupied by humans. (Ord. 2018-
08, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES, WEEDS, DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Nuisances Generally
4-2-2: Cleaning Of Real Property And Weed Control
4-2-3: Dangerous Buildings
4-2-4: Abandoned Vehicles
4-2-1: NUISANCES GENERALLY:
   A.   Nuisances Defined; Penalty: A "nuisance" is any item, thing, manner or
condition whatsoever that is dangerous to human life, property or health and
whatever renders soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome. It shall be
unlawful for any person, whether as an owner, agent or occupant, to create, aid
in creating, or contribute to a nuisance, or to support, continue or retain a
nuisance. Violations shall be punishable as provided for in title 12 of this
Code.
   B.   Author Of Nuisance Defined: Where a nuisance exists upon property and
is the outgrowth of the usual, natural or necessary use of the property, the
landlord or his agent, the tenant or his agent, and all other persons having
control of the property on which such nuisance exists, shall be deemed to be
the authors thereof and shall be equally liable and responsible. Where any such
nuisance shall arise from the unusual or unnecessary use of such property or
from the business thereon conducted, then the owners, occupants and all other
persons contributing to causing the nuisance or to the continuance of such
nuisance shall be deemed the authors.
   C.   Declaration Of Nuisance:
      1.   Every act or condition made, permitted, allowed or continued in
violation of subsection A of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and may be abated and punished as hereinafter provided.
      2.   Nuisances are also defined in section
12-1-110 of this Code and further include:
         a.   Befouling water in any spring, stream, well or water source
supplying water for culinary purposes.
         b.   Allowing any privy vault or cesspool, or other individual
wastewater disposal system, to become a menace to health or a source of odors
to air or water.
         c.   Permitting any garbage container to remain on premises when it
has become unclean, which produces a foul, putrid, or offensive odor.
         d.   Allowing vegetable waste, garbage, litter, filth or refuse of any
nature to accumulate within or upon any private alley, yard or area, except
when it is temporarily deposited for immediate removal.
         e.   Permitting the deposit for storage or accumulation of manure on
any property that is not intended for landscaping or gardening use immediately,
or within ten (10) days of delivery.
         f.   Permitting any slaughterhouse, market, meat shop, stable, feed
yard, or other place or building wherein any animals are slaughtered, kept, fed
or sold to remain unclean or in any state or condition detrimental to health or
creating a nuisance because of odors, or in which flies or rodents breed.
         g.   Discharging or placing any offensive water, liquid waste or
refuse of any kind into any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash,
natural watercourse, ditch, canal or any vacant lot, or which as the result of
continued discharge, will render the place of discharge offensive or likely to
become so.
         h.   Keeping or collecting any stale or putrid grease.
         i.   Having or permitting upon any premises any fly or mosquito
producing condition.
         j.   Permitting or performing any ablutions (the act of washing
oneself) in or near any public fountain or public drinking fountain.
         k.   Permitting any lot or excavation to become the repository of
stagnant water or any decaying or offensive substances.
         l.   Obstructing or interfering with or rendering dangerous for
passage any street or sidewalk, lake, stream, drainage system, canal or basin,
or any public park.
         m.   Burning garbage, leaves, grass or other refuse without a burn
permit issued by the South Davis Fire District.
         n.   Conducting an animal products manufacturing business of bone
crushing, bone boiling, fat boiling, gut cleaning or the making of glue, or the
manufacture of fertilizing material from any dead animal or part thereof, or
any boiling of offal, swill, fat or grease.
         o.   Conducting a business which creates or emits offensive odors or
gases in or within one mile of the City.
         p.   Throwing or allowing to remain upon or in any street, road,
ditch, gutter, public place, private premises, vacant lot, watercourse, lake,
spring or well any house refuse, offal, garbage, dead animals, decaying
vegetable matter or organic waste.
         q.   Failing to furnish any dwelling house, boarding house or factory
or other business with restroom facilities, including sinks as may be required
to maintain the same in a sanitary condition.
         r.   Neglecting or refusing to discontinue the use of, clean out,
disinfect and fill up all portable restrooms, privy vaults and cesspools.
         s.   Allowing snow and ice to accumulate on any paved sidewalk or
trail abutting the property of the owner, occupant or lessor.
         t.   Allowing any property or structure to become or allow to remain
dangerous or hazardous to the health or physical well- being of any person.
         u.   Permitting to remain on property any excavation or well which is
not guarded or covered by means of a permanent protective device or material,
or actively in the process of construction. For the purpose of this section,
the term "permanent protective device or material" shall mean a guard or
obstruction over or in front of the excavation or well opening that cannot
readily be removed, either intentionally or by inadvertence, sufficiently to
fall or crawl into the opening, and made of material which will support a
weight up to three hundred (300) pounds and which will not deteriorate due to
exposure to the weather, ground or moisture.
         v.   Permitting any drainage system, canal, ditch, conduit or other
watercourse of any kind or nature, natural or artificial, to become so
obstructed as to cause the water to back up and overflow therefrom or to become
unsanitary.
         w.   Opening, keeping or maintaining any store, shop, warehouse,
dwelling house, building, vehicle, boat, aircraft or other place to which users
or possessors of controlled substances listed in schedules I through V, Utah
Code Annotated section 58-37-4, resort to, where use or possession of
controlled substances violate this Code, or which is used for illegal keeping,
storing or selling any substances listed as controlled substances in schedules
I through V.
         x.   Maintaining at his place of business a tobacco vending machine
which is accessible to persons under the age of nineteen (19) which provides a
method of self-help for the disposition to such persons, by gift, sale or
otherwise, of any cigarette or cigarette paper or wrapper, or any paper made or
prepared for the purpose of making cigarettes or tobacco in any form
whatsoever. Cigarette vending machines shall be deemed accessible to persons
under the age of nineteen (19) under the conditions enumerated in Utah Code
Annotated section 76-10-105.1.
         y.   The carrying on, engaging in, committing or, when in possession
of control or responsibility, permitting any practice, act, trade, manufacture,
business or profession which is injurious or dangerous to the health, safety,
comfort or welfare of persons or damaging to the property of others or which
prevents the reasonable use or enjoyment of the property of others by reason
of, among other things, odor, smoke, dust, gas, noise, dirt, or vibration.
   D.   Enumeration Of Nuisances: The types of nuisances above stated shall not
be deemed exclusive but shall be deemed in addition to and in no way a
limitation of the nuisances subject to this chapter.
   E.   Toilet Or Sewer Facilities: All toilet or sewer facilities shall be
constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the State.
All such facilities that do not comply with such provisions are hereby declared
to be a nuisance and are subject to abatement as herein prescribed.
   F.   Restrictions On Blocking Water:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to permit any
drainage system, canal, ditch, conduit or other watercourse of any kind or
nature, natural or artificial, to become so obstructed as to cause the water to
back up and overflow therefrom, or to become unsanitary.
      2.   Maintenance of any such watercourse in such conditions shall
constitute a nuisance and the same shall be subject to abatement.
   G.   Attractive Nuisances, Generally: Any vacant lot or open area of ground
within which any of the following conditions occur and to which the public, and
particularly children, have access is termed an "attractive nuisance" and are
required to be abated:
      1.   Ponding or impounding of water.
      2.   Open pits, shafts, caves, ditches or dilapidated unoccupied
buildings.
      3.   Weeds, noxious or otherwise, or overgrown vegetation.
      4.   Trash, debris or garbage.
      5.   Heavy equipment or machinery. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-2-2: CLEANING OF REAL PROPERTY AND WEED CONTROL:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms,
phrases and words shall have the meanings herein expressed:
      ABATE: To put an end to any condition which is considered a violation of
this section.
      DELETERIOUS: Anything injurious to the health, safety or welfare of other
persons.
      ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The North Salt Lake City Ordinance Enforcement
Officer, authorized representatives, or any North Salt Lake City employee or
contract employee, so designated to enforce the provisions of this section.
      ERADICATION: The complete destruction of weeds by chemicals, root removal
or any other method approved by the Enforcement Officer.
      OWNER: Any person, who alone or jointly or severally with others:
         1.   Has legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with
or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
         2.   Has charge, care or control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling
unit, as legal or equitable owner, agent of the owner, lessee, or is an
executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
      PERSON: Any individual, public or private corporation and its officers,
partnership, association, firm, trustee, executor of an estate, the State or
its departments, institution, bureau, agency, municipal corporation, county,
city, political subdivision, or any legal entity recognized by law.
      PROPERTY: Any form of real property, including a habitable structure or
any structure that is appurtenant thereto, object, or anything that is visible
or tangible, specifically including, but not limited to, hedges, automobiles,
etc.
      SOLID WASTE:
         1.   Garbage, refuse, trash, rubbish, hazardous waste, dead animals,
sludge, liquid or semiliquid waste, and other spent, useless, worthless or
discarded materials;
         2.   Materials stored or accumulated for the purpose of discarding;
         3.   Materials that have served their original intended purpose; or
         4.   Waste material resulting from industrial, manufacturing, mining,
commercial, agricultural, residential, institutional, recreational or community
activities;
         5.   Except it does not include solid or dissolved materials in
domestic sewage or in irrigation return flows or discharges for which a permit
is required under Utah Code Annotated title 19, chapter 6, as amended, or under
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC section 1251 et seq.
      STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on or
below the ground, specifically including, but not limited to, fences, wells,
poles, buildings or sheds.
      UNSIGHTLY: Offensive as reasonably determined by the Enforcement Officer.
      WEEDS:
         1.   Vegetation that has become a fire hazard;
         2.   Vegetation that is noxious, a nuisance or dangerous;
         3.   Grasses, stubble, brush, tumbleweeds, clippings, and cuttings
that endanger the public health and safety by creating a fire hazard; insect,
rodent or other vermin harborage; or other nuisance;
         4.   Poison ivy; and
         5.   Plants specified as weeds in the Utah Noxious Weed Act, Utah Code
Annotated section 4-17-1 et seq., and its subsequent regulations.
   B.   Purpose: It is the purpose of these regulations to provide for the
cleaning of real property, abatement of nuisances on property, securing,
maintenance or removal of structures and control of weeds within the City in a
way that will:
      1.   Prevent fire hazards;
      2.   Prevent insect, rodent and other vermin harborage;
      3.   Prevent induction of hazardous pollens into the air;
      4.   Prevent further spreading of vegetation that threatens the public
health, safety or welfare;
      5.   Abate the existence or condition of property, objects, structures or
solid waste that threaten the public health, safety or welfare or that create a
public nuisance;
      6.   Prevent the continued existence of unsightly or deleterious objects,
conditions, and structures upon property resulting from lack of maintenance,
repair or cleaning;
      7.   Enhance the appearance of property within the City.
   C.   Jurisdiction: All cleaning, maintenance or removal of property and weed
control enumerated in this chapter shall be subject to the direction and
control of the designated Enforcement Officer, with the assistance of any City
departments as appropriate.
   D.   Scope: It shall be unlawful for any person not to comply with any rule
or regulation promulgated by the City.
   E.   Real Property To Be Kept Clean And Secured: It shall be unlawful for
any person owning or occupying real property within the City, after receiving
written notice from the Enforcement Officer to fail to:
      1.   Maintain the height of weeds on the property, including adjacent
parking strips, alleys and street edges, as required in subsection F of this
section.
      2.   Remove from the property and lawfully dispose of all cuttings from
weeds or solid waste.
      3.   Effectively secure any vacant structure.
      4.   Maintain or repair any "unsightly" or "deleterious" objects or
structures, as defined in subsection A of this section.
      5.   Remove from the property and lawfully dispose of any unsightly or
deleterious objects or structures.
      6.   Abate from the property any condition that is determined to be a
nuisance or attractive nuisance as defined in section
4-2-1 of this chapter and section 12-1-1-10 of this Code.
   F.   Standards For Weed Control: Weeds shall be maintained at a height of
not more than six inches (6") (15.2 cm) at all times, and the cuttings shall be
promptly cleared and removed from the premises.
      1.   Weeds must be eradicated by chemicals, cutting or other acceptable
method so they do not exceed six inches (6") (15.2 cm) in height.
      2.   Weeds that are rototilled or removed by the root must be buried
under the soil, removed from the property, or composted as allowed by law.
      3.   If the Enforcement Officer determines that the large size of the
property makes the cutting of all weeds impractical, the Enforcement Officer
may issue an order limiting the required cutting of weeds to a firebreak of not
less than fifteen feet (15') (4.6 m) in width around any structures and around
the complete perimeter of the property.
   G.   Notice:
      1.   Enforcement Officer To Notify Owner Or Others Of Violations: If the
Enforcement Officer has inspected any property and has found and determined
that the property is in violation of these regulations or has reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any part of these
regulations, notice shall be given of the violation to the owner or other
responsible persons thereof in accordance with title 12, chapter 1, part 2 of
this Code.
   H.   Enforcement: The City Ordinance Enforcement Officer or any designated
enforcement official has the authority and power necessary to gain compliance
with the provisions of this Code and applicable State codes, as outlined in
title 12, chapter 1, part 3 of this Code.
   I.   Abatement: The City shall have the authority of abatement of violations
as provided in title 12, chapter 3, part 3 of this Code and of emergency
abatements in title 12, chapter 2, part 2 of this Code.
   J.   Penalty: Penalties are provided for in title 12, chapter 2, part 4 of
this Code. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-2-3: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
   A.   1997 Uniform Code For The Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings Adopted: The
most recently published edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings, as compiled as a code in book form by the most recently
published edition of the International Code Council (ICC) (providing for a
just, equitable and practicable method whereby buildings or structures which
from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or
welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be required to be
repaired, vacated or demolished), one copy of which has been filed for use and
examination by the public in the Office of the City Recorder, is hereby
approved and adopted as the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code of the City.
   B.   Application: The provisions of the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
Code shall apply to all "dangerous buildings", as therein defined, which now
exist or which may exist or hereafter be constructed in the City.
   C.   Alterations, Additions And Repairs: All buildings or structures which
are required to be repaired under the provisions of the Abatement of Dangerous
Buildings Code shall be subject to the provisions of the Building Code.
   D.   Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings: All buildings or portions thereof
which are determined after inspection by the building official to be
"dangerous", as defined in the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code, are
hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with procedures specified
in the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code.
   E.   Establishment Of Board Of Appeals: In order to interpret provisions of
the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code and to hear appeals provided for
thereunder, there is hereby established an Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
Board of Appeals consisting of five (5) members, who shall not be employees of
the City. The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act
as Secretary to the Board. The Board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations
for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the applicant with a copy to the building official. Appeals to the
Board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in the
adopted codes. Copies of all rules and regulations adopted by the Board shall
be delivered to the building official who shall make them accessible to the
public without cost.
   F.   Dangerous Buildings Declared Nuisance: All dangerous buildings within
the terms of this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall
be vacated or demolished as herein provided. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-2-4: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
   A.   Purpose: Motor vehicles which have been abandoned, dismantled,
partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, inoperative or discarded or left about
the City, in places other than junkyards or other appropriate areas: 1) impede
traffic in the streets; 2) interfere with the enjoyment of property; 3) reduce
the value of private property; 4) invite plundering; 5) create fire hazards; 6)
extend and aggravate urban blight and/or a nuisance; or 7) result in serious
hazard to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, welfare and
happiness of the residents of the City.
   B.   Short Title: This section shall be known and may be cited as the
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE ORDINANCE.
   C.   Definitions: As used in this section:
      JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any "motor vehicle", as defined in this subsection,
which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or
plates and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and the
condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative,
abandoned or discarded.
      MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel
along the ground or implement designed to be towed behind a motor vehicle,
including, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles,
motor- scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, recreational vehicles,
campers, and trailers.
      PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property within the City which is privately
owned and which is not "public property", as defined in this subsection.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any street or highway which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the
purposes of vehicular travel, and any other publicly owned property or
facility.
   D.   Storing, Parking Or Leaving Dismantled Or Other Such Motor Vehicle
Prohibited; Exceptions: No person shall park, store, leave or permit parking,
storing or leaving any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled
condition, whether attended or not, on any public or private property within
the City for a period of time in excess of seven (7) days. This subsection
shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building, or to a
vehicle stored behind a six foot (6') solid fence or wall on an approved hard
surface. This subsection shall not apply to any vehicle held in connection with
a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the City, or to any motor vehicle
in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on drag
strips or raceways.
   E.   Impounding: The Police Chief or any member of the Police Department
designated by the Police Chief is hereby authorized to remove or have removed
any vehicle left at any place within the City which reasonably appears to be a
violation of this section, or to be lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle
shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with
State law.
   F.   Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 12 of this Code. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Collection
4-3-3: Recyclable Pick Up Services
4-3-4: Specialty Recycling
4-3-5: Title To Garbage And Recyclables
4-3-6: Service Charges
4-3-7: Time And Place Of Pickup
4-3-8: Regulations And Requirements
4-3-9: Delivery Of Processible Waste To Solid Waste Management Facility
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
 
                                   Garbage produced in commercial
                                   establishments, public or quasi-public
COMMERCIAL GARBAGE:                institutions or establishments, including
                                   restaurants, hotels, motels and similar
                                   establishments.
                                   A type of garbage or trash container of
                                   galvanized metal or other approved material
CONTAINER OR REGULATION CONTAINER: and having a tightfitting lid or properly
                                   and sufficiently treated weather resistant
                                   bag manufactured specifically for use in
                                   garbage and refuse collection.
                                   Waste from the preparation, handling,
GARBAGE:                           storing, cooking or consumption of food and
                                   food products.
RECYCLABLES:                       Used or waste materials fit to undergo reuse
                                   or renewal.
                                   All waste matter, except garbage, attending
                                   or resulting from the occupancy of
                                   residences, apartments, hotels or other
REFUSE:                            places of dwelling and from the operation of
                                   a business. "Refuse" shall not be deemed to
                                   include industrial waste or waste matter
                                   resulting from the construction, demolition
                                   or repair of a building or other structure.
RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE:               Garbage produced in places of private
                                   residences.
                                   Lawn cuttings, clippings from bushes and
YARD WASTE:                        shrubs, leaves and trees and tree branches.
                                   (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-06,
                                   6-15-2021)
 
4-3-2: COLLECTION:
   A.   The City, or its agent, shall collect, remove and dispose of all
residential garbage, the removal of which is not otherwise provided for by the
establishment or institution hereunder provided. All garbage and refuse shall
be collected, removed and disposed of with such frequency and in such manner as
the City Council may from time to time establish by regulation.
   B.   Commercial and residential garbage shall not be mixed in the same
vehicle and transported to point of disposal. Commercial garbage disposal shall
not be a normal function of the City.
   C.   Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, no garbage or
refuse shall be moved or hauled away or transported upon the streets or public
ways of the City, except by the City or its agent, and except by authorized
persons hauling commercial garbage or refuse as hereinafter provided. It is
hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, except as permitted in this
chapter, to haul or remove garbage or refuse in the City.
   D.   Commercial establishments, public or quasi-public, institutions and
establishments creating commercial garbage, may remove commercial garbage
themselves or may employ the services of authorized contractors to remove
commercial garbage. Authorized garbage haulers must apply for and receive
permission to do so from the City Manager. Haulage of refuse must be done in
the manner, at such times and in such vehicles as may be approved for such
purposes as the City Council may from time to time by regulation provide.
   E.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as eliminating the charge
made for garbage service. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-3-3: RECYCLABLE PICK UP SERVICES:
   A.   Remove Recyclables: The City shall provide recyclable collection
services to all residential persons owning and/or occupying any property in the
City upon request.
   B.   Collection Containers: The City shall provide the owner and/or occupant
of each residence, upon request, with an approved residential/municipal
recycling container. The cost for use of said container will be borne by the
owner and/or occupant to be included as a part of the City's monthly utility
billing. Only recyclables placed in said container will be collected.
Additional containers may be obtained at the user's expense.
   C.   Acceptable Recyclables:
      1.   A list of acceptable recyclables will be provided to the owner and/
or occupant of each residence. The list will be provided yearly or when there
are any changes or additions to the items that can be recycled.
      2.   If recyclables are determined to be unacceptable due to insufficient
preparation of materials, a sticker or other form of notification explaining
the proper method of preparation of recyclables shall be left at the residence.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to accumulate and/or place in an approved
residential/municipal recycling container anything other than acceptable
recyclables.
   D.   Time And Place Of Pick Up:
      1.   Collection services shall be bi-weekly and on the same day as
garbage collection. Service may be delayed one day on certain holidays.
      2.   Approved residential/municipal recycling containers shall be made
available for collection services no earlier than the evening prior to the day
of collection and shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours after
collection.
      3.   Approved residential/municipal recycling containers shall be placed
within two feet (2') of the blacktop or in the gutter, if curb and gutter is
present, and at a location that is readily accessible to the automated
collection vehicle. (Ord. 1-17-2012B, 1-17-2012; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 6-15-2021)
4-3-4: SPECIALTY RECYCLING:
The City may enter into a contract with a private service provider for the
collection of specific recyclable materials. The terms of the contract shall
establish at minimum the following:
   A.   The provider shall be responsible for all administration of customer
subscriptions, billing, and customer service, where applicable;
   B.   The provider shall be responsible for the provision and replacement of
separate collection containers and minimum size specification;
   C.   The provider shall be responsible for clean up or tipped collection
containers when providing service to subscribers;
   D.   The provider shall supply the City with yearly report on the total
number of subscribers and collection weight;
   E.   Where feasible and practical the collection of specific recyclables
shall be made on the same week day as garbage collection; and
   F.   The provider shall provide can to curb assistance for a subscriber who
receives similar assistance with City garbage collection services; and
   G.   May provide for the collection of both residential and commercial
properties within the same transport vehicle for final point of disposal. (Ord.
2021-06, 6-15-2021)
4-3-5: TITLE TO GARBAGE AND RECYCLABLES:
The owner and/or occupant shall relinquish title to all garbage and/or
recyclables following collection services. (Ord. 2021-06, 6-15-2021)
4-3-6: SERVICE CHARGES:
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 2025-
14, passed 7-15-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below
when the ordinance is codified.
   A.   Required: All residents within the City shall pay monthly garbage
service charges in such amounts as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule
resolution.
   B.   Vacancies: If a dwelling unit or a place of business has remained
vacant for an entire month, the owner or possessor of the site may make
arrangements with the City Recorder for no garbage collection charges during
the continued vacancy of the premises.
   C.   Method Of Payment Of Service Charges:
      1.   The garbage service charges imposed by this section shall be added
to the charge made for water furnished through the water system of the City,
and shall be billed and collected in the same manner as water service charges
are billed and collected.
      2.   In the event that the obligee for the water service charges and the
obligee for the garbage service charges do not coincide, or in the event that
practical economic and administrative reasons do not make combined billing and
collection feasible, in the opinion of the City Council, the garbage service
charges may be collected with such frequency and in such manner as the City
Council shall by regulation provide. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-3-7: TIME AND PLACE OF PICKUP:
   A.   Placement: All garbage and refuse subject to garbage collection by the
City shall be placed at a pick up point at or near the premises designated from
time to time by regulation adopted by the City Council and at such time or
times as shall be designated by regulations of the City Council.
   B.   Day Of Collection: Until otherwise provided by regulation, garbage and
refuse must not be set out upon the street for collection prior to the evening
of the day before collection and must be set out on the day of collection
before the hour of collection designated by regulation of the City Council.
   C.   Removal Of Empty Receptacles: All empty receptacles must be removed
from the street as soon as practicable after being emptied, and in every case,
must be removed from the street the same day they are emptied. Receptacles
shall not be permitted to remain on the street longer than may be necessary for
the removal of the contents. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-3-8: REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Accumulation Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
accumulate garbage or refuse, or cause garbage or refuse to be deposited upon
any street or alley, or upon any premises in the City, without express
permission from the City. The City may permit the feeding or processing of
garbage or refuse upon premises properly equipped and maintained so as to
prevent the creation of a nuisance or a hazard to health, or permit the
depositing of ashes and other dry material for filling purposes at such places
as the City may designate and under such restrictions as the City Council may
by regulation impose. Additionally, the City may grant to any person permission
for sorting, baling and marketing trade waste upon premises properly equipped
and maintained for property zoned for that use.
   B.   Containers: Approved garbage containers consist of ninety (90) to one
hundred five (105) gallon containers designed specifically for automated
collection, equipped with wheels for easy movement by City users. All
containers have permanently attached, tightfitting lids.
   C.   Closing Of Garbage Containers Required: All garbage and market waste
must be placed in approved containers and the container shall be closed in such
a manner as to prevent offensive odors or flies.
   D.   Disposal Of Yard Waste:
      1.   Yard waste may be disposed of by residents and business
establishments in vehicles provided by them subject to regulation by the City
Council as to the places of disposal and as to the type of vehicle used to
avoid spillage upon public ways of the City, hazards to safety and the
prevention of nuisances.
      2.   The City Council from time to time may provide for the collection
and disposal of such types of yard waste as it may decide to collect and haul
in connection with its regular garbage, waste collection and disposal service.
In the event yard waste disposal service should require a charge to be made by
the City, the determination of the charge will be made by negotiation with the
residents or business enterprises and the residents or business enterprises
will be given an opportunity to choose from among services offered by persons
other than the City.
   E.   Burning Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn
garbage, market waste, manure or other refuse or rubbish in the open air or in
any furnace or stove within the City.
   F.   Dumping Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit or dump garbage, ashes, market waste, paper boxes, cartons, trade
waste, construction waste (such as lumber, building materials, rocks, concrete,
asphalt, and dirt), manure or night soil, or any other refuse, upon any lot
within the City, whether such lot is occupied or vacant and whether such person
so placing, depositing or dumping such refuse is the owner, tenant, occupant or
lessor thereof, or has the same under his jurisdiction and control.
   G.   Limitations Upon Dumping: Dumping waste and garbage shall be permitted
only in such places as are designated by the City Council. Dumping shall be
subject to such rules and regulations as may be formulated by the City Council.
   H.   Hauling Upon Public Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to
haul, convey or transport through or upon any public streets any garbage,
ashes, market wastes, trade wastes, manure, night soil, loose paper, scrap
lumber, excelsior, trees, tree limbs, bush clippings, lawn clippings, house
refuse, yard refuse, liquid wastes, or any other materials, in open trucks,
open trailers, or other conveyances unless completely covered with a heavy
tarp, canvas, plastic, cloth, or other material sufficient to secure the load
and prevent the same, or any part thereof, from overhanging the sides, or
falling from the vehicle or conveyance upon which it is being transported. Each
vehicle must be covered with a heavy tarp, canvas, plastic, cloth or other
acceptable material at all times when the vehicle is being used for the
collection of, or carrying, transporting or hauling manure, dead animals,
refuse and other materials hereinabove set forth upon the public streets within
the City.
   I.   Regulations Adopted: The City Council may adopt such regulations as in
its opinion are necessary to implement this chapter and its objectives. (Ord.
2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-3-9: DELIVERY OF PROCESSIBLE WASTE TO SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY:
   A.   The City has determined that construction of a solid waste management
facility (the "facility"), as defined in the Utah Solid Waste Management Act,
Utah Code Annotated title 19, chapter 6, is necessary in Davis County to
protect, preserve and enhance the environment within the City; and
   B.   The City has entered into a solid waste disposal services contract with
the Wasatch Integrated Waste Management District (the "contract"), pursuant to
which contract the City has agreed to supervise and regulate the collection,
transportation and disposition of all processible waste ("processible waste",
constituting "solid waste" as defined in the Solid Waste Management Act which
is processible by the facility) generated within their respective jurisdictions
(including any territory annexed thereto in the future) as authorized by the
Solid Waste Management Act; and
   C.   The City may enter into a separate contract for the disposal of
recyclable materials that are not processible by the facility; and
   D.   Utah Code Annotated sections 10-8-84 and 10-3-702 provide that the City
may pass all ordinances and rules and make all regulations not repugnant to law
necessary for carrying into effect or discharging the powers and duties
conferred by State law any ordinance necessary and proper to provide for the
safety and preserve the health and promote the prosperity of the City and the
inhabitants thereof; and
   E.   The Utah Solid Waste Management Act provides, among other things, that
the governing body of a public entity may:
      1.   Regulate the collection, transportation and disposition of all solid
waste within its jurisdiction;
      2.   Require that all such solid waste generated within its jurisdiction
be delivered to a solid waste management facility;
      3.   Control the right to collect, transport and dispose of all solid
waste generated within its jurisdiction.
   F.   Beginning on the date provided in the notice given by the owner of the
facility (referred to hereinabove) directly to the City for the commencement of
delivery of processible waste to the facility or in the notice given by the
district as to the effective date for the commencement of delivery of
processible waste to the landfill (as defined in section 2.1 of the contract),
all persons (including private collectors of solid waste operating within the
jurisdiction of the County) shall deliver all processible waste (as defined
hereinabove) generated within the corporate boundaries of the City to the
facility or the landfill in accordance with the contract; but, if the facility
is operating at capacity or is shut down as provided in the contract, such
persons, including private collectors of solid waste operating within the
jurisdiction of the City, shall, upon the direction of the owner of the
facility, deliver all processible waste to a landfill or landfills. (Ord. 2018-
08, 9-4-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-06, 6-15-2021)
CHAPTER 4
NOISE CONTROL
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 2025-
10, passed 6-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
SECTION:
4-4-1: Prohibited Noise
4-4-2: Regulated Noise
4-4-3: Factors To Determine Violations
4-4-4: Exceptions
4-4-5: Special Permit
4-4-6: Penalty
4-4-1: PROHIBITED NOISE:
It is unlawful for any person to intentionally or recklessly create the
following noise disturbances within the City:
   A.   Disruption Of Dwelling: To make, cause or permit any excessive or
unreasonable noise which annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health or safety of any neighborhood or person residing therein which, under
the circumstances, would disturb a person of average and reasonable
sensitivities.
   B.   Disruption Of Meeting: To make, cause or permit any excessive noise
which prevents or disrupts a lawful meeting, gathering, business or other
lawful activity which, under the circumstances, would disturb a person of
average and reasonable sensitivities.
   C.   Automobiles: To operate or permit the operation of a motor vehicle
which causes excessive noise levels as a result of a defective or modified
exhaust or mechanical system, or as a result of any unnecessary rapid
acceleration, deceleration, engine revving or tire squealing.
   D.   Dynamic Braking Device: To operate or permit the operation of any motor
vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged. As used herein, a "dynamic
braking device" means a device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of
the engine from a combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of
braking without the use of wheel brakes, also commonly referred to as a Jake
brake, engine brake or compression brake.
   E.   Street Performances: To use or permit the use of bells, whistles,
sirens, music horns or any other noisemaking device for the purpose of
business, amusement or otherwise which tends to collect persons on the streets
or sidewalks of the City.
   F.   Emergency Signals: To make, cause or permit the sounding of any fire,
burglar, automobile or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar emergency
signaling device other than for emergency or testing purposes. Any testing
permitted herein shall be conducted between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and shall be conducted for the minimum test
cycle time not to exceed two (2) minutes. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-4-2: REGULATED NOISE:
It shall be unlawful to cause, permit or perform the following acts between the
hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.:
   A.   Loading Operation: To load, unload, open, close or otherwise handle
boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage containers or similar
objects, except within the following zones: General Commercial (CG),
Manufacturing & Distribution (MD) and General Manufacturing (MG), which shall
have no restriction during said hours.
   B.   Construction Work: To operate any tools or equipment used in
construction, drilling, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings,
structures or streets. During the months of May through September construction
work may begin at six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
   C.   Power Equipment: To operate any mechanically powered saw, drill,
sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawnmower or other similar device, other
than powered snow removal equipment.
   D.   Garbage Collection: To collect garbage, waste or refuse.
   E.   Loudspeakers: To operate or use any loudspeaker, public address system,
or mobile sound vehicle amplifying sound therefrom.
   F.   Radios: To operate or play any radio, television, musical instrument or
similar audio device. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-09, 2-18-2020)
4-4-3: FACTORS TO DETERMINE VIOLATIONS:
The factors to be considered in determining whether a violation of the
provisions of this chapter exists include:
   A.   The level of noise;
   B.   The nature of the noise; i.e., usual or unusual;
   C.   The origin of the noise; i.e., natural or unnatural;
   D.   The level and intensity of any background noise;
   E.   The proximity of the noise to residential areas;
   F.   The nature and zoning of the surrounding area;
   G.   The density of inhabitants in the surrounding area;
   H.   The time of day of the noise;
   I.   The recurrence or consistency of the noise; and
   J.   Lawfully existing business, operating within the approved parameters of
their license or conditional use permit, where applicable. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-
2018)
4-4-4: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to emergency situations, the
lawful exercise of free speech, and conduct permitted by license or permit of
the City or otherwise authorized by law. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-4-5: SPECIAL PERMIT:
Persons may file an application with the City for a special temporary permit
authorizing the applicant to take certain action or conduct certain activities
not otherwise permitted herein. Any permit issued hereunder shall be in
addition to any and all other licenses or permits required by law.
   A.   Application: Applications for a special temporary permit shall be made
in writing to the City Manager and shall include the following items:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant;
      2.   Activity or purpose for which the permit is desired;
      3.   Reasons why the permit is necessary, including an explanation of
undue hardship and lack of reasonable alternatives;
      4.   The specific date, time and location to be covered by the permit;
      5.   Any other relevant information requested by the City.
   B.   Fees: Each application for permit filed hereunder shall be accompanied
by any required permit fees set forth by resolution of the City Council. No
permit shall be issued until the proper fees have been paid to the City. Unless
otherwise provided, the fees required herein shall be in addition to any and
all other license or permit fees imposed by any other law.
   C.   Issuance: The City Manager shall review all applications filed
hereunder and may issue or deny a permit, in whole or in part, based upon
consideration for public health and safety. Any permit issued hereunder shall
contain any conditions upon which the permit has been granted, including the
effective dates, time restrictions, location and other reasonable requirements
necessary to minimize adverse effects upon surrounding areas and any persons
therein.
   D.   Denial: If the proper fees have not been paid, or the City Manager
determines that the application does not conform with applicable law or it is
not in the public's best interest to issue the permit, the City Manager shall
deny the permit and notify the applicant in writing of such denial. The notice
shall state the reasons for denial and inform the applicant that he or she may
file a written appeal of such denial pursuant to subsection I of this section.
   E.   Term: Any permit issued hereunder shall specifically state the term and
purpose for which it was issued, not to exceed six (6) months.
   F.   Limitation: Except as provided herein, each permit issued hereunder
shall be valid only for the person to whom it is issued and only for the
purpose and location for which it is issued.
   G.   Records: The City Manager shall keep a record of all permits issued,
including the name of the person to whom the permit was issued, the type of
permit issued, and the fees collected.
   H.   Revocation: Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by
the City Manager due to the permit holder's failure to comply with the
provisions hereof or other applicable law. Prior to revocation of any permit,
proper notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be provided to the permit
holder.
   I.   Appeal: Any determination made by the City Manager relative to the
issuance, denial or revocation of a permit hereunder may be appealed to the
City Council by filing within ten (10) days from the date of said
determination, a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds for the
appeal and any other pertinent information. Such notice of appeal shall be
filed by delivering an original and three (3) copies to the City Manager during
regular business hours. Upon receipt of the appeal, the City Council shall
thoroughly and objectively investigate the matter and issue a written decision
stating the reasons for the decision and informing the appellant of any right
to judicial review provided by law. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-4-6: PENALTY:
Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as
provided in title 12 of this Code or may be subject to criminal prosecution as
a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 5
LITTER; HANDBILLS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Litter Regulations
4-5-3: Handbills And Posters
4-5-4: Exemption For Mail And Newspapers
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter:
AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE: A public or private litter storage and collection
receptacle.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper booklet, or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:
   A.   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
   B.   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest in sales thereof;
   C.   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. However, the terms of this
chapter shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either the same
is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained
in this chapter shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking
place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind
without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this
State, or under any ordinance of the City; or
   D.   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
GARBAGE: Waste from preparation, cooking or consumption of food, condemned food
products and all refuse and waste from the handling, storage, preparation and
sale of produce. Garbage originates primarily in kitchens, stores, markets,
restaurants, hotels and other places where food is handled, stored, sold,
cooked or consumed.
LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish", as defined in this section, and all
other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to public health, safety, welfare or appearance of the City.
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general or local circulation or any periodical or
current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per
year, and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or
any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature not included in the definitions of a "commercial handbill" or
"newspaper", as defined in this section.
PARK: A park reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public
area in the City, owned or used by the City.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except bodily wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
VEHICLE: Every device in, on, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively on
stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-5-2: LITTER REGULATIONS:
   A.   Litter In Public Places: No person shall throw or deposit litter in or
on any street, sidewalk or other public place except:
      1.   In authorized receptacles for collection or in official Municipal
garbage dumps; or
      2.   For collection as authorized by the City Council.
   B.   Placement In Receptacles To Prevent Scattering: Persons placing litter
in authorized receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from
being carried or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other
public place or on private property.
   C.   Sweeping Into Gutters: No person shall sweep into or deposit or cause
any deposits in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of
litter, grass clippings, dirt, etc., from any building or lot or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway or property. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
   D.   Merchants' Duty To Keep Sidewalks Free Of Litter: No person owning or
occupying any place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter,
street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying places of business shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business
premises free of litter.
   E.   Litter Thrown By Persons In Vehicles: No person, while a driver or
passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit or cause to be deposited litter
on any street or other public place or on private property.
   F.   Truck Loads Causing Litter: Subject to subsection
4-3-5H of this title, no person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited on any street, alley or other
public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit on any street, alley or other
public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any
kind.
   G.   Parks: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park except in
authorized receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the park or on
any street or other public place. Where authorized receptacles are not
provided, all litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein.
   H.   Lakes And Fountains: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any
fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or
elsewhere.
   I.   Occupied Private Property: No person shall throw or deposit litter on
any occupied private property, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on any private property.
   J.   Vacant Lots: No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or
vacant private property whether or not owned by such person. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-
4-2018)
4-5-3: HANDBILLS AND POSTERS:
   A.   Handbills In Public Places: No person shall throw or deposit any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any sidewalk, street or other
public place. Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council, it is an
infraction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, for any person to hand out, distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not
be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place for any person to
hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
   B.   Handbills On Vehicles: Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council,
no person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
on any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public
place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver
thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to
accept it.
   C.   Handbills On Uninhabited Or Vacant Premises: No person shall throw or
deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any private premises
which is temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
   D.   Prohibited Distribution Of Handbills Where Properly Posted: No person
shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill on
any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there
is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof
a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers Or Agents", "No
Advertisement", or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the
occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of
privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left on such premises.
   E.   Distributing Handbills At Inhabited Private Premises: No person shall
throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on
private premises which are inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or on
such private premises. However, in case of inhabited private premises which are
not posted, as provided in subsection D of this section, such person, unless
requested by anyone on such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any
such handbill in or on such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so
placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or
drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and
except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by Federal postal laws
or regulations.
   F.   Posting Notice Prohibited: No person shall post or affix any notice,
poster or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the
public to any lamppost, public utility pole, street sign or shade tree, or on
any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by
law.
   G.   Permit Requirements For Distribution Of Handbills And Posters:
      1.   No person or business shall post, stick, paint or otherwise fix, or
cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card,
poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the
attention of the public, upon any sidewalk, curb or any other portion or part
of any public way or public place, or any lamppost, electric light, telegraph,
telephone or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or upon the
columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any bridge or
other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of the
fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be authorized or
required by the laws of the United States, the State, and the ordinances of the
City.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to distribute indiscriminately to the public by
leaving at houses or residences in the City any cards, circulars, handbills,
samples of merchandise, or any advertising matter whatsoever, without having
first secured a permit therefor. This subsection shall not be construed to
apply to the sale of articles by licensed peddlers.
      3.   Applications for such permit shall be made to the City Recorder and
shall contain a statement of the nature of the article, cards or advertisement
to be distributed, the name of the applicant and the name of the manufacturer
or distributor of such article or service advertised.
      4.   Licenses shall be issued only to persons of good character. The
Chief of Police shall make or cause to be made an investigation into the
character of each applicant and shall report the results thereof to the City
Recorder before any such license is issued. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-5-4: EXEMPTION FOR MAIL AND NEWSPAPERS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the distribution of mail by
the United States, or to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on
private property in such a manner so as to prevent their being carried or
deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place or on
private property. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 6
OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
4-6-1: Commencement Of Offensive Business
4-6-2: Issuance Of Permits
4-6-3: Existing Offensive Businesses And Facilities
4-6-4: Control Of Animal And Fowl Facilities
4-6-1: COMMENCEMENT OF OFFENSIVE BUSINESS:
   A.   Application For Permit Required: No person shall commence or change the
location of any offensive business or establishment within the City without
first filing an application for a permit to do so with the City Recorder.
   B.   Defined: "Offensive businesses" means packinghouses, dairies,
tanneries, canneries, renderies, junk or salvage yards, bone factories,
slaughterhouse, butcher shops, soap factories, foundries, breweries,
distilleries, livery stables, blacksmith shops, or any other enterprise or
establishment which creates excessive odors, fumes, smoke, gases or noises.
   C.   Content Of Application: The application for a permit shall specify the
location at which the business or establishment is to be operated and
maintained or the new location to which it is to be moved. The application
shall describe the type of activity which will be conducted and describe the
manner in which the business or establishment shall eliminate, control or
modify the emission by the business of the undesirable odors, fumes, noises and
other noisome features and the manner in which it shall be screened from public
view, if its appearance is offensive. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-6-2: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
   A.   Report And Recommendation; Decision: The City Recorder shall cause a
study to be made of the proposed business or relocation of any offensive
business or establishment by the Davis County Board of Health and by personnel
engaged in the inspection of buildings and other facilities. A report and
recommendation shall be made to the City Council. The City Council, after
review, may grant to the applicant an opportunity to be heard and present
additional facts. Thereafter the City Council may:
      1.   Deny the application.
      2.   Recommend a modification thereof.
      3.   Grant a limited permit to enter into the business or make the change
of location subject to the requirement that the business facility conform to
standards established by the City Council with reference to controlling the
offensive features of the business.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: In the event a permit is granted, it shall be
subject to revocation either upon failure of the operator or owner to conduct
his business in the manner specified by the City Council at the time of
granting of the permit, or because a change of circumstances makes the
continued operation or maintenance of the business or facility a public
nuisance.
   C.   Authority To Revoke Or Modify Permit: The City Council shall have power
to revoke or modify the permission to operate and maintain the business in such
a manner as it deems necessary for the public good. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-6-3: EXISTING OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES:
   A.   Investigation; Notice: The City Council may require an investigation of
any existing offensive business or facility to determine whether or not it
should be permitted to remain in existence in or within one mile of the City
limits. If the City Council determines that the continuation of the business or
facility has become a nuisance to persons situated within the City limits or
that ample control is not being exercised to minimize the creation of excessive
odors, fumes, smoke, gases and noise, it shall notify the owner or operator
thereof that the City Council is considering revoking or modifying the
operator's license.
   B.   Modification: If the City Council decides to require a modification of
the manner in which the business or facility is to be maintained, it shall
specify the standards or specification to which the enterprise must conform or
otherwise lose its license to engage thereafter in the business or activity.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
4-6-4: CONTROL OF ANIMAL AND FOWL FACILITIES:
   A.   Authority Of City: The City Council shall have the power to prohibit or
control the location and management of any offensive, unwholesome business or
establishment in the City and may compel the owner of any pigsty, privy, barn,
corral, furbearing animal farm, feed yard, poultry farm or other unwholesome or
nauseous house or place to cleanse, abate or remove the same.
   B.   Examination: The City Council may on its own initiative and shall, on
complaint of a member of the public, examine the operation, control or location
of any business or facility for the purpose of determining whether or not the
operation of such business or facility should be improved so as to minimize the
offensive and unwholesome characteristics, or whether the business or activity
should be moved or abated.
   C.   Notice Of Abatement Or Removal: If the City Council decides that the
business or facility should be abated, removed or controlled, it shall notify
the owner or operator of the business or facility of such fact.
   D.   Limited License After Hearing: After a hearing, the City Council may
issue a limited license wherein it may prescribe the specifications and
standards which must be followed by the business or facility in order to be
permitted to continue in operation.
   E.   Forced Abatement Or Removal; Failure To Comply: Upon a determination by
the City Council that the business or facility is a nuisance, it shall have
power to order the abatement or removal of the facility or establishment. If
the owner fails to conform to such order, the City Council shall have power to
bring all necessary legal proceedings to force removal, abatement or adherence
to standards. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Established
5-1-2: Chief Of Police
5-1-3: Powers And Duties
5-1-4: Citations, Information
5-1-5: Jail
5-1-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a regularly constituted police force to be known as
the police department, which shall consist of a chief of police and such other
police officers as shall be employed by the city. (1989 Code § 13-10-1-01)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Powers Generally: The chief of police shall, in the discharge of his
duties, have the same powers and responsibilities as sheriffs and constables.
The chief of police shall suppress riots, disturbances and breaches of the
peace, and apprehend any person committing any offense against the laws of the
state or the ordinances of the city. He shall at all times diligently and
faithfully discharge his duties and enforce all ordinances and regulations of
the city for the preservation of peace, good order and the protection of the
rights and property of all persons.
   B.   Departmental Supervision: The chief of police shall organize, supervise
and be responsible for all activities of the police department and shall define
and assign the duties of the different police officers.
   C.   Attend Meetings; Execute Orders: The chief of police shall, when
required, attend meetings of the city council to consult with and advise them
on matters of public safety. He shall execute all lawful orders of the mayor
and city council and see that all orders and judgments of the justice court
judge are carried into effect. (1989 Code § 13-10-1-02)
5-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The chief of police and all police officers of the city
shall have the following powers and duties in addition to those that may be
given to them as peace officers under state law and these ordinances:
      1.   Suppress riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace, and
apprehend all persons committing any offense against the laws of the state or
ordinances of the city.
      2.   Execute and serve all warrants, processes, commitments and writs
whatsoever issued by the justice court judge, court or any court of
jurisdiction.
      3.   Preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest
offenders, protect persons and property, remove nuisances existing in the
public streets, roads, highways and other public places, enforce every law
relating to the suppression of offenses, render such assistance in the
collection of licenses as may be required by the license collector and perform
all duties enjoined upon them by law and ordinance. (1989 Code § 13-10-1-03)
   B.   Register Of Arrest: The chief of police shall provide and cause to be
kept a register of arrest. Upon such register shall be entered a statement
showing the date of such arrest, the name of the person arrested, the name of
the arresting officer, the offense charged and a description of any property
found upon the person arrested. (1989 Code § 13-10-1-04)
   C.   Property Taken From Person Arrested; Triplicate Receipts: When money or
other property is taken from a person arrested upon a charge of a public
offense, the officer taking it must at the time issue triplicate receipts
therefor specifying particularly the amount of money or kind of property taken.
One of the receipts he must deliver to the person arrested. Another he must
forthwith file with the clerk of the court to which the complaint and other
papers in the case are required by law to be sent. The third receipt must be
sent at once to the office of the police department. (1989 Code § 13-10-1-05)
   D.   Register Of Property Kept: The chief of police must enter or cause to
be entered in a suitable book and digital record a description of every article
of property alleged to be stolen or embezzled and brought into the evidence
area or taken from the person of the prisoner and must attach a number to each
article and make a corresponding entry thereof. (1989 Code § 13-10-1-06; amd.
2012 Code)
   E.   Stolen Property Disposition: It shall be the duty of the chief of
police to keep all lost or stolen property that comes into the possession of
the police department or any of its members. He shall make all reasonable
efforts to discover the owners thereof. If no owner can be found, the evidence
custodian may dispose of the property in a lawful manner. (1989 Code § 13-10-1-
07; amd. 2012 Code)
5-1-4: CITATIONS, INFORMATION:
   A.   Citation For Misdemeanors: The city police, or any peace officer, in
lieu of taking a person into custody, or any public official charged with the
enforcement of laws of this city, may issue and deliver a citation requiring
any person subject to arrest or prosecution on a misdemeanor charge to appear
at the appropriate court of jurisdiction before whom the person could be taken
pursuant to law if the person had been arrested. (1989 Code § 13-10-1-08; amd.
2012 Code)
   B.   Appearance Required By Citation Or Information; Arrest For Failure To
Appear; Motor Vehicle Violations; Disposition Of Fines And Costs:
      1.   Persons receiving misdemeanor citations or information shall appear
before the court designated on the citation or information on or before the
time and date specified in the citation or information.
      2.   No citation or information shall require a person to appear sooner
than five (5) days or later than fourteen (14) days following its issuance.
      3.   Any person who receives a citation or information and who fails to
appear on or before the time and date at the court specified shall be subject
to arrest. The justice court judge may issue a warrant of arrest.
      4.   Except where otherwise provided by law, citations or information
issued for violations of Utah Code Annotated title 41 shall state that the
person receiving the citation or information shall appear before the magistrate
nearest and most accessible to the place of violation who has jurisdiction over
the offense charged. If the citation or information is issued for a violation
within the geographical boundaries of any municipality or county precinct in
which a justice court exists and in which a justice court judge is currently
serving, such court shall be deemed the nearest most accessible court before
whom such person shall appear; provided, however, information or citations
issued for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, driving with blood
content of 0.10 percent or higher, and reckless driving may be filed and tried
in the district court in the county where the offense occurred without regard
to the location of the offense within the county.
      5.   Any justice court judge may, upon his own motion or upon the motion
of either the defense attorney or prosecuting attorney, transfer cases to the
nearest justice court or the nearest district court within said county, except
those cases filed under municipal ordinances.
      6.   It shall be the duty of the clerks and other administrative
personnel serving the district, juvenile and justice courts to ensure that all
citations or information for violations of Utah Code Annotated title 41, which
are not filed contrary to the foregoing subsection, shall be paid over to the
municipality or county entitled to the same by the state, county or municipal
treasurer who has received such fines, fees, costs or forfeitures from the
court which collected them. Such accounting and remitting of any sums due
hereunder shall be accomplished at the close of the fiscal year of the
municipality or county which has received fines, fees, costs or forfeitures as
a result of any improperly filed citations. (1989 Code § 13-10-1-09; amd. 2012
Code)
   C.   Citation Contents:
      1.   If a citation is issued pursuant to subsection A of this section,
the peace officer or public official shall issue one copy to the person cited
and shall within five (5) days file a duplicate copy with the court specified
in the citation.
      2.   Each copy of the citation issued under authority of this chapter
shall contain:
         a.   The name of the court before which the person is to appear;
         b.   The name of the person cited;
         c.   A brief description of the offense charged;
         d.   The date, time and place at which the offense is alleged to have
occurred;
         e.   The date on which the citation was issued;
         f.   The name of the peace officer or public official who issued the
citation, and the name of the arresting person if an arrest was made by a
private party and the citation was issued in lieu of taking the arrested person
before a magistrate as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 77-7-18, as
amended, or in this code;
         g.   The time and date on or before and after which the person is to
appear;
         h.   The address of the court in which the person is to appear;
         i.   A certification above the signature of the officer issuing the
citation in substantially the language set forth in Utah Code Annotated section
77-7-20;
         j.   A notice containing substantially the following language:
            READ CAREFULLY
            This citation is not an information and will not be used as an
information without your consent. If an information is filed you will be
provided a copy by the court. You MUST appear in court on or before the time
set in this citation. IF YOU FAIL TO APPEAR, THE COURT MAY ISSUE A WARRANT FOR
YOUR ARREST.
   D.   Proceeding On Citation; Voluntary Forfeiture Of Bail; Parent Signature
Required; Information, When Required:
      1.   a. A copy of the citation issued under Utah Code Annotated section
77-7-18 that is filed with the magistrate may be used in lieu of an information
to which the person cited may plead guilty or no contest and be sentenced or on
which bail may be forfeited.
         b.   With the magistrate's approval, a person may voluntarily forfeit
bail without appearance being required in any case of a class B misdemeanor or
less.
         c.   Voluntary forfeiture of bail shall be entered as a conviction and
treated the same as if the accused pleaded guilty.
         d.   If the person cited is under eighteen (18) years of age, and if
any of the charges allege a violation of Utah Code Annotated title 41, the
court shall promptly mail a copy of the citation or a notice of the citation to
the address as shown on the citation to the attention of the parent or guardian
of the defendant.
      2.   An information shall be filed and proceedings held in accordance
with the rules of criminal procedure and all other applicable provisions of
state statute if the person cited pleads not guilty to the offense charged.
      3.   a. The information is an original pleading.
         b.   If a person cited waives by written agreement the filing of the
information, the prosecution may proceed on the citation. (1989 Code § 13-10-1-
11; amd. 2012 Code)
   E.   Wilfully Failing To Appear; Misdemeanor: A person who wilfully fails to
appear before a court pursuant to a citation issued under the provisions of
subsection A of this section, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor, regardless of
the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally cited, and subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 13-10-1-12; amd. 2012 Code)
5-1-5: JAIL:
   A.   The city council shall provide for a place of incarceration.
   B.   The city council has contracted with Davis County for the purpose of
providing suitable premises and facilities to be used by the city as the city
jail. (1989 Code § 13-10-2-01)
CHAPTER 2
DISASTER RESPONSE
SECTION:
5-2-1: State Statutes Adopted By Reference
5-2-2: Interim Succession
5-2-1: STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The disaster response and recovery act, which is set forth in Utah Code
Annotated title 63K, chapter 4, is hereby adopted. (Ord. 92-12, 9-1-1992; amd.
2012 Code)
5-2-2: INTERIM SUCCESSION:
If any of the following city officers are unavailable to exercise the powers
and duties of the office they hold, then the officers stated below shall, in
the order named, exercise the powers and duties of that office until the
incumbent officer shall become available:
 
1st Mayor
2nd Mayor pro tempore
3rd City manager
4th Emergency manager
    Senior most city council member (in years on the council/or in the event 2
5th or more council members were elected the same year, then seniority shall be
    based on the greater number of votes received) available
 
(Ord. 92-12, 9-1-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 3
RECOVERY OF COSTS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Recovery Authorization And Procedure
5-3-3: No Admission Of Liability
5-3-4: Action To Recover Expenses
5-3-5: Conflict With Other Laws
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AGGRAVATED FIRE EMERGENCY: A fire caused or contributed to by the failure to
comply with an order from any state, county, city or local agency, department
or official; or occurs as a direct result of a deliberate act in violation of
state law or the ordinances or regulations of the city, county or other local
agency.
   A.   A fire that constitutes "arson" or "reckless burning", as defined by
Utah Code Annotated.
   B.   An alarm that results in a fire unit being dispatched, and the person
transmitting, or causing the transmission of the alarm, knows at the time of
said transmission that no fire or fire related emergency exists.
AGGRAVATED MEDICAL EMERGENCY: An alarm that results in an emergency medical
unit being dispatched, and the person transmitting, or causing the transmission
of the alarm, knows at the time of said transmission that there are no
reasonable grounds for believing that a medical emergency exists.
EXPENSES: The actual costs of the city, county, South Davis Metro Fire Agency,
or any other mutual aid department, including workers' compensation benefits,
fringe benefits, administrative overhead, cost of equipment, cost of equipment
operation, equipment repair or replacement, cost of materials, decontamination,
waste management (treatment, storage or disposal), and any contract labor and
materials. Costs of any health assessment or health effects study and related
treatment carried out for responding personnel as a necessity resulting from a
hazardous materials incident.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY: A sudden or unexpected release, spilling,
leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting,
escaping, leaching or disposing into the environment (including the abandonment
or discarding of barrels, containers and other receptacles containing any
hazardous material, substance, waste, pollutant or contaminant), any substance
that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics, presents a direct and immediate threat to public
safety or the environment and requires immediate action to mitigate that
threat. (Ord. 02-1, 2-5-2002)
5-3-2: RECOVERY AUTHORIZATION AND PROCEDURE:
The city and/or the South Davis Metro Fire Agency, is hereby empowered to
recover expenses incurred due to the city or other local governmental agencies'
response to a hazardous materials emergency, aggravated fire emergency or an
aggravated medical emergency from any person, corporation, partnership or other
individual or entity who caused such an emergency, pursuant to the following
procedure:
   A.   The South Davis Metro Fire Agency shall determine responsibility for
the emergency or response and notify the responsible party by mail of the
department's determination of responsibility and the expenses to be recovered.
The South Davis Metro Fire Agency shall serve as the city agent for collecting
invoices and billing the responsible party for costs. Mutual aid agencies of
the district will be eligible to submit bills. Invoices that identify eligible
costs under this section shall be submitted to the South Davis Metro Fire
Agency chief or designee within ten (10) working days after the costs were
incurred or identified. Submitted invoices should include sufficient
documentation for cost reimbursement (i.e., copies of time sheets for specific
personnel, copies of bills for materials, equipment and supplies procured or
used, etc.). Accepting invoices from mutual aid agencies shall not incur
liability to the city or district to pay costs from such agencies until payment
has been received by the city or South Davis Metro Fire Agency from the
responsible party.
   B.   The notice for assessment of expenses to the responsible party shall
specify that the determined responsible party may appeal the department's
decision before a hearing officer designated by the city council and establish
a date by which the notice of appeal shall be filed. The appeal date shall be
no less than fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice.
   C.   In the event the determined responsible party appeals the
determination, the hearing officer shall hold a hearing to consider any issues
raised by the appeal, at which hearing the appealing party and the South Davis
Metro Fire Agency or local government shall be entitled to present evidence in
support of their respective positions.
   D.   After the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a recommendation to
the city council, which shall issue a decision determining responsibility and
assessing expenses. The city council may adopt, modify or remand the
recommendation of the hearing examiner for further proceedings. The city
council may, in its sole discretion, hear additional evidence prior to issuing
its decision. (Ord. 02-1, 2-5-2002)
5-3-3: NO ADMISSION OF LIABILITY:
The payment of expenses determined owing under this chapter does not
constitute:
   A.   An admission of liability or negligence in any legal action for
damages; or
   B.   A criminal fine. (Ord. 02-1, 2-5-2002)
5-3-4: ACTION TO RECOVER EXPENSES:
The fire chief or his designee shall submit one or a series of consolidated
invoices to the responsible party identifying agencies or agents and their
specific costs for reimbursement. The responsible party shall issue a certified
check to the city, or the South Davis Metro Fire Agency, within sixty (60) days
of receiving any invoice. All funds received under the authority of this
section shall be disbursed according to the claims submitted. If the
reimbursement is less than the requested amount, each agency shall receive a
pro rata share of such reimbursement as the agencies' reimbursable costs bear
to the total reimbursable cost. The city or South Davis Metro Fire Agency shall
not be liable to the agency for any deficiency and, in the event the party or
parties determined to be responsible for the repayment of expenses incurred due
to the city or South Davis Metro Fire Agency fail to make payment after the
final administrative determination of any appeal to the city, or sixty (60)
days from the deadline for appeal is filed, the city may initiate legal action
to recover from the determined responsible party the expenses determined to be
owing, including the city or the South Davis Metro Fire Agency's reasonable
attorney fees. (Ord. 02-1, 2-5-2002)
5-3-5: CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS:
If any requirement or provision of this chapter is in conflict with the
requirements or provisions of any other lawfully adopted ordinance, the more
restrictive requirements shall apply. Further, this chapter shall not restrict
or replace cost of recovery from funding sources available under state and
federal agencies. (Ord. 02-1, 2-5-2002)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-4-1: Davis County Animal Control Ordinance Adopted
5-4-2: Land Use Regulations Of Animals In Effect
5-4-3: Penalties
5-4-1: DAVIS COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
The Davis County Animal Control Ordinance, as adopted by Davis County, and as
amended or superseded from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and
made part of this code as if fully set out at length herein. All laws, rules
and regulation contained therein, where applicable and within the
jurisdictional authority of the City of North Salt Lake, shall be in full force
and effect within the limits of the city, except as hereinafter specified.
(Ord. 2023-07, 5-30-2023)
5-4-2: LAND USE REGULATIONS OF ANIMALS IN EFFECT:
Adoption of the Davis County Animal Control Ordinance shall not supersede
regulations outlined within Title 10, Land Use and Subdivision Ordinances.
Davis County Animal Control shall be responsible for the enforcement of animal
related regulations within the City, with the advice and assistance of the
Community Development Department and Code Enforcement Specialist. (Ord. 2023-
07, 5-30-2023)
5-4-3: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided in any section of this chapter, any person violating
any provision of the Davis County Animal Control Ordinance, shall be subject to
civil or criminal penalty as outlined in said ordinance. Nothing therein shall
prohibit the City from pursuing separate civil enforcement action of violation
of said ordinance, this chapter, or Title 10 Land Use and Subdivision
Ordinances, in accordance with Title 12, Administrative Code Enforcement
Hearing Program. (Ord. 2023-07, 5-30-2023)
CHAPTER 5
CRIMES AND OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-5-1: Criminal Code Adopted By Reference
5-5-2: Open Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited In Public Places
5-5-3: Battery
5-5-1: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except as the application thereof is clearly impractical or inappropriate, in
view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all of the definitions,
requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and sections of the Utah
criminal code, Utah Code Annotated title 76, as amended, with a corresponding
penalty of infraction, class C misdemeanor or class B misdemeanor, are hereby
adopted by the city. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered
violations of this chapter and each such violation shall be subject to the
penalties as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2012 Code)
5-5-2: OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage, or to
have in his possession any open container of an alcoholic beverage, in any
public place.
"Public place", for purposes of this section, includes, but is not limited to,
public owned property, parks, roadways, sidewalks, streets, parking lots of any
place of business, apartment complex parking lots, office building parking
lots, bus stops, stores and their parking lots, fields, canals and their
embankments, and all places open to the public; provided, however, that this
provision shall not apply to those places in which the city council has
expressly granted a concessionaire operating at the golf course a license to
sell beer. Only alcoholic beverages purchased at the concessionaire's point of
sale is permitted on the golf course premises. No consumption or possession of
an open container of an alcoholic beverage is permitted in the golf course
parking lot or on any sidewalks adjacent to a public roadway.
Violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2012-03, 2-7-2012)
5-5-3: BATTERY:
   A.   A person commits battery if the person, intentionally or knowingly,
without legal justification and by any means:
      1.   Causes bodily injury to a person; or
      2.   Makes physical contact of an offensive, insulting or provoking
nature with a person.
   B.   Physical contact in subsection (A)(2) above shall include, but is not
limited to, kissing, pinching, poking, shoving or intimidating touching.
   C.   Battery is a class “B” misdemeanor. (Ord. 2023-01, 2-7-2023)
ARTICLE A. MINORS
SECTION:
5-5A-1: Curfew
5-5A-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Under Eighteen: Except as provided in subsection C of this section, it
shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in
or upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public place between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day.
   B.   Parents And Guardians: It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or
other person having legal care and custody of any minor, to allow or permit or
suffer any such minor to go or be in or upon any of the sidewalks, streets,
alleys or public places in the city within the times provided in subsection A
of this section.
   C.   Exceptions: The provision of subsection A of this section shall not
apply when any person regulated therein is:
      1.   Accompanied by an adult having the care and custody of such person.
      2.   Attending or returning home from a function of any school or church.
      3.   Attending or returning home from a lawful entertainment, amusement
or commercial activity.
      4.   On an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed by
his parent, guardian or other adult having custody or care of him.
      5.   Engaged in legitimate employment which requires his presence at the
public places during the prohibited hours.
   D.   Business Premises: No person owning or operating a business shall
permit any minor person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or to remain
on the premises where said business is conducted between twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., unless in the immediate presence of the
parent or other adult person having legal care and custody of said minor, nor
shall the owner permit any minor person under eighteen (18) years of age to be
or to remain on said premises, between twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M., unless in the immediate presence of the parent or other
adult person having legal care and custody of said minor. This subsection,
however, shall not apply to any minor who is lawfully employed on the premises.
   E.   Aiding Minor To Violate Curfew: It is unlawful for any person to
assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to violate the provisions of
subsection A of this section. It is unlawful for any person to use any
influence or otherwise to entice or persuade any minor, under the age of
eighteen (18) years, from his or her parents, guardians or other persons having
charge or custody of such minor without the consent of such parents, guardians
or custodians. (Ord. 92-4, 7-7-1992)
   F.   Penalty: A violation of this section shall be a class C misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 92-4, 7-7-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
ARTICLE B. FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
SECTION:
5-5B-1: Use Of A Projectile Weapon
5-5B-1: USE OF A PROJECTILE WEAPON:
   A.   Firearm Defined: A "firearm" means a pistol, revolver, shotgun, sawed
off shotgun, rifle, sawed off rifle, or any other weapon using an explosion.
   B.   Releasing, Discharging Or Shooting Prohibited: Within the corporate
limits of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to release, discharge
or shoot:
      1.   A firearm;
      2.   A BB gun;
      3.   A pellet gun;
      4.   A bow and arrow;
      5.   A crossbow;
      6.   A paintball gun;
      7.   A wrist rocket; or
      8.   Any other device which:
         a.   Uses an explosion, compressed air or return spring action to send
an object through the air; and
         b.   Causes or creates a substantial risk of bodily injury to another.
   C.   Defenses: It shall be a defense if the person:
      1.   Is acting in self-defense, or the defense of another;
      2.   Is a peace officer or ordinance enforcement officer acting in the
discharge of the officer's duty;
      3.   Is acting under specified conditions at an archery, gun, paintball,
or "airsoft" gaming range that is licensed or otherwise approved by the city.
(Ord. 2011-17, 9-6-2011)
   D.   Penalty: A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor, subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2011-17, 9-6-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 6
BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Applicability Of Provisions
5-6-3: False Alarms
5-6-4: Administration And Enforcement
5-6-5: Nonliability Of City
5-6-6: Penalty
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanism, equipment or device assembled for the purpose to
detect and signal an unauthorized entry or intrusion into any building or onto
any property, or to direct attention to a burglary, robbery or other emergency
in progress, and to signal the above occurrences either by a local or audible
alarm, or by a silent or remote alarm.
ALARM USER: The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility, or
portion thereof, wherein an alarm system is maintained.
EMERGENCY: The commission or attempted commission of a robbery, burglary or
other criminal action.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system which results in a response by
the police department where an emergency does not exist. It includes an alarm
signal caused by conditions of nature which are normal for that area and
subject to control by the alarm business owner or alarm user. "False alarm"
does not include an alarm signal caused by extraordinarily violent conditions
of nature not reasonably subject to control.
INTRUSION ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry
into the area protected by the system.
PERSON: Includes natural persons, without regard to the number or gender, and
any partnership, corporation, and any other type of legal entity.
PHYSICAL DURESS SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling a robbery or other physical
endangerment. (Ord. 99-11, 8-3-1999; amd. 2012 Code)
5-6-2: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all alarm businesses, residences,
employees and alarm systems which are installed, connected, operated or
maintained. (Ord. 99-11, 8-3-1999; amd. 2012 Code)
5-6-3: FALSE ALARMS:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall cause to be transmitted any intrusion or
physical duress alarm knowing the same to be false or without basis in fact.
   B.   Service Fee:
      1.   Imposed: A service fee shall be imposed for false alarms on a
physical duress or intrusion alarm system to which a peace officer responds.
The service fee shall be assessed on the user of the alarm system for each
false alarm after three (3) false alarms in any twelve (12) month period and
shall be in such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule
resolution.
      2.   Due And Payable: All service fees assessed pursuant to this chapter
are due and payable on the date written notice of any fee due is issued by the
city. If any service fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of the due date, a
penalty in such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule
resolution shall be added to each service fee that remains unpaid. If any
service fee is not paid within ninety (90) days of the due date, together with
all applicable penalties, the city may use such lawful means as are available
to collect such fee, including all penalties, costs and attorney fees.
   C.   Revocation; Penalty: Any alarm user which has more than three (3) false
alarms within any twelve (12) month period shall be subject to revocation and
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. Revocation of a user permit shall be in accordance with the
business license revocation provisions of the city. Any city alarm user whose
user permit is suspended or revoked by the city shall pay a reinstatement fee
in such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution to the
city before such permit shall be reinstated or reissued. (Ord. 99-11, 8-3-1999;
amd. 2012 Code)
5-6-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief
of police, or his or her authorized representative, who shall be authorized to
make inspections of burglar, robbery or other emergency alarm systems and of
the premises wherein said devices or systems are located. Such individual shall
have authority at reasonable times and upon oral notice to enter upon any
premises within the city to undertake such inspections and to determine whether
such systems are being used in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-11, 8-3-1999)
5-6-5: NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
The city shall not be liable for any defects in the operation of burglar or
robbery alarm systems, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon
the receipt of an alarm, nor for the failure or neglect of any person connected
with the installation, operation or maintenance of the equipment necessary or
incident to the operation of such systems. In the event the city finds it
necessary to order the system disconnected, the city shall inure no liability
for such action. (Ord. 99-11, 8-3-1999)
5-6-6: PENALTY:
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, failure of any person to
comply with the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a class B
misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-11, 8-3-1999; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 7
FIREWORKS AND OPEN CAMPFIRES
SECTION:
5-7-1: State Statutes Adopted By Reference
5-7-2: Retail Sales Of Fireworks
5-7-3: Public Displays Of Fireworks
5-7-4: Fireworks Restrictions; Campfires
5-7-1: STATE STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, penalties,
provisions and sections of the Utah county and municipal fireworks act, Utah
Code Annotated section
11-3-1 et seq., and the Utah fireworks act, Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-
220 et seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by the city. Any and all violations
thereof shall be considered violations of this section and each such violation
shall be subject to the penalties provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (2012 Code)
5-7-2: RETAIL SALES OF FIREWORKS:
Retail sellers of fireworks are required to obtain a permit from the city and
pay a permit fee and post a bond in such amounts as specified in the
comprehensive fee schedule resolution. (2012 Code)
5-7-3: PUBLIC DISPLAYS OF FIREWORKS:
In accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 11-3-3.5(2), persons desiring to
display fireworks shall be required to obtain a permit from the city for such
discharge, and provide evidence that the operator has received a license from
the state fire marshal division of the department of public safety. The city
may charge a permit fee in such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee
schedule resolution. The city may require the applicant to obtain insurance or
provide a bond as required by the city council. (2012 Code)
5-7-4: FIREWORKS RESTRICTIONS; CAMPFIRES:
   A.   Definitions: All terms relating to fireworks used in this section shall
have the same meanings as they are defined in Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-
202 of the Utah fire prevention act.
   B.   Sale, Discharge And Possession Of Certain Fireworks Restricted:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for retail sale, or
to discharge, or to have in their possession any fireworks in this
municipality, other than class C common Utah state approved explosives used in
accordance with, and only on the dates allowed, by Utah Code Annotated sections
53-7-220 through 225; the rules adopted pursuant thereto; and this section,
except as otherwise permitted by state law;
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any fireworks generally
east of Orchard Drive from the Bountiful City boundary to the Salt Lake City
boundary, all areas adjacent to the south curb of Eagleridge Drive, in the city
of North Salt Lake as depicted on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified
herein or in areas as designated by the officials at the South Davis metro fire
agency.
   C.   Campfires: Campfires and other fires are allowed only in an approved
fire pit designed and installed by the United States forest service or the
city. No homemade or makeshift fire pits are allowed. This does not apply to
residential structures or improved fire pits adjacent to a residential
structure.
   D.   Public Displays: This section and restrictions contained herein do not
apply to the city's 3rd Of July Civic Celebration because of adequate fire
prevention preparations.
   E.   Enforcement:
      1.   Every officer charged with enforcement of state and municipal laws,
including the fire marshal, is hereby charged with the responsibility to
enforce this section;
      2.   Fireworks possessed, sold or offered for sale in violation of this
section may be seized and destroyed and the license of the person selling or
offering fireworks for sale may be revoked.
   F.   Punishment: Violation of this section shall be a class B misdemeanor
punishable by both fine and imprisonment as set forth in Utah law. (Ord. 2014-
09, 6-17-2014)
CHAPTER 8
GRAFFITI CLEANING AND REMOVAL
SECTION:
5-8-1: Title And Purpose
5-8-2: Definitions
5-8-3: Jurisdiction
5-8-4: Scope
5-8-5: Notice
5-8-6: Failure To Comply
5-8-7: Enforcement
5-8-8: Appeal
5-8-9: Penalty
5-8-1: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This chapter may be referred to as the NORTH SALT LAKE CITY ANTIGRAFFITI
ORDINANCE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a process for removal of
graffiti within the city. The city specifically finds that the continued
existence of graffiti is an economic and visual detriment to the city. Further,
the city specifically finds that graffiti is related to gangs and other
criminal violence and contributes to criminal activity and juvenile
delinquency. The city declares that such graffiti is a public nuisance. (Ord.
09-08, 3-31-2009)
5-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the meanings herein expressed:
ABANDONED AND VACANT PROPERTY: Any property which has been abandoned and left
vacant by the property owner. Abandonment shall be determined by the
enforcement officer using reasonable discretion and judgment as to whether any
person is occupying the said premises.
ABATE: To put an end to any condition which is considered in violation of this
chapter.
CITY: North Salt Lake City.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Either an officer assigned by the North Salt Lake City
chief of police or the city code enforcement officer is hereby designated to
administer and enforce the provisions of this title.
ERADICATION: The removal and cleaning of graffiti by chemical or any other
method approved by the city.
GRAFFITI: Any form of unauthorized printing, writing, spraying, scratching,
affixing or inscribing on the property of another, regardless of the content or
nature of the material used in the commission of the act. For the purposes of
Utah Code Annotated section
10-11-1 et seq., graffiti is deleterious and unsightly.
OWNER/RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with
others:
   A.   Has legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
   B.   Has charge, care or control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit,
as legal or equitable owner, agent of the owner or lessee, or is an executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner.
PERSON: Any individual or public or private corporation and its officers,
partnership, association, firm, trustee, executor of an estate, the state of
Utah or a department, institution, bureau, agency, municipal corporation,
county, city political subdivision, or any legal entity recognized by law.
PROPERTY: Any form of real property, including a habitable structure or any
structure that is appurtenant thereto, object, or anything that is visible or
tangible, specifically including, but not limited to, retaining walls, fences,
signage, automobiles, etc.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on or below
the ground, specifically including, but not limited to, fences, walls, poles,
buildings or sheds.
UNSIGHTLY: Offensive to the visual senses as reasonably determined by the city.
(Ord. 09-08, 3-31-2009)
5-8-3: JURISDICTION:
All graffiti removal, cleaning or obliteration enumerated in this chapter shall
be subject to the direction and control of the police department. (Ord. 09-08,
3-31-2009)
5-8-4: SCOPE:
It is unlawful for any person not to comply with any rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant to this chapter, unless expressly waived by these rules
and regulations. (Ord. 09-08, 3-31-2009)
5-8-5: NOTICE:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: If an enforcement officer has inspected any
premises and has found and determined that graffiti is present on the property,
or has reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
part of these regulations, the enforcement officer shall give notice of the
violation to the owner or other responsible person thereof.
   B.   Written Notice Of Violation: Prior to initiating a court complaint for
the violation of these rules and regulations, the enforcement officer shall
issue a notice pursuant to subsection A of this section, and shall:
      1.   Describe the property;
      2.   Give a statement of the cause of its issuance;
      3.   Set forth an outline of the remedial action that complies with the
provisions of these regulations; and
      4.   Provide notice that said remedial action shall be taken within ten
(10) calendar days from the date of the notice.
   C.   Service Of Notice:
      1.   The enforcement officer shall serve notice upon the owner of the
property or other responsible person pursuant to subsections A and B of this
section. Service shall be deemed complete if the notice is served in one of the
following ways:
         a.   Served in person; or
         b.   Sent by certified mail to the last known address of the owner or
other responsible person; or
         c.   Posting of said notice in a conspicuous place on the property.
      2.   The enforcement officer shall make proof of service of such notice
under oath, and file the same in the office of the city treasurer. One notice
shall be deemed sufficient on any lot or parcel of property as continuing
notice to maintain the property free of graffiti. (Ord. 09-08, 3-31-2009)
5-8-6: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying real property within
the city, after receiving written notice from the enforcement officer, to fail
to remove or obliterate any graffiti within ten (10) calendar days from or on
any structure located upon any real property within the city, when the graffiti
is visible from the street or other public or private property. (Ord. 09-08, 3-
31-2009)
5-8-7: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Inspections To Ensure Compliance: It shall be the duty of the
enforcement officer, upon the presentation of proper credentials, to make
inspections of any property as is necessary to ensure compliance with these
regulations.
   B.   Inspection Made With Consent: Inspections may be made with consent of
the owner or other responsible person. If consent is not granted, a search may
be made pursuant to an administrative search warrant issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   C.   Inspection Of Abandoned Or Vacant Property: The enforcement officer is
hereby authorized to enter upon any property deemed abandoned or vacant without
consent of the property owner or other responsible person for purpose of
inspecting said property for violations of these provisions.
   D.   Department Authority To Clean And Remove; Failure To Comply:
      1.   If the responsible person fails to clean and remove or obliterate
graffiti after a notice has been issued by the enforcement officer pursuant to
subsections
5-8-5A and B of this chapter, or if graffiti is found to exist on abandoned and
vacant property, the city may, at its expense, employ necessary assistance and
cause the graffiti to be removed.
      2.   The enforcement officer, upon approved completion of the work,
shall:
         a.   Prepare an itemized statement of all expenses, including
administrative expenses, incurred in removing or obliterating the graffiti.
         b.   Mail a copy of the statement to the property owner or responsible
person demanding payment of such expenses to the city treasurer within thirty
(30) days of the date of mailing.
         c.   Each notice to the owner shall be considered delivered when
mailed by certified mail to the property owner's last known address.
   E.   Alternate Methods Of Compelling Payment: If the owner or other
responsible person fails to make payment within the required thirty (30) days
after the date of mailing, or after the date of decision of the appeal, of the
amount set forth in the itemized statement of costs, payable to the city
treasurer, the enforcement officer may either cause suit to be brought in an
appropriate court of law or refer the matter to the county treasurer, as
provided in subsections F and G of this section.
   F.   Collection By Lawsuit: If collection of expenses is pursued through the
court, the city shall sue for and receive a judgment upon all of the costs of
removal, including administrative costs, together with reasonable attorney
fees, interest and court costs. The city may execute on such judgment in the
manner provided by law.
   G.   Collection Through Taxes:
      1.   If the enforcement officer elects to refer the collection of
expenses to the county treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of the
property owner, the enforcement officer shall:
         a.   Make, in triplicate, an itemized statement of all expenses,
including administrative costs, incurred in the removal of the graffiti; and
         b.   Shall deliver three (3) copies of the statement to the county
treasurer within ten (10) days after the expiration of the thirty (30) day
period provided in the statement under subsection D2 of this section.
      2.   Upon receipt of the itemized statement of the cost of removing the
graffiti, the county treasurer shall forthwith mail one copy to the owner of
the land from which the same was removed, together with a notice that objection
in writing may be made within thirty (30) days to the whole or any part of the
statement so filed to the county commission. The county treasurer shall at the
same time deliver a copy of the statement to the clerk of the county
commission. If objections to any statement are filed with the county
commission, they shall set a date for hearing, giving notice thereof, and upon
the hearing fix and determine the actual cost of removal of the graffiti, and
report their findings to the county treasurer. If no objections to the items of
the account so filed are made within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing
such itemized statement, the county treasurer shall enter the amount of such
statement on the assessment rolls of the county in the column prepared for that
purpose, and likewise within ten (10) days from the date of the action of the
county commission upon objections filed shall enter in the prepared column upon
the tax rolls the amount found by the county commission as the cost of removing
the graffiti. If current tax notices have been mailed, said taxes may be
carried over on the rolls to the following year. After the entry by the county
treasurer of the costs of removing the graffiti the amount so entered shall
have the force and effect of a valid judgment of the district court, and shall
be a lien upon the lands from which the graffiti was removed, and shall be
collected by the county treasurer at the time of the payment of general taxes.
Upon payment thereof, receipt shall be acknowledged upon the general tax
receipt issued by the county treasurer. (Ord. 09-08, 3-31-2009)
5-8-8: APPEAL:
Within ten (10) calendar days after the enforcement officer has given notice of
violation, any person aggrieved by the notice may request in writing a hearing
before the city council. The hearing shall take place at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the city council. A written notice of the city council's
final determination shall be given ten (10) days after adjournment of the
hearing, upholding, denying or modifying the determination of expenses. (Ord.
09-08, 3-31-2009)
5-8-9: PENALTY:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of these rules and regulations, either by failing to do those acts
required herein or by doing a prohibited act, is guilty of a class C
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 09-08, 3-31-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Separate Violation: Each day such violation is committed or permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate violation.
   C.   Abatement: The city attorney may initiate legal action, civil or
criminal, requested by the enforcement officer to abate any condition that
exists in violation of these rules and regulations.
   D.   Liability For Expenses: In addition to other penalties imposed by a
court of competent jurisdiction, any person found guilty of violating any of
these rules and regulations shall be liable for all expenses incurred by the
city in removing or obliterating any graffiti. (Ord. 09-08, 3-31-2009)
CHAPTER 9
IGNITION SOURCES
SECTION:
5-9-1: Purpose
5-9-2: Definitions
5-9-3: Authority Of Local Fire Official To Issue Orders
5-9-4: Areas Affected; Written Order
5-9-5: Public Notice
5-9-6: Penalty
5-9-7: Enforcement
5-9-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter authorizes the fire chief of South Davis Metro Fire Agency as the
local fire official for this municipality to prohibit open fires and the use of
any ignition source, including fireworks, lighters, matches, and smoking
materials, when hazardous environmental conditions necessitate controlling the
use thereof. (Ord. 2012-10, 6-26-2012, eff. 7-1-2012)
5-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
FIREWORKS: Shall have the same meaning as found in title 53, chapter 7 of the
Utah code.
HAZARDOUS ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS: Extreme dryness or lack of moisture, windy
conditions, the presence of dry weeds and other vegetation and any combination
thereof.
IGNITION SOURCE: Fireworks, lighters, matches, smoking materials, and similar
means used to ignite fire. (Ord. 2012-10, 6-26-2012, eff. 7-1-2012)
5-9-3: AUTHORITY OF LOCAL FIRE OFFICIAL TO ISSUE ORDERS:
The local fire official is hereby authorized to issue orders prohibiting open
burning, open fires, the use of any ignition source, including fireworks,
lighters, matches, and smoking materials in any area of the municipality when
the local fire official determines that hazardous environmental conditions
necessitate controlling or prohibiting the use thereof. (Ord. 2012-10, 6-26-
2012, eff. 7-1-2012)
5-9-4: AREAS AFFECTED; WRITTEN ORDER:
The local fire official shall determine what areas are subject to prohibition
and the extent of the prohibition and shall identify the same in a written
order. The order may also include a map outlining affected areas. (Ord. 2012-
10, 6-26-2012, eff. 7-1-2012)
5-9-5: PUBLIC NOTICE:
The municipality shall immediately post copies of the written order of the
local fire official in at least three (3) public places within the city; post a
copy of the order on the official municipal website; inform all local news
media outlets of the order and provide a copy of the order thereto. (Ord. 2012-
10, 6-26-2012, eff. 7-1-2012)
5-9-6: PENALTY:
Any person who intentionally or knowingly violates an order of the local fire
official issued pursuant to this chapter is guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2012-10, 6-26-2012, eff. 7-1-2012)
5-9-7: ENFORCEMENT:
Every officer charged with enforcement of state and municipal laws within the
jurisdiction of this municipality, including the fire marshal is hereby charged
with the responsibility to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 2012-10, 6-26-2012, eff.
7-1-2012)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Traffic Code Adopted By Reference
6-1-2: Prima Facie Speed
6-1-3: Weight Limitation Of Restricted Vehicles On Public Streets
6-1-4: Authority To Erect Regulatory Signs
6-1-5: Motorcycles And All-Terrain Vehicles Restricted
6-1-6: Skateboards, Rollerblades, Long Boards, Sleds And Other Nonmotorized
Conveyances
6-1-7: Penalty
6-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
   A.   State Traffic Code Adopted By Reference: Except insofar as the
application thereof is clearly impractical or inappropriate, in view of the
context of purposes or penalty as provided, all of the definitions,
requirements, regulations, prohibitions, penalties, provisions and sections of
the Utah Traffic Code, Utah Code Annotated title 41, as amended, with a
corresponding penalty of infraction, Class C misdemeanor or Class B
misdemeanor, are hereby adopted by the City. Any and all violations thereof
shall be considered violations of this section and each such violation shall be
subject to the penalties provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1989 Code § 11-321; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Definitions Contained In Code: Unless the context otherwise requires,
the following terms, as used in this chapter, shall mean:
      DEPARTMENT: The Department of Public Safety of the State of Utah, or the
Chief of Police of North Salt Lake City or his agent.
      DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION: The Utah Department of Transportation.
      JUSTICE COURT JUDGE: The Justice Court Judge of North Salt Lake City.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The City Council of North Salt Lake City. (1989
Code § 11-322; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-2: PRIMA FACIE SPEED:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, or in any other ordinance of the
City, the prima facie speed limit on the streets of the City shall be twenty
five (25) miles per hour. (1989 Code § 11-323; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-3: WEIGHT LIMITATION OF RESTRICTED VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS:
   A.   No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be driven on the streets of
the City which have a maximum gross weight in excess of nine thousand five
hundred (9,500) pounds on one wheel, or an axle load in excess of twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds, except with the permission of the City Council.
   B.   No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be driven on the streets of
the City in excess of the maximum gross weight or axle load posted on the
street if the posting was authorized by the City Council.
   C.   As used in this section, "axle load" means the total load on wheels the
centers of which are included between two (2) parallel transverse vertical
planes. (1989 Code § 11-324)
   D.   Any person that violates this section is guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   E.   Commercial, excavation, and construction equipment delivering to a
property or approved construction site located on a weight restricted street
shall be exempt from this section. (1989 Code § 11-324; amd. 2012 Code; Ord.
2023-02, 2-7-2023)
6-1-4: AUTHORITY TO ERECT REGULATORY SIGNS:
The City Manager or designee may authorize any person employed by the City to
erect or install any sign or traffic control device required to enforce the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-2019)
6-1-5: MOTORCYCLES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES RESTRICTED:
It shall be a Class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code, for any person to operate any motorized vehicle, motorcycle
or all-terrain vehicle on any property within the City, except dedicated public
streets (when permitted), private property which has a business license to
permit the use of motorcycles or all- terrain vehicles in a commercial
capacity, or private residential property (provided the owner consents to such
use), or on commercial property used for the sale, lease, rent or display of
motorized vehicles. (Ord. 03-11, 10-21-2003; amd. 2012 Code)
6-1-6: SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERBLADES, LONG BOARDS, SLEDS AND OTHER NONMOTORIZED
CONVEYANCES:
   A.   Use Prohibited: A person may not intentionally or knowingly ride upon
or utilize roller skates, skateboards, long boards, rollerblades, scooters or
other similar conveyances on any public roadway or sidewalk on Eaglewood Drive,
Eagleridge Drive, Center Street and Lacey Way.
   B.   Towing Devices: It is unlawful for the driver of any motorized vehicle
to intentionally or knowingly drive or operate such vehicle upon a City street
or sidewalk while any sled, sleigh, skateboard, wagon or similar device is
towed, attached to or connected with the vehicle. (Ord. 08-17, 9-16-2008)
   C.   Penalty: Violation of this section shall be a Class C misdemeanor,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 08-17, 9-16-2008; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2023-02, 2-7-
2023)
6-1-7: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or the adopted State Traffic Code,
any person violating, causing or permitting violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1989 Code § 11-327; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2023-02, 2-7-
2023)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Purpose
6-2-2: Definitions
6-2-3: Registered Owner Responsible
6-2-4: Signs
6-2-5: Peace Officer Authority To Move Or Remove Vehicles Or Trailers
6-2-6: Applicability
6-2-7: Prohibited Acts
6-2-8: Regulations Not Exclusive
6-2-9: Notice Of Parking Violation Procedures
6-2-10: Presiding Officer - Administrative Law Judge Procedures
6-2-11: Judicial Review - Appeal Of Parking Code Enforcement
6-2-12: Penalties
6-2-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   This chapter is intended to serve, promote, and protect the public
health, safety, and welfare:
      1.   To reduce congestion upon the public streets of the City;
      2.   To promote safety and accommodate efficient snow removal on City
streets;
      3.   To accomplish traffic control;
      4.   To ensure that development provides the parking needed to serve the
associated uses, residents, tenants, and visitors;
      5.   To achieve an appropriate balance between the demand for and supply
of off-street parking; and
      6.   To accommodate multi-modal transportation usage. (Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-
2019)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT: Means heavy-duty vehicles, specially designed for
executing construction tasks, most frequently ones involving earthwork
operations.
IMPOUND: Means to remove or seize a vehicle or trailer to an impound yard or if
none, a garage or other place of safety.
MOVE: Means to move or relocate a vehicle or trailer to a location off the
public roadway or street.
PARK OR PARKING: Means the standing of a vehicle or trailer, whether occupied
or not. "Park" or "parking" does not include the standing of a vehicle
temporarily for the purpose of and while engaged in loading or unloading
property or passengers.
PEACE OFFICER: Is a sworn member of the North Salt Lake Police Department and
certified as defined under Utah Code section 53-13-103.
PERMIT: Means a specific written authorization for a use that is regulated by
this Code.
PERSON: Means the individual or business to which a vehicle or trailer is
registered, whether in the State of Utah or another state.
SNOW EVENT: Means a weather system that produces any type or combination of
winter precipitation such as ice, snow, hail, sleet, or freezing rain.
STAND OR STANDING: Means the temporary halting of a vehicle or trailer, whether
occupied or not, for the purpose of and while engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers or property.
STOP OR STOPPING: When prohibited means any halting even momentarily of a
vehicle or trailer, whether occupied or not, except when:
   A.   Necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic;
   B.   Or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official
traffic-control device.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE: Means sign, signal, marking, light, or painting or
other device on the road, sidewalk, curb, or street for the purpose of
regulation, warning, or guiding traffic, including standing or stopped
vehicles.
TRAILER: Means a vehicle with or without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
VEHICLE: Means any device such as farm equipment, construction equipment,
tractors or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn
upon a roadway, off highway vehicles, and any specialty equipment. (Ord. 2019-
01, 6-4-2019)
6-2-3: REGISTERED OWNER RESPONSIBLE:
   A.   If any vehicle or trailer is used in violation of the parking
provisions of this title, the person or entity in whose name the vehicle or
trailer is registered shall be strictly liable for the violation and the
penalty for the violation.
   B.   If a peace officer or Ordinance Enforcement Officer witnesses a person
stop or park a vehicle or trailer in violation of this chapter, the officer
shall assess the civil penalty against that operator in lieu of the registered
owner. (Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-2019)
6-2-4: SIGNS:
The City Manager or designee may authorize any person employed by the City to
erect or install any sign or traffic control device required to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-2019)
6-2-5: PEACE OFFICER AUTHORITY TO MOVE OR REMOVE VEHICLES OR TRAILERS:
   A.   When a peace officer determines that a vehicle or trailer parked in
violation of this chapter must be moved to avoid public inconvenience, ensure
public safety, or remove if abandoned, the peace officer is authorized to move,
remove, or impound the vehicle or trailer, or to order the owner or operator of
the vehicle or trailer to move or remove it.
   B.   A peace officer who causes a vehicle or trailer to be removed under
this section shall have the vehicle or trailer removed by a tow truck service
that meets the standards established by title 72, chapter 9, Motor Safety
Carrier Act, as amended.
   C.   The City shall not be liable for any lost, damaged, or stolen items or
damage to any vehicle or trailer moved, removed, or impounded pursuant to this
section.
   D.   The registered owner of a vehicle or trailer moved, removed, or
impounded under this section is strictly liable for all related costs. (Ord.
2019-01, 6-4-2019)
6-2-6: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter that prohibit the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle or trailer shall apply at all times as specified by
ordinance or as indicated on an official traffic control device except when
necessary to stop a vehicle or trailer due to emergency conditions, to avoid
conflict with other traffic, or to comply with the directions of a peace
officer or an official traffic control device.
   B.   Any permit issued under this chapter may temporarily authorize
stopping, standing or parking that would otherwise be a violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-2019)
6-2-7: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Restrictions On Stopping, Standing, Or Parking:
      1.   No vehicle or trailer shall stop, stand, or park, whether occupied
or not, in any of the following places:
         a.   On the roadway side of any vehicle or trailer stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of a street;
         b.   On or across a sidewalk or curb;
         c.   Within an intersection or roundabout;
         d.   On a crosswalk or designated crossing;
         e.   Adjacent to a clear view area as defined by City Code 10-1- 31,
unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         f.   Adjacent to or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         g.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, on a highway, or
within a tunnel;
         h.   On any railroad track or railroad signal area;
         i.   On any controlled-access highway;
         j.   At any place where an official traffic-control device prohibits
stopping, standing, or parking; or
         k.   Alongside any curb during times when prohibited.
      2.   No vehicle or trailer shall be standing or parked, whether occupied
or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
         a.   In front of a public or private driveway;
         b.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
         c.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk or designated crossing;
         d.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing
signal, stop sign, yield sign, or other traffic-control signal located at the
side of a roadway;
         e.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the opposite side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within seventy five feet (75') of the entrance when posted by signs; or
         f.   At any place where official traffic-control devices prohibit
standing or parking.
      3.   All vehicles and trailers stopped, standing or parked within a
public right of way shall be parked in the direction of lawful traffic
movement, with the wheels parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the
curb, asphalt edge, or shoulder, except where lawfully striped.
      4.   Parking perpendicular to a curb within a cul-de-sac is strictly
prohibited.
   B.   Passenger Or Freight Curb Loading Zone:
      1.   No vehicle or trailer may stop or park for any purpose other than
for the loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger
curb-loading zone during the hours when the curb-loading zone regulation is in
effect, and then only for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes, provided
the driver remains with the vehicle.
      2.   No vehicle or trailer may stop or park for any purpose other than
for the expeditious loading or unloading of property in any place marked as a
freight curb-loading zone during hours when curb-loading zone regulation is in
effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed
thirty (30) minutes.
      3.   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop at a place marked as a
freight curb-loading zone while freight loading is occurring. Unloading
passengers may not interfere with any vehicle loading or unloading freight,
provided that the driver remains with the vehicle.
   C.   Bus Stops: No vehicle or trailer shall stop, stand, or park, other than
a bus or coach, in a bus stop when any such stand or stop has been officially
designated (60 feet prior to the stop and 20 feet past the stop) and
appropriately signed or marked. A passenger vehicle may temporarily stop
therein while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or coach, provided the driver remains
with the vehicle.
   D.   Vehicle Left Unattended: No vehicle or trailer shall be left standing
unattended unless the engine is stopped, the ignition is locked, and the
ignition key is removed. If the vehicle or trailer is standing upon any
perceptible grade, the brakes shall be set and the front wheels turned to the
curb or side of the roadway.
   E.   Parking In Disabled Parking Stalls:
      1.   No vehicle shall park in any parking spot designated for parking by
disabled persons, unless:
         a.   The driver or a passenger in the vehicle is disabled and the
vehicle displays a disability special group license plate, temporary removable
windshield placard, or removable windshield placard issued by the State,
another state, territory, or foreign jurisdiction; or
         b.   The driver of the vehicle is parked to load or unload a passenger
who is disabled and the vehicle displays a disability special group license
plate, temporary removable windshield placard, or removable windshield placard
issued by the State, another state, territory, or foreign jurisdiction.
      2.   This section shall apply to and be enforceable upon public property
and on private property that is used or intended for use by the public.
   F.   No Parking During Snow Removal/Plowing Hours:
      1.   It is unlawful to park or leave parked any vehicle or trailer upon
the City’s paved portion of the street or roadway during a snow event or until
snow removal or plowing from pavement edge to pavement edge is complete.
      2.   Any vehicle parked in violation of subsection F1 of this section may
be impounded and subject to a penalty. No person may recover any impounded
vehicle without first paying the cost of impound and storage.
      3.   Vehicles which require circumvention for plowing are considered
abandoned or in continued violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
citation, removal, and impoundment.
   G.   Vehicle Registration:
      1.   Every vehicle at all times while being driven, stopped or parked
upon the streets, alleys, roadways, municipal property or publicly owned
parking lots of this city, shall:
         a.   Be registered in the name of the owner thereof in accordance with
the laws of the state, unless such vehicle is not required by the laws of Utah
to be registered;
         b.   Display in proper position at least one (1) valid unexpired
registration plate, on the rear of such vehicle; and
         c.   When required, current validation or indicia of registration
attached to the rear plate and in a manner complying with the laws of the state
of Utah, and free from defacement mutilation, and other obscuring matters, so
as to be plainly visible and legible at all times. However, if such vehicle is
not required to be registered in this state, and the indicia of registration
issued by another state, territory, possession, or district of the United
States, or of a foreign county, substantially complies with the provisions
hereof, such registration shall be considered as compliant with this code.
      2.   Any registered vehicle that has not yet received a permanent
validation or indicia of registration shall display the temporary indicia of
registration issued to such vehicle in accordance with the requirements set
forth in section 41-1a-211 of the Utah code or its successor section.
      3.   The above requirements also apply to any traitor, vessel, outboard
motor, or other conveyance required to be registered in the State of Utah
pursuant to Utah State Code Title 41 (Motor Vehicles), Chapter 1a (Motor
Vehicle Act).
   H.   Time Limitations And Long Term Street Storage:
      1.   No vehicle or trailer shall be parked on any street or roadway for:
         a.   Longer than forty eight (48) consecutive hours; or
         b.   Longer than allowed by appropriate signs or markings giving
notice of such parking time limitation.
      2.   For the purpose of this subsection, moving a vehicle or trailer
shall mean relocating the vehicle or trailer to a location off of the public
right-of-way, street, or roadway.
   I.   Parking Or Standing Vehicles, Trailers, Or Equipment On Street:
      1.   Construction equipment may be temporarily parked within a right- of-
way during periods of active construction as authorized by permit or agreement.
      2.   Inoperable vehicles or trailers shall not be parked, placed, stored,
abandoned, or otherwise left on any public street, alley, sidewalk, park strip,
curb, or right-of-way at any time.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to park, place, store, abandon, or otherwise
leave any motorized vehicle, combination of vehicles, or combination of
vehicles and load which have a length of more than forty five feet (45'), a
width of more than eight feet (8'), a height of more than fourteen feet (14'),
a gross vehicle weight over eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds, or more than two
(2) axles on any public street, roadway, alley, or right-of-way at any time for
a period longer than two (2) hours unless:
         a.   The vehicle or combination is actually engaged in loading or
unloading passengers or freight; or
         b.   The vehicle or trailer is located on a street or roadway within
an MD or MG Zone, with the exception of Main Street, Center Street, 1100 North,
Pacific Avenue, Overland Drive or Redwood Road, in which case the time limit
shall be forty eight (48) hours.
      4.   For the purposes of this subsection, a vehicle shall be considered
parked, even if the engine is running, if the vehicle is left standing for any
period longer than three (3) minutes, unless the vehicle is actually loading or
unloading passengers or property.
      5.   The provisions of this subsection do not apply to passenger buses
operated under the authority of the Public Service Commission of the State of
Utah, nor to authorized emergency vehicles, nor to City vehicles.
   J.   Parking Or Standing Near Mailbox Restricted: No vehicle shall be
stopped or parked, whether occupied or not, within fifteen feet (15') of a
public or private curb mailbox between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) A.M.
and five o’clock (5:00) P.M., except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic, to comply with law or the directions of a peace officer or
official traffic control device, or to momentarily pick up or discharge
passengers.
   K.   Parking In City-Owned Parking Lots:
      1.   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be parked in a City-owned parking
lot, including North Salt Lake City Hall, City parks, or other City-owned
parking lots in violation of any sign posted that restricts parking.
      2.   The City Manager or designee may grant written permission for
temporary use of a parking lot owned by the City of North Salt Lake under
special circumstances.
      3.   No motorized or non-motorized vehicle or trailer shall be parked
outside of a designated parking stall, unless specifically authorized by the
City in any parking lot owned by the City where parking stalls are designated
by painted lines or other markings. (Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-02,
2-7-2023; Ord. 2025-03, 2-4-2025)
6-2-8: REGULATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter that impose a time limit on stopping, standing
and parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to comply with other
more restrictive provisions that prohibit or limit the stopping, standing, or
parking of vehicles or trailers in specified places or at specified times.
(Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-2019)
6-2-9: NOTICE OF PARKING VIOLATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Any person who receives a Notice of Parking Violation shall pay the
civil penalty for that violation as set forth in the City of North Salt Lake
Comprehensive Fee Schedule, Section 7.3 Parking Violation Civil Penalties. If
the owner or operator requests a hearing before the Administrative Law Judge
within thirty (30) days, as provided in this chapter, the penalty is not due
until the hearing process is complete.
   B.   Per the Comprehensive Fee Schedule, failure to request a hearing within
thirty (30) days of the Notice of Parking Violation or failure to pay the civil
penalty shall result in an increased fee being assessed, with a second increase
for violations which remain unpaid after sixty-one (61) days.
   C.   Any Notice of Violation for which the appropriate penalty has been paid
within thirty (30) days from such date as may have been determined by the
Administrative Law Judge shall be deemed satisfied.
   D.   Any filing for a Notice of Violation for which the appropriate penalty
imposed pursuant to this chapter remains unsatisfied after sixty (60) days from
the issuance of the Notice of Violation, or thirty (30) days from such date as
may have been determined by the Administrative Law Judge, shall be considered
in default. The City may use any lawful means to collect on the default. The
owner or operator shall be subject to all fines, including court, constable and
attorneys’ fees. Nonappearance of an owner or operator may result in a default
judgment.
   E.   The City may use any lawful means to collect and satisfy the judgment,
including costs and reasonable attorney’s fees. (Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-2019; amd.
Ord. 2025-03, 2-4-2025)
6-2-10: PRESIDING OFFICER - ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE PROCEDURES:
The Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) is the presiding officer who shall be
appointed in accordance with title 12, “Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
Program”, of this Code to consider matters relating a violation to this title.
The ALJ shall not be a member of the North Salt Lake Police Department.
   A.   City Recorder Responsibilities: The City Recorder or designee shall
accept payments and offers of proof; manage payment plans; and schedule
hearings before the ALJ.
   B.   Make Payment Or Request Hearing: Any person who has received a Notice
of Violation on the person’s vehicle or trailer, by mail, or in person, shall
make payment in one of the methods provided for on the citation or may contact
the City Recorder or designee to pay or schedule payment or to request a
hearing before the Administrative Law Judge.
      1.   A request for hearing shall be in writing, on a request form
provided by the City.
      2.   The form shall be filed with the City Recorder or designee, signed
by the person named in the Notice of Violation, clearly state that the person
is requesting a hearing, and identify the Notice of Violation.
      3.   If the City Recorder or designee determines that a purported request
does not comply with this subsection, the person named in the Notice of
Violation shall be sent notice of the noncompliance within three (3) business
days. The petitioner may amend the request to comply with this subsection
within ten (10) days of receiving notice.
   C.   Standard Of Proof - Burden:
      1.   The burden of proof is upon the petitioner alleging defenses.
      2.   If the Administrative Law Judge finds by a preponderance of the
evidence that no violation occurred, or that a violation occurred but one or
more of the defenses set forth in this subsection is applicable, the
Administrative Law Judge may dismiss the Notice of Violation and release the
owner or person named in the notice from liability thereunder.
      A petitioner may allege the following defenses under this subsection:
         a.   At the time of the observed violation, the subject vehicle or
trailer had been acquired, possessed, or under the control of someone other
than the registered owner, in violation of the criminal laws of the State.
         b.   At the time of the observed violation, the compliance with this
chapter would have presented an imminent and irreparable injury to persons or
property.
      3.   If the Administrative Law Judge finds by a preponderance of the
evidence that a violation occurred, but that one of the defenses set forth in
this subsection apply, the ALJ may reduce the penalty. A petitioner may allege
the following defenses under this subsection:
         a.   At the time of receipt of the Notice of Violation, possession of
the subject vehicle or trailer had been acquired pursuant to a written lease
agreement or other similar written agreement;
         b.   The subject vehicle or trailer was mechanically incapable of
being moved from such location; provided, however, that this defense shall not
apply to any vehicle or trailer which remains at such location in excess of
twelve (12) hours;
         c.   Any marking, sign, or other indicia of parking regulation:
            (1)   Was not clearly visible or comprehensible; or
            (2)   Was not properly installed; or
            (3)   There exist other mitigating circumstances as may be
determined by the ALJ.
      4.   If the Administrative Law Judge finds that a violation occurred and
no applicable defense exists, the ALJ may, in the interest of justice and on
behalf of the City, enforce the penalty and may set up a plan for the timely or
periodic payment of the applicable penalty. (Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-2019; amd. Ord.
2020-02, 1-7-2020; Ord. 2025-03, 2-4-2025)
6-2-11: JUDICIAL REVIEW - APPEAL OF PARKING CODE ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any party adversely affected by any decision made in the exercise of
the provisions of this chapter, may file a petition for review of the decision
or order by the District Court within thirty (30) days after the decision is
rendered.
   B.   The decision or order by the Administrative Law Judge constitutes final
agency action.
   C.   A party may seek judicial review only after exhausting all
administrative remedies available.
   D.   The petition shall name the agency and all other appropriate parties as
respondents and shall meet the form requirements specified.
   E.   At the time of the appeal to District Court, the appellant may request
within thirty (30) days a transcript of the hearing and shall be responsible
for all associated costs of the transcription.
   F.   The District Court's review is limited to the record of the
administrative decision that is being appealed. The court shall not accept or
consider any evidence that is not part of the record of that decision.
   G.   The District Court shall presume that the decision or order of the
Parking Code Enforcement Administrative Law Judge is valid.
   H.   The District Court shall review the record to determine whether or not
the decision was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal. (Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-2019)
6-2-12: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any parking regulation in this chapter is subject to penalties as
currently adopted in the City of North Salt Lake Comprehensive Fee Schedule,
section 7.3 Parking Violation Civil Penalties.
   B.   Any vehicle or trailer with unpaid North Salt Lake parking tickets is
subject to impound at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-2019)
CHAPTER 3
MOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CITY TRAILS, PATHWAYS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Motorized Vehicle Defined
6-3-2: Prohibited Use
6-3-3: Penalty
6-3-1: MOTORIZED VEHICLE DEFINED:
"Motorized vehicle", as used in this chapter, includes, but is not limited to,
automobiles, motorcycles, HOV vehicles, motorized scooters and all other means
of motorized travel. (Ord. 2010-15, 6-15-2010)
6-3-2: PROHIBITED USE:
It is unlawful to drive, operate or ride, or to possess a motorized vehicle on
trails, pathways or other off road travelways owned or maintained by the city,
unless designated as open to motorized vehicles by the city council, or except
when those vehicles are authorized by the city. (Ord. 2010-15, 6-15-2010)
6-3-3: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall be a class C misdemeanor, punishable by both
fine and imprisonment, as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2010-15, 6-15-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Street Department
7-1-2: Sidewalk Regulations
7-1-3: Obstruction Of Public Streets By Railroads
7-1-4: Obstructions To Streets And Sidewalks
7-1-1: STREET DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created a department of streets, which shall
have general supervision of the streets, sidewalks, bridges and other public
ways.
   B.   Public Works Director: The department shall be under the direction and
control of the public works director. (1989 Code § 11-311)
   C.   Powers And Duties: The department shall:
      1.   Supervise the construction, maintenance and repair of streets,
sidewalks, bridges, curbs, gutters, culverts, drains, waterways and other
public ways;
      2.   Control all waters flowing on the streets, sidewalks and public
ways, whether originating from storm, flood, drainage or irrigation waters;
      3.   Keep a record of and promptly investigate all complaints of
defective streets, culverts, drains, ditches, sidewalks and other public ways
and, when proper, repair, replace or take such action as deemed best, and shall
record the action taken on each complaint;
      4.   Enforce the provisions of this title, and all other ordinances
relating to the maintenance and use of streets, culverts, drains, ditches,
waterways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other public ways; and
      5.   Repair, or cause to be repaired, all defects coming to the
department's attention and take responsible precautions to protect the public
from injuries due to such defects pending their repair. (1989 Code § 11-312;
amd. 2012 Code)
7-1-2: SIDEWALK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Snow Removal 1 :
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, lessor or agent having
charge or control of any property, building, lot, land or any real estate
abutting against any street to fail, refuse or neglect to remove promptly and
effectively every snowfall from the sidewalk in front of such property. In any
event, all such snow, ice and hail shall be removed within twenty four (24)
hours of the end of the storm.
      2.   Any area of a sidewalk where snow has not been removed as required
in this subsection is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated
by civil action.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to blow, shovel or plow snow from private
property onto a public street or right of way.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person removing snow from the sidewalk
to deposit dirt, leaves or other such material in the gutter, so as to clog or
prevent the free flow of water therein. (Ord. 09-01, 1-20-2009)
      5.   A violation of subsection A1, A3 or A4 of this section shall be an
infraction and shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 09-01, 1-20-2009; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Placing Trash Or Other Obstructions Prohibited: It shall be unlawful
for any person owning, occupying or having control of any premises to place, or
permit to be placed (except on normal garbage collection days or within 7 days
prior to a special city trash collection) upon or in the public street, parking
area, gutter or sidewalk, or on the half of the street next to such premises,
any of the following materials which could hamper pedestrian traffic or
obstruct passage:
      1.   Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, sweepings, refuse matter,
ice, snow, water, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substances;
      2.   Any wagons, lumber, wood boxes, fencing, building materials, dead
trees, tree stumps, merchandise or other thing, except as expressly authorized
by ordinance, without the permission of the city council; and
      3.   Any permanent or temporary structure, mechanism, device, vehicle, or
other thing of any kind or character, except trees planted pursuant to the
provisions of applicable ordinances. (1989 Code § 11-362; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Doors Opening Into Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation owning or having the control or management of any alley, road or
passageway to construct or hang gates or doors to such alley, road or
passageway so that the gates or doors thereto, when open, shall project
outwardly more than two feet (2') over or upon the sidewalk or beyond the
property line. (1989 Code § 11-364)
   D.   Discharge Of Water On Sidewalk: It shall be unlawful for any person
owning, occupying or having control of any premises to fail, refuse or neglect
to prevent water from these premises or from any other source under the control
of such person to be discharged upon the surface of any sidewalk. (1989 Code §
11-365)
   E.   Crossing At Intersections: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive
or park a self-propelled vehicle or lead, drive or ride any animal upon any
sidewalk, except across a sidewalk at established crossings. (1989 Code § 11-
366)
   F.   Business To Keep Sidewalk Clean: It shall be unlawful for any owners or
occupants of any place of business to refuse, neglect or fail to cause the
sidewalk abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned each morning before the hour
of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. (1989 Code § 11-367)
   G.   Placing Goods On Sidewalks For Sale Or Show: No goods, wares or
merchandise shall be placed, maintained or permitted for sale or show in or on
any parking area, street or sidewalk beyond two feet (2') from the front line
of the lot, without first obtaining the written approval of the city council.
Such approval shall be granted only when such sale or show shall be a
promotional activity not exceeding forty eight (48) hours and when participated
in by a majority of firms seeking approval in their business areas. The city
council's written approval shall specifically provide that no goods, wares or
merchandise shall be placed in such a manner as to leave less than a six foot
(6') passageway for pedestrians. (1989 Code § 11-368)
   H.   Placing Goods On Sidewalks For Receipt Or Delivery: It shall be
unlawful for any person to place or permit to be placed or kept upon any
sidewalk, any goods, wares or merchandise which he may be receiving or
delivering, without leaving a foot passageway upon such sidewalk. It shall be
unlawful for any person receiving or delivering such goods, wares or
merchandise to permit the same to be or remain on such sidewalk for a longer
period than four (4) hours. (1989 Code § 11-369; amd. 2012 Code)
   I.   Residences To Keep Sidewalks Clean And Clear: It shall be unlawful for
any owners or occupants of any residence, business or lot to refuse, neglect or
fail to cause the sidewalk to be clean and clear of any shrubs, bushes,
overhanging or protruding tree limbs and debris. (1989 Code § 11-370)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  4-2-1C2u of this code.
7-1-3: OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC STREETS BY RAILROADS:
   A.   Regulations And Prohibitions:
      1.   No railroad company, railroad engineer, railroad conductor or any
other person operating or in control of the movement of any railroad train or
locomotive, shall cause or permit any locomotive, railroad car, train or
railroad cars or any portion thereof to obstruct any intersection between a
railroad and public street so as to prevent any person or vehicle from crossing
the railroad tracks at such intersection for a period longer than five (5)
minutes, except:
         a.   When necessary to comply with signals affecting the safety of the
movement of trains (as required by state and federal regulations);
         b.   When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the
track;
         c.   When the train is disabled;
         d.   When the train is in motion or while engaged in switching
operations (as required by State and Federal regulations);
         e.   When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the crossing;
or
         f.   When necessary to comply with a governmental safety regulation.
      2.   In the event that a railroad train, locomotive, railroad car or
railroad cars, or any portion thereof, obstruct any intersection between a
railroad and public street so as to prevent any person or any vehicle from
crossing the railroad tracks at such intersection for a period longer than five
(5) minutes, notice shall be given at each such crossing by the engineer,
conductor or other employee of said railroad company of such delay by means of
a handheld sign clearly visible to the waiting motorists or pedestrians that
said locomotive, railroad car, train or portion thereof will be delayed for
more than five (5) minutes at such crossings. (Ord. 91-2, 2-5-1991)
   B.   Penalty: A violation of any provision of this section shall be a Class
B misdemeanor, and shall carry a mandatory minimum fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) and a maximum penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each occurrence of delay for a period of more than five (5)
minutes which is not excused by the provisions and exceptions set forth in
subsection A1 of this section shall be a separate offense. No criminal
conviction shall excuse a person from otherwise complying with the provisions
of this section. (Ord. 91-2, 2-5-1991; amd. 2012 Code)
7-1-4: OBSTRUCTIONS TO STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Prohibited: It is unlawful to place or permit, or cause to allow to be
placed or permitted, or for a property owner adjacent to a public right-of-way
to permit the continued existence of, anywhere upon a public street or
sidewalk, anything which wholly or partially obstructs, impedes or blocks use
by pedestrians or vehicles. This prohibition includes trees, bushes, sidewalks
raised by trees or other means, un-level sidewalks, dirt, rocks, rubbish,
construction materials, wood, trailers or vehicles. It shall be unlawful for
any person to place a trash dumpster within public rights- of-way that impedes
traffic or creates a driving hazard.
   B.   Temporary Dumpster Or Portable Storage Device:
      1.   A permit to place a dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable
storage device shall be for an initial term of not more than fourteen (14)
days.
      2.   Provided the permit applicant is in compliance with the provisions
of this title and any other applicable City regulations, a renewal permit may
be approved and issued for an additional fourteen (14) day period upon
application and payment of the permit renewal fee.
      3.   No more than one renewal permit shall be issued by the City for any
dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device placed upon any City
street.
      4.   The dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device shall
be removed no later than the expiration date of the permit.
      5.   No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device may be
placed:
         a.   On any arterial or collector road in the City;
         b.   Within forty feet (40') of an intersection;
         c.   Within any prohibited or restricted area;
         d.   Nearer than fifteen feet (15') to any fire hydrant;
         e.   Within the designated travel lane of any street extending a
distance of more than nine feet (9') from the curb line or edge of pavement;
         f.   To interfere with any required clear sight distance across any
intersection;
         g.   To obstruct any pedestrian way or the travel lane of any public
street; or
         h.   To interfere with the operation or maintenance of any public
utility.
      6.   Any dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device shall
have the following:
         a.   The name, address and telephone number of the dumpster, temporary
dumpster, or portable storage device owner/operator displayed conspicuously on
at least two (2) sides of the device;
         b.   Reflective tape shall be placed upon all four (4) sides of the
dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device in such a manner as to
make it visible at night;
         c.   Any dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device
rollers or wheels shall be placed upon a wooden pad of at least six inches by
six inches and at least three-fourths (3/4) of an inch in thickness, or on a
similarly protective device in order to prevent damage to the road surface.
      7.   No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device shall:
         a.   Be loaded in such a manner as to cause its contents to spill onto
any street, sidewalk, or other area intended for pedestrian travel;
         b.   Contain any hazardous waste unless pursuant to a permit for such
waste issued by the appropriate governmental entity;
         c.   Emit any noxious or offensive odor; or
         d.   Otherwise create any hazard or risk to public health.
      8.   In addition to the provisions of subsections B5, B6, and B7 of this
section, the placement of any dumpster shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the State of Utah Motor Vehicle Code.
      9.   If any damage or injury occurs to the asphalt, curb or sidewalk by a
dumpster, temporary dumpster or portable storage device which is caused or the
result of the use or occupancy of any street or road, the permittee shall be
responsible and liable to restore the asphalt, curb or sidewalk to its original
condition.
      10.   If the permittee refuses to properly restore the asphalt, curb and
sidewalk to its original condition, the City may do so and collect the cost of
the same from the permittee.
   C.   Encroachment: Trees, bushes or other growth, or the branches, fruit or
leaves thereof, which encroach directly upon the street or sidewalk, or within
eleven feet (11') above the street or seven feet (7') above the sidewalk, are
prohibited.
   D.   Violation: Violations of this section may also be treated as a Class C
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2019-01, 6-4-2019)
CHAPTER 2
STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-2-1: Conformance To Specifications
7-2-2: Permit Required; Supervision
7-2-3: Driveways; Changes To Construction
7-2-4: Building Materials In Street
7-2-5: Sand Or Gravel On Paved Street Or Sidewalk
7-2-6: Overflowing Of Water On Public Property
7-2-7: Irrigation Ditches Across Sidewalks
7-2-1: CONFORMANCE TO SPECIFICATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent, servant,
contractor or employee, to construct a street or sidewalk which does not
conform to specifications established by the city engineer or other authorized
representative of the city, unless special permission to deviate from such
specifications is first obtained from the chief building official. (1989 Code §
11-351; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; SUPERVISION:
   A.   No person, either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or employee,
shall construct any permanent sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from
the city engineer. The permit shall specify that the sidewalk is to be
constructed according to city specifications and standards.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to construct a sidewalk in violation of the
specifications given by a proper city official.
   C.   All sidewalks shall be constructed under the inspection of the public
works director or designee. (1989 Code § 11-352; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-3: DRIVEWAYS; CHANGES TO CONSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway across a sidewalk,
or cut or change the construction of sidewalk, curb, or gutter without first
making written application and obtaining a permit from the public works
department. The acceptance of such permit shall be deemed an agreement on the
part of such person to construct said driveway in accordance with
specifications furnished by the city. (1989 Code § 11-353; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-4: BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use any portion of the public
streets when erecting or repairing any building upon land abutting thereon,
without first making application to and receiving a permit from the city
council for the occupation or use of such portions of streets for such periods
of time and under such limitations and restrictions as may be required by the
city council. Any such permit may be revoked by the city council at any time
when the holder thereof fails to comply with any rule or regulation under which
it is granted, or when, in the opinion of the city council, the public interest
requires such revocation. (1989 Code § 11-354; amd. 2012 Code)
7-2-5: SAND OR GRAVEL ON PAVED STREET OR SIDEWALK:
Unless a permit from the public works director or designee has been obtained,
it shall be unlawful to: (1989 Code § 11-355; amd. 2012 Code)
   A.   Place or pile, or permit to place or pile, any sand, gravel, lime,
cement, mortar, plaster, concrete, or any like substance or mixture, or allow
the same to remain on any portion of any paved street or sidewalk.
   B.   Make, mix or permit to be made or mixed any mortar, plaster, concrete
or any like substance or mixture on any portion of any paved street or
sidewalk. (1989 Code § 11-355)
7-2-6: OVERFLOWING OF WATER ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow water to overflow from any ditch,
subsurface drainage system, canal, well or irrigation stream onto the streets,
sidewalks or property of the city. (1989 Code § 11-356)
7-2-7: IRRIGATION DITCHES ACROSS SIDEWALKS:
All owners or occupants of lots in the city who require water from a main ditch
for irrigation or other purposes shall dig ditches, erect flumes, lay pipes and
install culverts, as needed, and maintain the same to convey water under
sidewalks to or from their respective lots. All culverts, ditches, pipes and
flumes conveying water under sidewalks shall meet such reasonable standards and
specifications as may be established by the public works director or designee.
(1989 Code § 11-357; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 3
TRANSPORTING LOADS ON STREETS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Types Of Loads Allowed On Certain Streets
7-3-2: Owner Or Lessee Of Vehicles Using Streets
7-3-3: Penalty
7-3-1: TYPES OF LOADS ALLOWED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   A.   Specified: It shall be unlawful for any person or carrier of the
following enumerated commercial materials or substances to transport, haul,
drive, propel or convey, or cause to be transported, hauled, driven, propelled
or conveyed on any vehicle, trailer or wagon, any load or burden containing
acids, corrosives, explosives, tars, crude oil or derivatives of gasoline,
diesel, stove oil, aviation gas or salts in liquid form, propane, butane,
acetylene, or any other flammable liquids, materials or substances over or upon
any of the following streets within the corporate limits of the city:
      1.   Any street within a platted and recorded subdivision.
      2.   Main Street (from U.S. Hwy 89 to 1100 North Main). (Ord. 93-2, 5-4-
1993)
      3.   Center Street (from U.S. Hwy 89 to the railroad). (Ord. 93-2, 5-4-
1993; amd. 2012 Code)
      4.   400 East (from U.S. Hwy 89 to 1100 North Main).
      5.   400 West (from Center Street to 1100 North).
   B.   Exception: This restriction shall not apply to trucks or vehicles
making deliveries of gasoline or similar motor vehicle fuels to service
stations by means of the shortest traveled routes within the city, or of
propane, butane or other heating fuels to customers located in the city. (Ord.
93-2, 5-4-1993)
7-3-2: OWNER OR LESSEE OF VEHICLES USING STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or lessee of any such motor vehicle or
wagon, or for any other person responsible for transporting, hauling, driving,
propelling or conveying such loads prohibited by section
7-3-1 of this chapter, or for the owner of the load so transported, to
knowingly permit such loads to be conveyed over or upon any public streets or
portions of public streets of the city, other than those enumerated in section
7-3-1 of this chapter, contrary to the provisions of said section. (Ord. 93-2,
5-4-1993)
7-3-3: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a class B misdemeanor, as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 93-2, 5-4-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY, USE AND CONTROL
SECTION:
7-4-1: Unlawful Use
7-4-2: Repair Or Restoration
7-4-3: Franchise
7-4-4: Acts Exempted
7-4-1: UNLAWFUL USE:
Unless authorized by permit or other written authorization issued by the city,
or unless authority is granted by provisions of this code or other ordinance of
the city, it shall be a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code, for any person to:
   A.   Construct, lay, excavate, erect, operate or maintain over, under,
across, in or through any property owned or controlled by the city or utility,
canal, ditch, construction or building;
   B.   Enter upon any property of the city contrary to posting or marking,
restricting or prohibiting use of the area; or
   C.   Intentionally use or perform acts upon property of the city which
materially impair, alter or damage the property. (1989 Code § 8-111; amd. 2012
Code)
7-4-2: REPAIR OR RESTORATION:
In addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, the justice court judge
may order any person who has damaged, altered or changed any property of the
city to repair or restore the property to its original condition prior to the
damage, alteration or change. (1989 Code § 8-112; amd. 2012 Code)
7-4-3: FRANCHISE:
   A.   May Be Granted: The governing body may grant any person a franchise or
easement on such terms and conditions as it deems reasonable, for the purpose
of entering upon, constructing, building, operating and maintaining any
business or for other use of the property of the city, and the provisions of
sections
7-4-1 and
7-4-2 of this chapter shall not apply to the extent such provisions are waived,
qualified or made inapplicable to the rights or privileges granted in the
franchise ordinance or easement.
   B.   In Writing Required: Any franchise or easement granted by the city
shall be in writing, and any franchise or easement not in writing shall be
void.
   C.   Nonexclusive Franchise: No franchise or easement granted by the city
shall be considered exclusive. (1989 Code § 8-113)
7-4-4: ACTS EXEMPTED:
It shall not be a violation of this chapter where any person uses the public
property of the city in the manner or for the purpose or purposes for which
such property has been made available for public use. (1989 Code § 8-114)
ARTICLE A. USE OF EAGLEWOOD GOLF COURSE FOR ACCESS TO PROPERTY
SECTION:
7-4A-1: Usage Fee And Deposit
7-4A-2: Access Denied For Unreasonable Risk
7-4A-1: USAGE FEE AND DEPOSIT:
Any individual or entity desiring to use Eaglewood golf course property to
access adjacent property for the purpose of landscaping, installation of
improvements, etc., will be required to pay a fee in such amount as specified
in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution. Said fee will represent a usage
fee and deposit. The deposit will be returned to the property owner when the
project is completed and any damage from the usage of the course has been
repaired to the satisfaction of the director of golf. The property owner will
be responsible for any and all damage, latent or otherwise, to the golf course.
(Ord. 08-01, 1-15-2008; amd. 2012 Code)
7-4A-2: ACCESS DENIED FOR UNREASONABLE RISK:
Nothing in this article requires the city to allow access if the director of
golf determines that such access poses an unreasonable risk to persons or
property. (Ord. 08-01, 1-15-2008)
CHAPTER 5
EXCAVATIONS
ARTICLE A. MINERAL EXTRACTION
SECTION:
7-5A-1: Purpose And Intent
7-5A-2: Enforcement
7-5A-3: Definitions
7-5A-4: Natural Resources Extraction Permit
7-5A-5: Application Procedures
7-5A-6: Review Procedure
7-5A-7: Revocation Or Modification Of Permit
7-5A-8: Transfer To Successor Operator
7-5A-9: Appeals To City Council
7-5A-10: Filing Of Annual Progress Report
7-5A-11: Special Regulations
7-5A-12: Reclamation
7-5A-13: Provision Of Surety
7-5A-14: Site Operations
7-5A-15: Applicability To Existing Operations
7-5A-16: Penalty
7-5A-17: Appendix A-1; Blasting
7-5A-18: Appendix A-2; Vibration
7-5A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   The extraction of minerals is essential to the continued economic well-
being of the City and to the needs of society.
   B.   It is necessary to alter the surface of the earth to extract minerals
required by our society. This should be done in such a way as to minimize
undesirable effects on the surroundings.
   C.   Mined land should be reclaimed so as to prevent conditions detrimental
to the general safety and welfare of all citizens of the City and to provide
for the subsequent use of the lands affected. Reclamation requirements must be
adapted to the diversity of the topographic, chemical, climatic, biologic,
geologic, economic and social conditions of the area where the mining takes
place. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-2: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Engineering Department To Enforce: The City Engineer, or designee, is
hereby designated and authorized as the officer charged with the enforcement of
this article.
   B.   Powers And Duties Of City Engineer: It shall be the duty of the City
Engineer, or designee, to inspect or cause to be inspected at least monthly
during periods of operation, or as often as necessary, all excavations. Where
it is determined by the City Engineer that any excavation project is not
proceeding in compliance with the provisions of this article, he shall, where
necessary, pursue legal action in appropriate courts. The failure to do so
shall not legalize any violation of such provisions. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
EXCAVATION: Notwithstanding the definitions in Utah Code Annotated and section
10-1-47 of this Code, and for purposes of this article, the removal of sand and
gravel, clay, soil, granite, flagstone, slate or shale by excavating,
stripping, leveling, or any other process, together with all other types of
mining operations where material is removed from the earth. The provisions of
this article shall not apply to the removal of sod or topsoil, providing the
operations be not closer than ten feet (10') to any property line or to a depth
in excess of eighteen inches (18"), or so to adversely affect the drainage,
stability or vegetation for the area. This article shall not apply to ditching
and land leveling for agricultural purposes. Land leveling for agricultural
purposes shall not include the removal of mineral resources from the site for
other uses.
LAND AFFECTED: The surface and subsurface on an area within the City where
mining operations are being or will be conducted, including, but not limited
to, on site private ways, roads, the excavation site, exploration sites, drill
sites or working, parking, storage or waste storage areas, and areas in which
structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or
property which result from or are used in such operation are situated.
MINING OPERATION: Those activities conducted on the surface of the land for the
exploration for development of or the extraction of mineral deposits from its
natural occurrences, including surface mining and surface effects of
underground mining, including on site transportation and other primary
processing.
NATURAL RESOURCES EXTRACTION PERMIT: The acceptance by the City, the Planning
Commission and the City Council of the premining inventory/analysis, the
operations plan and the final reclamation plan.
OFF SITE: The land areas that are outside of or beyond the on site and which
are owned or controlled by the operator.
ON SITE: The surface land area within which mining operations are or will be
conducted pursuant to the plan provided under this article, which is bounded by
continuous property lines dividing the surface of land ownership, control or
right that is invested in the operator. A series of related properties under
the control of a single operator but separated by small parcels of land
controlled by others will be considered a single site unless exempted by the
Planning Commission.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, receiver,
trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, fiduciary, agent, or other
organization or representative of any kind, either public or private, owning,
controlling or managing mining operations or proposed mining operations,
including exploring for or developing of a mineral deposit.
OWNER: Any person, corporation, association, partnership or other legally
deeded organization or representative of any kind, either public or private,
owning, controlling or managing a mineral deposit or the surface of lands
employed in mining operations.
PUBLIC ROAD: Any road, street, alley, lane, court, place, viaduct, tunnel,
culvert or bridge laid out or erected as such by the public, dedicated or
abandoned to the public, or made such in an action for the partition of real
property. "Public road" includes the entire area within the right-of-way.
RECLAMATION: Actions performed during and after mining operations to shore,
stabilize, revegetate, or otherwise treat the land affected in order to achieve
a safe, stable, ecological condition. The mined lands will be reclaimed to a
usable condition which is readily adaptable to alternate land uses and creates
no danger to public safety. These rehabilitated or reclaimed conditions will be
consistent with the North Salt Lake City master plan for that particular area.
The reclamation process may extend to affected lands surrounding the mined
lands and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil
compaction, stabilization and other measures.
STEADY STATE VIBRATION: Periodic vibration for which the statistical
measurement properties (such as the peak, average, RMS and mean values) are
constant. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-4: NATURAL RESOURCES EXTRACTION PERMIT:
Natural resources extraction shall be permitted only as authorized under a
natural resources extraction permit and site plan approval. The Planning
Commission shall make recommendation to the City Council for approval or
disapproval in accordance with the application procedures hereinafter set
forth. In addition to delineating the area to which it is applicable, the
natural resources extraction permit shall also make explicit reference to the
permitted and special uses authorized and shall include, where applicable,
specific requirements for a pre-mining reclamation plan, which includes plans
for simultaneous phasing of excavation and reclamation of the excavation site.
(Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-5: APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
Application for a natural resources extraction permit shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission on forms provided for that purpose by the Community
Development Department.
   A.   Application Fee: The applicant shall submit at the time of application
an application fee in such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee
schedule resolution.
   B.   General Information: The following information shall be provided: the
name of the mineral property, property owner, lessee, lessor, operator, agent
of process, location of mineral property and legal description.
   C.   Pre-Mining Inventory And Analysis: A pre-mining inventory and analysis,
both off site and on site, shall be performed by the applicant, containing the
following information:
      1.   A regional vicinity analysis describing other land uses surrounding
the site, the possible impacts of the proposed excavation on surrounding land
and the methods to be employed to mitigate any potentially negative effects.
      2.   A graphic and written description of haul routes to be used,
including both internal and externally of all private roads and public streets.
Haul routes shall avoid residential neighborhoods. Haul routes shall be
designed to minimize impact on traffic patterns, avoid peak commuter travel
hours, and reduce the potential of traffic hazards or accidents.
   D.   Pre-Mining Site Inventory And Analysis: The applicant shall conduct a
pre-mining site inventory and analysis to include:
      1.   A topographic map of the area (at a scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet)
to a maximum contour interval of five feet (5');
      2.   A description of the site hydrology and geology;
      3.   A description of the visual characteristics with particular concern
given to the use of natural topography and vegetation to shield site operations
from nearby properties, roadways and the general public; and
      4.   A soils survey to include a soils profile.
   E.   Mining Operations Plan: The applicant shall provide a mining operations
plan, which describes the following:
      1.   Proposed starting date and the anticipated period of operation.
      2.   Develop an operations development plan on a topographic or aerial
map (to a scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet) of the area at least five hundred
feet (500') beyond the proposed excavation showing the operations listed in
subsections E2a through E2g of this section:
         a.   Stockpiles, milling and processing system;
         b.   Type and kind of machinery and equipment, waste disposal systems;
         c.   The water to be used, method of control and disposal;
         d.   Wind and air movement patterns with a description of techniques
used to control dust and noise;
         e.   Transportation routes used in the site, schedule of proposed
operations and plan showing location of buildings, storage areas, equipment;
         f.   The possible steps taken to mitigate them; and
         g.   Any adverse economic effects on the surrounding area and the
steps taken to mitigate them.
   F.   Reclamation Plan: The applicant shall provide a reclamation plan with
the use of maps, imagery and renderings (at a scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet)
extending five hundred feet (500') beyond the legal description of the site
area with a maximum contour interval of five feet (5'), which includes at least
the following:
      1.   A grading plan prepared by a professional team whose qualifications
have been approved by the Planning Commission indicating the areas excavated
and the proposed finished grades;
      2.   A description of the methods and plans to be employed for
simultaneous reclamation of the site during and after the mining operation;
      3.   A description of the landscape plan, to include the installation of
topsoil, planting schedule, specifications for plan applications, mulching, and
type of irrigation to be used;
      4.   A description of the hydrologic environment of the reclaimed site,
to include a map illustrating the water drainage areas such as lakes, springs,
ponds, streams, wells, pipelines, culverts, ditches, canals;
      5.   A description of all permanent roads and other manmade structures
which are to remain after reclamation; and
      6.   Cross sections taken in the excavation site in areas of greatest
material displacement. The number of cross sections required shall be dependent
on the size and topography of the excavation site.
   G.   Authorization By Permit: All operations and reclamation maps and plans
shall include signature blocks for: 1) the owners; 2) City Engineer; 3)
Planning Commission; and 4) City Council. Upon obtaining the signatures of each
of the above individuals on each of the required documents set forth in this
article, the natural resources extraction permit shall be deemed to have been
authorized and issued. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-6: REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   Pre-Application Meeting: The excavator or owner, or their
representative, shall meet with the Development Review Committee to review the
proposed pre-application plans for the excavation site. The pre-application
plans shall be submitted in a manner and form as prescribed by the Community
Development Department, and will consist of the information requested in
section
7-5A-5 of this article, plus the following:
      1.   A sketch of the existing site contours, drainage and unusual
geologic conditions;
      2.   The anticipated amount of mineral to be removed;
      3.   The type and kinds of machinery and equipment to be employed;
      4.   The water to be used in the operation, source and disposal;
      5.   A sketch of the site contours after excavation is complete, to
include location of natural drainage channels, vegetation and roadways.
   B.   Review Of Pre-Application:
      1.   Within a period of not more than seven (7) days following receipt of
the pre-application, the Community Development Director shall distribute copies
of the pre-application and accompanying plans and statements to other
interested County, City and State agencies, and shall ask for comments and
recommendations.
      2.   Within forty five (45) days of receipt by the Community Development
Director, the pre-application shall be formally considered through a regularly
scheduled or specially scheduled meeting before the Development Review
Committee with the excavator or owner. Following consideration of the proposal,
the Community Development Director shall notify the operator or owner of the
DRC findings and recommendation to the Planning Commission.
   C.   Review Of Final Plans:
      1.   Information Required: After review by the Development Review
Committee, the excavator or owner shall then provide the information required
by the forms provided by the Community Development Department for a site plan
approval and a natural resources extraction permit, including maps, drawings
and plans required by this article. Within fourteen (14) days following receipt
of the final application, the Community Development Director shall distribute
copies of the application and accompanying plans and statements to other
interested County, City and State agencies, and shall ask for comments and
recommendations.
      2.   Public Hearing: Within a period of not more than forty five (45)
days of receipt of the natural resources extraction permit and site plan
application, the Planning Commission shall schedule a public hearing and
provide, at a minimum, ten (10) days of notice as a class A notice, as provided
by Utah Code Annotated section 63G-30-102, as amended. Following the public
hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application and shall make
written recommendations to the City Council who shall have final approval or
disapproval of the application.
      3.   Conditions Of Approval: A natural resources extraction permit and
site plan for the operation shall be granted when the criteria set forth in
this title and appendices are met. The permit shall be subject to conditions as
recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council which
reasonably ensure compliance with the standards and regulations contained
within this article.
      4.   Zoning: Expansion of existing mining operations or new mining
operations shall only be approved on properties zoned Special Use Restricted
(SR). (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018; amd. Ord. 2023-09, 8-1-2023)
7-5A-7: REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF PERMIT:
The Planning Commission shall submit for revocation or modification any natural
resources extraction permit issued for cause and in the following manner:
   A.   Notice Of Failure To Comply: A notice shall be served on the owner or
the permittee by the Community Development Director or designee specifying the
failure to comply with the requirements of the conditions set forth in the
natural resources extraction permit or City ordinances, or State law, requiring
him to appear before the Planning Commission at a designated date and hour to
show cause why said permit should not be revoked or modified. Notice of the
hearing shall be provided a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing as a class A notice, as provided in by Utah Code Annotated section 63G-
30-102, as amended.
   B.   Public Hearing: Upon the date set for hearing, the Planning Commission
shall hear all charges and other testimony relating to the matter under
consideration. The Planning Commission shall then decide to either continue,
revoke, modify or refer to the City Attorney for further action as described in
section
7-5A-2 of this article.
   C.   Modification Of Permit Plans: Modification of the natural resources
extraction permit plans may be initiated either by the Community Development
Director, City Engineer, or by the permittee where it is merely sought to
affect minor revisions in the approved grading plan, schedule of proposed
operation, proposed reuse plan or landscape plan. Consideration of such
revisions need not require a public hearing; provided, that in the judgment of
the Planning Commission, the proposed revisions would not constitute
significant changes; and providing also, that the permittee has not expressly
requested that a public hearing be held. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018; amd. Ord.
2023-09, 8-1-2023)
7-5A-8: TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR OPERATOR:
Whenever an operator succeeds to the interest of another operator by sale,
assignment, lease or other means, the Planning Commission may release the first
operator from its responsibilities under its approved plans as described in
section
7-5A-5 of this article, including surety, provided the successor assumes all of
the responsibilities of the former operator, to the satisfaction of the
Planning Commission under the approved operations and reclamation plans and the
posting of surety. Upon satisfactory assumption of such responsibilities by the
successor operator, under conditions approved by the Planning Commission, the
responsibility of the total excavation site shall be transferred to the
successor operator. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-9: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
Appeals from any decision of the Planning Commission with respect to a natural
resources extraction permit may be directed to the City Council within thirty
(30) days and in the manner prescribed for in the zoning ordinances. Upon the
hearing of such appeal, the City Council may by motion, affirm, reverse or
modify in whole or in part, any determination of the Planning Commission. (Ord.
2018-04, 4-17-2018; amd. Ord. 2023-09, 8-1-2023)
7-5A-10: FILING OF ANNUAL PROGRESS REPORT:
At the end of each calendar year, unless waived by the Planning Commission,
each operator conducting mining operations shall file an operations and
progress report with the Planning Commission. Part of this progress report may
be submitted on United States Department of Interior, Bureau of Mines form OMB
no. 42-R0164. The remainder of the report will summarize activities in
fulfillment of the requirement of simultaneous excavation and reclamation in
confirmation with the reclamation plan previously submitted. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-
17-2018)
7-5A-11: SPECIAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Buffer Distances:
      1.   All extractive operations, haul roads, machinery, equipment and
stockpiles (excluding topsoil used for reclamation and visual screening) shall
be kept at least three hundred feet (300') horizontal distance from property
boundaries. The City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission
may reduce or eliminate this requirement when adjacent properties are combined
within one mining/reclamation plan or when neighboring mining operations have
executed reclamation agreements with regard to mining and reclamation along
common property boundaries.
      2.   All rock crushing operations shall be conducted at least four
hundred feet (400') horizontal distance from any property boundary and one
hundred feet (100') from any public right-of- way. The City Council, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission may reduce or eliminate this
requirement when adjacent properties are combined within one mining/reclamation
plan or when neighboring mining operations have executed reclamation agreements
with regard to mining and reclamation along common property boundaries.
      3.   All excavations shall be kept at least one hundred feet (100') from
a public road.
   B.   Fencing And Berming: All operations shall construct security fences
along property boundaries. Fenced areas shall be enhanced with berms, trees,
and shrubs to protect the public and act as barriers to access, fugitive dust,
noise, glare and view. Warning signs regarding mining and blasting operations
shall be posted along the fence at minimum of one sign every fifty feet (50').
   C.   Grading: All grading to include specifications for slope stabilization
shall be done in accordance with the latest reclamation plans and consistent
with industry standards.
   D.   Air And Water Quality: All air and water quality related plans and
actions shall be monitored and approved as required by applicable rules of the
Davis County Environmental Health Division, the State Division of Environmental
Quality and the State Division of Air Quality.
   E.   Hours Of Operation: All operation, crushing, blasting, screening and
hauling shall be confined to the hours between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday through Friday, and Saturday from seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., and at no time on Sundays,
except that maintenance and repairs of vehicles and equipment shall not be
restricted by these periods. Operations which are required as a result of
public emergency demands as determined by the Planning Commission or the City
Council shall also be excluded from these time restrictions.
   F.   Special Hours Of Operation: The operator may request overnight
operation hours for projects dictated by the State of Utah Department of
Transportation. Special hours request shall be temporary in nature and not
exceed one hundred twenty (120) days in duration during any calendar year. The
City Council may impose additional conditions on the operation related to
lighting, haul routes, dust control, noise buffering, and specific equipment
operations to mitigate the impacts of overnight operation hours.
   G.   Landscaping:
      1.   Properties containing uses for which a natural resource extraction
permit is required shall be landscaped for purposes of screening such uses from
public streets and abutting properties.
      2.   The minimum depth of improved vegetated landscaped buffers along
property lines and street rights-of-ways shall be thirty feet (30'). All
improved vegetated buffer areas shall be comprised of a mix of evergreens and
deciduous trees, shrubs, lawn, or other vegetative ground cover, or up to fifty
percent (50%) non-vegetative mulch.
      3.   Berming shall be incorporated along property lines at a minimum
height of ten feet (10'), where adjacent to a public right-of-way or
residential zone.
      4.   The resulting buffer area shall result in a visual barrier where
trees and shrubs touch at the time of maturity, and shall be demonstrated by
landscape plans, including finish elevation views, designed by qualified
landscape architect or engineering firm.
      5.   Landscape plans, including irrigation plans shall be submitted with
all applications and approved as part of the overall site plan and operations
plan. The minimum tree size shall be two inch (2") caliper for ornamental and
shade trees and six foot (6') height for coniferous trees. Woody shrubs shall
be a minimum two (2) gallon size container.
      6.   Berming and fencing shall be installed prior to commencement of
mining operations. Improved landscape buffers shall be installed within six (6)
months of commencement of mining operations.
      7.   Landscaping and buffering improvements shall be guaranteed by
posting a landscape bond equal to the actual costs for said improvements. The
amount shall be established by the City Engineer or the applicant may submit
quotes from qualified professional landscape contractor for approval by the
City Engineer.
      8.   Vegetative materials shall be planted, together with necessary
topsoil as per the schedule approved in the granting of the natural resources
extraction permit, and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition by
methods of regular irrigation.
   H.   Blasting: A mining or reclamation operation whose property boundaries
are within one-half (1/2) mile of a residential structure may only use
explosives in accordance with all State and Federal laws and the following
requirements:
      1.   Notice of upcoming blasting shall be made to the City Manager, and
designees, Fire Marshal, and to businesses and residents within one-half (1/2)
mile of the property boundaries at least seventy two (72) hours in advance of
blasting;
      2.   Retain the services of an experienced independent blasting
consultant and/or specialist with extensive experience in preparing controlled
blasting designs for blasting operations occurring near critical structures and
sensitive neighborhoods. The blasting consultant/specialist to have thorough
knowledge of all blasting methods used to control over break and damage to rock
remaining in walls. See section
7-5A-17, "Appendix A-1; Blasting", of this article for regulations related to
blasting plan;
      3.   Maintain a blasting record;
      4.   Mitigate explosives used to meet industry-standard vibration limits;
      5.   Monitor air blasts and ground vibration to ensure operation within
industry-standard limits.
   I.   Blasting Plan: A mining or reclamation operation which uses explosives
shall submit a blasting plan in accordance with section
7-5A-17, "Appendix A-1; Blasting", of this article.
   J.   Noise And Vibration: All equipment on site and off site utilized in the
extraction and processing of native natural resources shall be operated and
maintained so as to minimize the emanation of noise and vibration from the
premises. Soil berming, landscaping and other techniques should be used to
accomplish the objective of reducing the impact of noise and vibration on
adjacent property. See section
7-5A-18, "Appendix A-2; Vibrations", of this article.
   K.   Roads: All permanent haul roads within five hundred feet (500') of
public streets shall be regularly surfaced with asphalt or oil, and all
roadways shall be regularly watered, swept or surfaced so as to minimize loose
gravel, sand and soils from being carried onto the public streets. Accesses to
public roadways shall be paved a minimum distance of one hundred feet (100')
from the public right-of-way.
   L.   Monuments: Monuments or other means of identification shall be placed
and maintained around the perimeter of the excavation site so as to enable
reasonable identification of the property line separating the excavation
property from adjoining landowners and visually identify the limits of
excavation approved under the mining and reclamation plan.
   M.   Inspections: An annual on site investigation and report will be
conducted by the City Engineer, or designee, to determine whether the terms of
the grading plan and reclamation plan are being met; provided, however, that
the reasonable modifications of the site plan may be made by the applicant or
operator of the mining operations insofar as such modifications are required in
connection with the development of the site and the subsurface conditions
discovered pursuant to the mining operations. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-12: RECLAMATION:
   A.   Objective: The objective of excavation reclamation shall be to:
      1.   Return the land, concurrently with the mining operation or within a
reasonable amount of time thereafter, to a predetermined condition defined by
the reclamation plan as submitted and approved, compatible with planned, past,
present or probable future land uses.
      2.   Minimize or prevent present and future on site and off site
environmental degradations to the ecologic and hydrologic regimes caused by
mining operations, and to meet other pertinent State and Federal regulations
regarding air and water quality standards and health and safety criteria.
      3.   Minimize or prevent present and future hazards to public safety and
welfare.
   B.   Simultaneous Excavation And Reclamation:
      1.   The reclamation or rehabilitation of natural resource sites with a
projected life of more than one year shall be carried out simultaneously with
the excavation of the resource. A few objectives of simultaneous excavation and
reclamation are to:
         a.   Create a usable land resource and to eliminate waste heaps;
         b.   Prevent shallow, stagnant, small bodies of water, small usable
remnants of land, and eroding, barren slopes all normally associated with open
pit operations, except as providing stormwater detention facilities as
described in a hydrologic report.
      2.   Excavations shall be planned so as to progressively develop the
proposed final landforms by grading and by stockpiling overburden materials in
areas designated for future landforms or in excavations where the material will
be spread over the pit floor where no future excavation is anticipated. Such
areas are to be seeded and planted immediately after grading is completed or
within appropriate planting seasons, but in any case, the grading and planting
shall be completed within one year. The reclamation plan shall contain a
description of the phased rehabilitation process throughout the anticipated
life of the excavation.
   C.   Rehabilitation Standards: Following the termination of mining
operations, the site shall be reclaimed in accordance with the following
standards:
      1.   The side walls of any pit or mound located on the site shall be
smoothed and evenly contoured, and the floor of the pit or top of a mound shall
be flattened and leveled;
      2.   Mounds of fill shall not remain after reclamation of an extraction
operation;
      3.   No slope shall be steeper than the critical angle of repose for the
material as required by applicable MSHA/OSHA standards (e.g., 33 degrees for
gravel deposits);
      4.   All areas designated for revegetation on the approved reclamation
plan shall be covered with a two inch (2") or thicker layer of topsoil and
reseeded with a hardy plant material having a sufficient concentration to
screen at least twenty five percent (25%) of the exposed surface from view.
   D.   Final Reclamation: Final reclamation shall begin immediately for any
site where operations authorized under a natural resources extraction permit
have been abandoned for a period of at least one year, or otherwise terminated.
The final reclamation shall conform to the plan approved (including approved
modifications) in the natural resources extraction permit. All reclamation
plans shall conform at least to the below listed minimum standards and
requirements listed elsewhere in this article; provided, however, that the
Planning Commission may require more stringent standards where special hazards
exist in order to protect the health, safety or general welfare of the public,
and to prevent injury to property or improvements.
      1.   Grading: Slopes, overburden stockpiles and abandoned soil piles
shall be graded and smoothed so as to control erosion and prevent the creation
of potentially dangerous areas in accordance with the direction of the City
Engineer.
      2.   Water Filled Areas: All excavations which create standing water or
ponds shall be refilled with inert materials. This requirement shall not apply
however to any water filled excavations scheduled to become an integral part of
the final reclamation plan. The rehabilitation of these areas shall be done in
such a manner that the groundwater is not polluted as determined through
consultation with the Davis County Health Department, and State and Federal
officials where necessary. Fill material shall be porous to allow for water
dispersion unless otherwise specified in the reclamation plan.
      3.   Landscaping: Unless inconsistent with the final proposed use of the
reclaimed land, the excavated areas and all other disturbed areas shall be
replanted and maintained with trees, shrubs, grasses or other vegetative ground
cover, preferably native to the area, or other vegetative ground cover,
preferably returning the land to a natural appearance, or to an appearance
previously approved by the Planning Commission and maintained by an automated
irrigation system.
      4.   Removal Of Buildings And Equipment: As soon as excavation or
manufacturing has been permanently terminated, all buildings and equipment
(including electrical conduits) used in the administration of the operations,
shall be removed unless deemed necessary to the approved final use of the
reclaimed site.
      5.   Final Year Of Excavation: In the final year of excavation, the
mining operation may, as part of the reclamation project, excavate closer than
forty feet (40') to any property lines, but only upon a showing of compelling
mutual good and the approval of the Planning Commission and City Council.
   E.   Forfeiture Of Surety: If the operator fails or refuses to carry out the
necessary land reclamation as outlined in the approved operation and
reclamation plans, the Planning Commission may, after notice and hearing,
declare any surety filed for this purpose forfeited, or in case of a corporate
bond, file suit against the owner and its bonding company. The City shall also
have the right to file suit against the defaulting permittee for costs of
rehabilitation and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-13: PROVISION OF SURETY:
   A.   Provision For Surety Before Operations Begin: After receiving
notification that the application for a natural resources extraction permit has
been approved, but prior to commencement of such operation, the operator shall
provide surety to the City, in a form and amount to be determined by the
Planning Commission in consultation with the City Engineer and City Council.
   B.   Amount Of Surety: In determining the amount of surety to be provided,
the Planning Commission shall consider factual information as to the magnitude,
type and costs of approved reclamation activities planned for the land affected
and the nature, extent and duration of operations under the approved notice.
The Planning Commission shall fix the amount of the bond reasonably related
thereto, to protect the City and ensure compliance with the requirements of the
extraction permit; however, the amount of the bond shall not exceed one hundred
percent (100%) of the estimated cost of rehabilitating the excavation. The bond
shall be periodically reviewed to ensure that the amount of the bond is capable
of ensuring the adequate reclamation.
   C.   Form Of Surety: In determining the form of surety to be provided by the
owner, the Planning Commission may approve a method acceptable and consistent
with the requirements of this article, which may be one or a combination of
corporate surety bond, land, cash or other deposited securities.
   D.   Release Of Surety: The liability under surety provisions shall continue
until such time as released as to part, or in its entirety, by the City
Council.
   E.   Forfeiture Of Surety: If the operator fails or refuses to carry out the
necessary land reclamation as outlined in the approved operation and
reclamation plans, the Planning Commission may, after notice and hearing,
declare any surety filed for this purpose forfeited, or in case of a corporate
bond, file suit against the owner and its bonding company. The City shall also
have the right to file suit against the defaulting permittee for costs of
rehabilitation and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018; amd.
Ord. 2023-09, 8-1-2023)
7-5A-14: SITE OPERATIONS:
   A.   Lot And Yard Regulations:
      1.   Lot size: No restriction.
      2.   Front yard setback: All buildings shall be set back at least thirty
feet (30') from the right-of-way line.
      3.   Side and rear yard: Where the mining operation property boundary
abuts a residential district, all buildings, structures, and mining equipment
shall be located no closer than one hundred feet (100') to the abutting
property line.
   B.   Height Of Structures: The maximum height allowed for all buildings or
structures is sixty feet (60').
   C.   Parking And Loading:
      1.   Off street parking for employees, visitors, company vehicles and
equipment regularly utilized in connection with the mining operations, along
with provisions for ingress and egress of such vehicles and equipment, shall be
provided on site so as to eliminate the need for on street parking. A minimum
of one stall for each employee on the highest shift shall be provided. Parking
for permanent buildings shall be provided in accordance with title 10, chapter
6, "Off Street Parking Requirements", of this Code.
      2.   All loading of trucks used in connection with a mining operation
shall take place off street.
   D.   Storage, Trash And Mechanical Equipment:
      1.   Storage areas which contain garbage or rubbish containers
(dumpsters) shall be screened with landscaping or view obscuring fencing. The
height of such screening shall be appropriate to the nature of trash to be
stored. The screening shall be approved by the Planning Commission during site
plan review.
      2.   No outdoor storage will be located within thirty feet (30') of any
residential (R) district and no storage shall be permitted between a required
front yard from the street to the building line of any frontage street.
   E.   Lighting: Reflectors, spotlights, floodlights and other sources of
illumination may be used to illuminate buildings, mining operation areas,
landscaping, signs, parking and loading areas, provided they are equipped with
proper lenses or other devices concentrating the illumination upon the
building, mining operation areas, landscaping, signs, parking and loading
areas, and preventing any constant bright, direct illumination upon adjacent
property or any public right-of- way. Care shall be exercised so as to
minimize, to the extent reasonably possible, the impact of unshielded white
lights, reflectors, spotlights, strobe lights and searchlights used in
connection with the mining operations on frequently traveled public rights-of-
way or adjacent properties.
   F.   Signs: Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of title 10,
chapter 4 of this Code, except that no pole signs shall be permitted in the
Special Use Restricted Zone. All signs shall be low profile type signs and must
be located on landscaping berms or attached to a building. Any lighted signs
may not be illuminated between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and
five o'clock (5:00) A.M., except to the extent necessary to the mining
operations.
   G.   Batch Plants Prohibited: Concrete and asphalt batch plants are strictly
prohibited uses. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-15: APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING OPERATIONS:
Within one year after the adoption of this article, existing mining operations
shall comply with the provisions set forth herein. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-16: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this Code, and each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed,
continued or permitted. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-17: APPENDIX A-1; BLASTING:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish standards for
regulating rock blasting in natural resources extraction operations to:
      1.   Establish blasting limits, lines, and grades to those shown on the
plans or as established in the field by designated responsible party.
      2.   Minimize blasting adjacent to residential neighborhoods.
      3.   Control blasting techniques.
      4.   Require the use of presplit blasting techniques to form all final
cut slopes steeper than 0.6H:1V.
      5.   Control vibrations, fly rock, and containment of rock above or
adjacent to the existing cuts that may become loosened through blasting and
excavation operations.
      6.   Ensure the repair of any blast and vibration induced damage.
   B.   Definitions:
      BLASTING CONSULTANT: An individual that is a recognized expert in the
field of drilling and blasting whose primary source of income is providing
specialized blasting or blasting consulting services. The consultant will not
be an employee of the contractor, blasting subcontractor, explosives
manufacturer, or explosives distributor. The blasting consultant shall have
successfully completed blasting projects in similar geologic conditions.
      BLASTING SPECIALIST: An individual experienced in blasting techniques for
similar civil and geotechnical works, preparation of blasting plans, blast
materials and instrumentation, and interpretation and use of blast monitoring
records. The blasting specialist possesses all required Federal, State and
local licenses and/or permits. The blasting specialist will be responsible for
supervision of all field blasting operations and personnel.
      BUFFER HOLES: Holes with reduced energy charges drilled adjacent to the
perimeter holes. Buffer holes are usually drilled parallel to the adjacent
holes at the excavation perimeter.
      CONTROLLED BLASTING: The use of explosives in which the various elements
of the blast, including hole size, depth, spacing, burden, charge size,
distribution, and delay sequence, are carefully balanced and controlled to
provide a distribution of charge that will fragment the rock to the required
limits while minimizing overbreak and damage to the rock behind the trim line
to help ensure long-term stability. Controlled blasting techniques include
smooth blasting, presplitting, cushion blasting, and line drilling.
      CUSHION BLASTING: Trim blasting employing decoupled charges and a zone of
rock breakage introduced by buffer holes between the cushion holes and the main
production blasting.
      INDUSTRY STANDARDS: Blasting shall be conducted in accordance with all
applicable State and Federal laws and regulatory agencies including, but not
limited to, the Mine Safety Health Administration (MSHA), the Federal Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF), the Federal Department of Transportation
(DOT), and the Utah State Division of Oil, Gas and Mining. The mine operator
shall comply with all applicable industry standards for safely conducting
surface blasting operations on a sand and gravel quarry highwall.
      PERIMETER HOLES: The trim line, control line or presplit line drill holes
located at the finished excavation surface.
      PRESPLITTING: Controlled blasting technique used predominately for the
construction of a smooth final plane in rock cuts. Presplitting causes a
continuous or semi-continuous fracture that isolates the rock intended to be
blasted from the final excavation line to produce greater stability in rock
cuts and minimize over-break. Presplit holes are detonated before detonation of
the adjoining production holes.
      PRODUCTION BLASTING OR ROCK EXCAVATION BLASTING: The main fragmentation
blasting resulting from more widely spaced production holes drilled throughout
the main excavation area adjacent to the controlled blast line, that are
detonated in a controlled delay sequence with respect to a free face.
      ROCK BLASTING: The use of explosives to cause fragmentation of
consolidated mineral deposits which includes: drilling and blasting for smooth
blasting; production blasting; trenching; boulder blasting including oversize
blasting by blockholing and mudcapping; controlled blasting including
presplitting, cushioning blasting, or trim blasting.
      SMOOTH BLASTING: Controlled blasting technique used for the construction
of a smooth plane in rock cuts, using decoupled simultaneously fired charges in
closely placed drill holes along the final excavation line intended to produce
a final excavation contour with minimal fracture of the rock behind and
adjacent to the blasted face wall.
      TRIM BLASTING: Controlled blasting along the cut face performed after the
detonation of the production holes.
      TRIM LINE OR CONTROL LINE: The intersection of the desired finished
excavation surface with the existing ground surface.
   C.   Quality Control And Assurance: The mine operator shall be responsible
to ensure compliance with the following quality assurance controls:
      1.   Copies of all applicable codes, regulations, ordinances, and
permits, shall be kept readily accessible by the mine operator at all times.
      2.   The operator shall have on staff or contracted, a project safety
manager or blasting specialist to ensure that ongoing blasting work complies
with all applicable regulations and permits.
      3.   The operator shall retain the services of an experienced independent
blasting consultant with extensive experience in preparing controlled blasting
designs for blasting operations that will occur within three hundred feet
(300') of critical structures, underground pipelines and residential
neighborhoods. The blasting consultant must have thorough knowledge of all
blasting methods used to control overbreak and damage to rock retained in
walls.
      4.   Conceptual blasting plans, test-blasting plans, and revisions to any
of these plans must be kept on site and reviewed by the blasting specialist or
blasting consultant, when applicable, to ensure safety measures are in place
and compliance with applicable codes, regulations, ordinances, and permits.
      5.   Blasting shall not be conducted until all blasting plans, test-
blasting plans and revisions have been submitted to the City Engineer.
   D.   Conceptual Blasting Plan: The operator shall submit a conceptual
blasting plan to the City Engineer annually, with revisions or updates
submitted to the City Engineer prior to initiating any change in the conceptual
blasting plan. The operator shall be responsible for the development of the
conceptual blasting plan and the accuracy and adequacy of the plan when
implemented in the field. The conceptual blasting plan shall include:
      1.   The proposed blasting locations and limits anticipated for the
upcoming year.
      2.   A list of all equipment involved in scaling, drilling, blasting,
pioneering, rock containment, and rock excavation.
      3.   A draft timeline and sequence of operations, including working
hours, for the upcoming year.
      4.   A typical plan view diagram of proposed drill patterns to be used,
including typical free face, burden, blast-hole spacing distance, and delay
sequences.
      5.   A typical section view loading diagram showing type and quantity of
explosives, primers, initiators, downhole delay sequence and timing, hole
diameter, hole angles, lift height, depth of subdrilling and stemming, powder
factor and maximum pounds of explosives per delay.
      6.   A material Safety Data Sheet for all explosives, primers, and
initiators to be employed.
      7.   A manufacturer's cut sheets describing explosives, primers and
initiators to be employed.
      8.   A manufacturer's instructions for presplit material.
      9.   A plan and procedure for temporary rockfall catchment device, where
applicable.
      10.   A statement of methods, devices, and special equipment proposed for
containing materials within the blast containment limits set forth in the
blasting plan.
      11.   A review and correlation of available site and geologic information
with the proposed blast plan, including geologic structure of the rock, the
location and direction of the jointing system, the strike and dip of bedding
planes, mud, shale or other soft seams that may cause unacceptable blast
results.
      12.   A plan and procedure for blasting safety, which conforms to all
Federal, State and local regulations. The plan shall include the storage and
transport of explosives, training of personnel and a complete description of
clearing, guarding, visible warning signs, audible warning signs and
procedures.
      13.   The size and location of blasting test section(s) including
different test sections which are required for each varying type of blast and
geologic condition.
      14.   The qualifications of the blasting specialist including
descriptions of related project experience.
      15.   The qualifications and resume with credentials of the proposed
blasting consultant, where required.
      16.   A vibration and airblast monitoring plan, which includes vibration
control calculations, monitoring instrumentation, calibration records,
manufacturer information, and the name and relevant experience of the entity
that will collect and process the data.
      17.   A plan and procedure for pre-blast survey.
   E.   Blast Report: The operator shall maintain blasting records for each
blast regardless of purpose, that shall be submitted to the City Engineer
annually, or upon request by the City. The records shall identify each blast
with a numeric-alpha designation, name of the blasting specialist/foreman,
date, and time of blast. The Blast Report shall include the following
information:
      1.   Notation of any significant or unusual occurrences including
overbreak, fragmentation, fly rock beyond the blast exclusion area, unplanned
rock fall, undetonated explosives, or any other unusual events which may
present a hazard.
      2.   Vibrations noted and seismograph output including time histories.
      3.   Vibration regression curves showing the change of vibration levels
with explosive weight and distance (scaled distance).
   F.   Explosives: The operator shall assure the following:
      1.   The blasting specialist uses only standard explosives which have
been manufactured especially for controlled blasting (presplitting or cushion),
or fractional cartridges that are firmly affixed to detonating cord downline.
Bulk loading shall not be allowed.
   G.   Accessories: The blast specialist shall assure the following:
      1.   The appropriate stemming material is used to properly confine blast
energy. The use of special material may be permitted, should drill cuttings or
other site-generated material prove stemming to be inadequate.
      2.   The use of blasting mats, or other acceptable control measures, to
prevent fly rock from leaving the blast exclusion area.
      3.   The appropriate use of all products for initiation and loading,
including but not limited to loading poles, powder punches and other necessary
materials.
   H.   Operations Requirements:
      1.   Compliance: The operator shall perform blasting operations and store
and handle explosives and blasting agents in accordance with the provisions of
all Federal, State, and local regulations and permits.
      2.   Suspension Of Blasting Operations: The City Engineer may suspend
blasting operations if the specified slopes are not maintained in a stable
condition and the resulting instability places nearby residences, structures,
utilities, or appurtenances in immediate danger; or if public safety is
jeopardized due to excessive fly-rock, vibration, and/or airblast in excess of
the limits contained in subsection
7-5A-18H of this article.
      3.   Compatibility: The types of explosives and blasting accessories
necessary to accomplish the specified results are to be compatible with
conditions encountered.
      4.   Holes For Controlled Blasting:
         a.   Provide drilling equipment with devices that accurately determine
the angle the drill steel enters the rock. Drilling shall not proceed if the
devices are inoperable.
         b.   Control drilling operations shall be used to ensure that no hole
significantly deviates from the plane of the planned slope.
         c.   Stem control holes below the collar with sand, or other dry,
angular material shall provide adequate stemming material if the drill cuttings
do not adequately confine the blast. The operator shall ensure the use of
adequate stemming to control airblast and noise.
      5.   Presplit Blasting:
         a.   Before placing charges, the blasting specialist shall assure the
hole is free of obstructions for its entire depth and shall place the charge
without causing material to cave in from the walls of the holes.
         b.   The blasting specialist shall use explosives of a suitable
diameter for the diameter of the presplit hole and use only standard explosives
manufactured specifically for presplitting.
         c.   The blasting specialist shall affix fractional portions of
standard explosive cartridges so that the cartridges will not slip down the
detonating cord or bridge the hole.
         d.   The blasting specialist shall assemble and affix continuous
column cartridge type explosives to the detonating cord in accordance with the
explosive manufacturer's instructions.
         e.   The bottom charge of a presplit hole may be larger than the line
charges provided it does not cause overbreak. The blasting specialist shall use
a top charge that sufficiently reduces power and is placed far enough below the
collar to avoid overbreaking and heaving.
         f.   Stem presplit holes below the collar with sand, or other dry,
angular material shall be used to provide adequate stemming material if the
drill cuttings do not adequately confine the blast. The operator shall use
adequate stemming to control airblast and noise.
         g.   If specified presplit slopes are obtained, the slope face may be
presplit before production drilling, and blasting; or presplitting and
production blasting performed at the same time, provided presplitting holes are
fired simultaneously at least one hundred (100) milliseconds prior to the
production blast. To reduce ground vibrations or noise, delay the blasting of
presplit holes provided by hole-to-hole delay is not greater than twenty five
(25) milliseconds.
      6.   Cushion Or Trim Blasting:
         a.   Where sufficient burden does not exist for effective
presplitting, substitute cushion or trim blasting may be utilized for
presplitting. Trim or cushion holes along the trim line shall be detonated
after the detonation of all production holes.
         b.   The operator shall use buffer holes as the slope geometry
dictates.
         c.   With the exception of the requirements in these subsections,
requirements given for presplit blasting apply.
      7.   Rock Excavation Blasting:
         a.   The row of production blast holes immediately adjacent to the
control row shall be a buffer row. Buffer holes shall be drilled parallel to
the controlled blast holes and employ reduced charge weight per hole, reduced
spacing, and reduced diameter with respect to the production holes, as required
to prevent overbreak.
         b.   Stem production holes with sand or other dry, angular granular
shall be provided with adequate stemming material if the drill cuttings do not
adequately confine the blast.
         c.   The operator shall take necessary precautions in production
blasting to prevent damage to the rock backslope.
         d.   The operator shall utilize sequential firing, deck holes to
reduce charge weight per delay, reduced production hole diameter, and
appropriate explosives as necessary, to maintain adequate relief throughout the
blast and control vibrations.
      8.   Safety:
         a.   The operator shall comply with all Federal, State and local
regulations regarding the transportation and handling of explosives.
         b.   The blast specialist or blast foreman shall inspect the entire
area following a blast to determine that no undetonated material exists,
determine that dangerous concentrations of toxic gases have dissipated and
remove unstable rock before commencing any excavation operations.
         c.   Determine that the site is safe before resuming work.
         d.   Remove unstable rock before commencing any additional drilling
operations in the cut.
      9.   Fly Rock Control: Before the firing of any blast in areas where
flying rock may result in personal injury or damage to property, fly rock shall
be controlled through blast design, the use of mats, or other methods in
accordance with industry standards.
      10.   Damage: The operator must repair any blast induced damage at its
sole expense, including but not limited to pavement and structures. If blasting
operations damage existing structures, utilities, offsite properties, promptly
repair or replace damaged items to the condition that existed before the
damage.
      11.   Vibration Control: Vibrations shall be monitored and controlled in
accordance with section
7-5A-18, "Appendix A-2; Vibration", of this article. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5A-18: APPENDIX A-2; VIBRATION:
   A.   The purpose of this section is to provide methods of monitoring and
controlling vibrations in and around existing and adjoining structures and
utilities that arise from blasting or other vibration-producing activities.
Vibration monitoring will be required when blasting in rock to:
      1.   Control and monitor vibrations during blasting or engaging in other
construction-related activity near structures and utilities which may be
susceptible to damage from ground vibrations.
      2.   Ensure the use of approved seismographs in locations that are
between the blast area or vibration source and the property boundary or
easement closest to susceptible object(s), structure(s) or utilities.
      3.   Ensure the use of seismographs capable of recording particle
velocity, for three (3) mutually perpendicular components of vibration.
      4.   Control the ground vibrations by the use of properly designed delay
sequences and appropriate charge weights per delay.
   B.   The operator of newly approved or expanded mines shall complete a pre-
blast survey which meets the following requirements:
      1.   Perform a pre-blast survey to determine and document the condition
of all utilities, buildings or other structures within one-half (1/2) mile of
the blast sites.
      2.   Where appropriate videotape each such structure or utility, and
document existing defects through measurements called out on diagrams of the
structure or utility, using appropriate resolution and magnification to clearly
display each defect noted, and include appropriate reference scales in all
photos.
      3.   Submit a copy of any evidence of pre-mining and blasting defect
noted to the City Engineer for review prior to commencement of drilling and
blasting, or other vibration- producing activity.
      4.   All surveys shall be performed by an independent firm, acceptable to
the City Engineer, which can demonstrate acceptable experience with such
surveys.
      5.   Provide at least two (2) weeks written notice to each property owner
of the intent to conduct a survey.
      6.   If right of entry is denied by the property owner, notify the City
Engineer as soon as practicable.
      7.   Perform pre-work structure surveys as required by the engineer for
all structures that may be affected by construction vibrations other than
blasting.
   C.   The operator shall use all reasonable precautions and care to prevent
fly rock damage to structures, property, and individuals and shall repair any
damage from fly rock to the pre-blasting condition.
   D.   The operator shall use calibrated seismographs containing internal
calibration and triaxial orthogonal transducers with a flat frequency response
from two (2) to two hundred (200) hertz.
The operator shall monitor blast activity for which ground motions may exceed
one inch (1") per second at any off-site structure or utility and monitor
steady state vibration-inducing activity for which ground motions may exceed
0.1 inch per second at any structure or utility. The operator shall maintain
seismographic records of all monitoring and submit said records annually, or
upon request, to the City Engineer. The records shall contain seismograph
characteristics and factory calibration prior to drilling for blasting or
commencing blasting, vibration producing activity. The records shall furnish
real-time, permanent time histories of the vibration measurements in terms of
particle velocity.
   E.   The operator shall provide calibration records and vibration reports
for non-blasting vibration producing activities, upon request by the City
Engineer.
   F.   The operator shall place transducers in locations approved by the City
Engineer. When engaging in blasting or other vibration producing activities,
the transducers shall record vibration time histories at the closest surface
structure.
   G.   The City Engineer may require that different features be monitored,
including but not limited to pipelines and buried utilities.
   H.   The operator may not exceed two inches (2") per second maximum peak
particle velocity for blasting, and may not exceed 0.2 inches per second
maximum peak particle velocity for steady state vibrations. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-
17-2018)
ARTICLE B. PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
7-5B-1: Permit Required
7-5B-2: Application For Permit
7-5B-3: Fee For Permit
7-5B-4: Controls, Limitations And Restrictions
7-5B-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in any excavation activities within a public right of
way within the limits of the city without first obtaining a permit therefor.
(1989 Code § 11-391)
7-5B-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for such permit shall contain or be accompanied by the following:
   A.   The name and address of the person desiring a permit. If the applicant
is a copartnership, the names and addresses of all the partners. If a
corporation, the names and addresses of the manager or person authorized to act
for and in behalf of the corporation and to obligate it to the responsibilities
set forth in this article.
   B.   The name and address of the person who will do the actual digging,
tunneling, trenching and backfilling or construction work.
   C.   Mechanical means or method by which the street, highway or roadway is
to be trenched and backfilled.
   D.   The exact location, with a complete description, of the place where the
cut is to be made in or along or across the roadway or highway, with a brief
sketch showing the designated work.
   E.   A signed agreement whereby the petitioner contracts with the city, and
whereby his contractor, if he has one, also contracts, that they will:
      1.   Notify the public works department twenty four (24) hours in advance
when the work is to begin, so that an inspection may be made of the excavation
site.
      2.   Make certain that all backfill materials shall be fine material,
free from lumps and stone, selected from the soil and shall be thoroughly
compacted around and under the substructure to the upper level of the
substructure. Backfill material shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavement
in lifts consistent with the type of soil involved and the method of
consolidation being used. Broken pavement, large stones, roots and debris shall
not be used to backfill. Each lift shall be flooded, jetted, rolled or tamped,
or a combination of these methods shall be used, depending upon the type of
soil involved, to compact the backfill material. Such backfill shall be done in
a manner that will permit the restoration of the surface to condition
equivalent to that in which it was prior to excavation. The city engineer may
require soil tests to be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or
registered professional engineer specializing in soil mechanics when, in his
opinion, backfill for any excavation is not being adequately compacted. In
order for the resurfacing to be permitted, such tests must show that the
backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the city
engineer. All expense of such test shall be borne by the permittee.
      3.   Before beginning the excavation, use proper safeguards by
barricades, and warning lights, where necessary, shall be placed by the
applicant and/or his contractor at all times while there is any possible danger
or inconvenience to persons traveling the roadway.
      4.   Guarantee that the city and its employees and the city council shall
be free and harmless from any and all damages that may occur during the
operations under the permit, and agree that the applicant and/or his
contractors will assume full responsibility therefor before a permit is
granted. The applicant and his contractor, if guaranteeing that the work will
be done in accordance with this article, shall provide an appropriate bond in
an amount to be set by the public works director in accordance with the
provisions of this article. No permit shall be issued, and no work shall begin,
until such bond is properly made to the city.
      5.   Agree between the applicant and his contractor that all digging and
excavation will be made in strict accordance with the specifications of the
city, and that all excavations will be immediately backfilled and properly
tamped to prevent settling. Should the city determine at any time that the work
is not progressing as rapidly as it should progress for the protection of the
city and the people of the city, then, after notice to the applicant or his
contractor or agent, the city shall be authorized to employ another contractor
to finish the job in a good workmanlike manner; and any and all costs and
expenses of this work shall be immediately paid by the applicant and his
contractor to the city; or it may be taken from the bond, at the city's option,
should the city at any time feel that the backfilling and hard surfacing work
is not being properly done, and after notice to the applicant and his
contractor to properly do this work.
      6.   Complete all work under this article and under the permit within the
time specified in the permit by the city engineer, and in all events within
thirty (30) days from the issuance of the permit, unless an extension in
writing is placed on the permit by the city engineer's office. In no case will
work other than that described in and shown on the application for permit and
on the permit be attempted or done by the applicant or his contractor.
      7.   Maintain and be responsible as the applicant, his contractor or
agent for the place of excavation for a period of two (2) years from the date
of completion and assume full responsibility for any injury caused to the city
or to third persons as a result of a rise or settling in a portion of the
roadway which they have worked on. Should the applicant, within said two (2)
years, receive notice from the streets department, the city council or from the
city engineer's office that the road portion that they have reconstructed has
settled or raised, they will immediately place necessary barricades to protect
the traveling public, and will within seven (7) days' time repair the road at
the point of construction, placing it back in a condition equal to its original
condition, subject to weather conditions or availability of asphalt. Should the
applicant or the contractor or agency fail to do this within seven (7) days,
the city engineer shall have the authority, without further notice, to employ a
third party contractor to repair the work or the city may do so with its own
work crews, and the applicant and the amount necessarily expended by it in the
reconstruction of this portion of the road. The bond of the applicant will be
retained during this two (2) year period to guarantee the proper reconstruction
of the road. (1989 Code § 11-391)
   F.   Excavation restrictions will be imposed by the city for five (5) years
following the completion of new streets and for three (3) years following the
resurfacing of streets. For the purposes of this section, new streets shall be
defined as any street which is paved with three (3) or more inches of new
asphalt, and resurfaced streets shall be defined as any street which is
overlayed with less than three inches (3") of asphalt, or had a resurfacing
treatment which shall include a chip seal, bonded matrix overlay, or
microsurfacing. The city engineer shall, on or prior to September 1 of each
year, mail to all persons who have made a written request to the city engineer
a schedule identifying the location and anticipated start date and completion
date of all street construction or reconstruction and overlays constituting
major work, anticipated to be performed during the next one year period. Each
utility provider shall, as a condition of the permit, coordinate construction
activities with the city engineer such that it does not delay the construction
of the street project. The utility provider shall also demonstrate that the
facilities proposed to be installed are reasonably anticipated to provide
sufficient capacity to satisfy the needs of such applicant for a minimum of
five (5) years.
   G.   Exceptions to the restrictions outlined in Section F shall be limited
to street excavations required for construction of an approved building lot, or
may be granted by City Council for new development which has a favorable
recommendation by the city engineer. All excavations shall comply with the
adopted standards and specifications for street excavation. (Ord. 03-1, 3-4-
2003; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2022-06, 9-20-2022)
7-5B-3: FEE FOR PERMIT:
The city shall charge a permit fee in addition to the cash bond for the
excavation in the public right of way. The fee shall be in such amount as
specified in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution. (1989 Code § 11-391;
amd. 2012 Code)
7-5B-4: CONTROLS, LIMITATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
All building excavation operations conducted within a public right of way are
subject to the following controls, limitations and restrictions:
   A.   Permits: It shall be unlawful for any person to break, excavate,
tunnel, undermine, or in any manner affect the surface or base of any street,
or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or any other material
without an excavation permit from the city. Any public utility regulated by the
state or holding a franchise from the city which in the pursuit of its calling
has frequent occasion to open or make excavations in the streets may, upon
application, receive a general permit from the city to cover all excavating
such utilities may make within the streets of the city. All permits shall be
subject to revocation and the city may refuse to issue a permit for failure of
the permittee or applicant to abide by the terms and conditions of this
article. Excavation permits will not be required prior to excavation in case of
emergency endangering life or property, providing the city is notified as soon
as practicable and a permit is applied for upon the next regular working day
following the emergency.
   B.   Interference With Utilities: An excavator shall not interfere with any
existing utility without the written consent of the governing body and without
advance notice to the owner of the utility. If it becomes necessary to relocate
an existing utility, it shall be done by its owner unless the owner otherwise
directs. No utility, whether owned by the city or by a private enterprise,
shall be removed to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be
borne by the permittee or an expressly written agreement is made whereby the
utility owner and the excavator make other arrangements relating to such cost.
The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by
the excavation work, and shall do everything necessary to support, sustain and
protect them under, over, along or across the work. In case any of the pipes,
conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged (and for this purpose
pipe coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a
substructure), they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them, but
the utility owner shall be reimbursed for the expense of such repairs by the
permittee. It is the intent of this subsection that the permittee shall assume
all liability for damage to substructures, and any resulting damage or injury
to anyone because of such substructure damage, and such assumption of liability
shall be deemed a contractual obligation which the permittee accepts upon
acceptance of an excavation permit. The city need not be made a party to any
action because of this subsection. The permittee shall inform itself as to the
existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same
against damage.
   C.   Jetting Pipe: Jetting pipe by means of water under pressure, or
compressed air, is permitted only when approved by the city.
   D.   Bond Required:
      1.   In order to ensure proper backfill and restoration of surface, the
permittee shall deposit a cash deposit with the city recorder, payable to the
city, except that a public utility operating or using any of the streets under
a franchise from the city will not be required to furnish such bond, providing
such franchise obligates the holder thereof to restore the streets and to hold
the city harmless in the event of any injury to any person or damage to any
property due to negligence of such holder in conducting excavation and
restoration operations under such franchise.
      2.   The amount of cash deposit shall be established by resolution and
may be changed from time to time, but until such resolution is passed, the
amount of the cash deposit shall be one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the
estimated cost of the street repair given by the streets department. (1989 Code
§ 11-392)
ARTICLE C. SITE GRADING
SECTION:
7-5C-1: Purpose And Intent
7-5C-2: Permit Required; Exceptions
7-5C-3: Responsibility
7-5C-4: Retention Of Plans
7-5C-5: Inspections
7-5C-6: Standards And Specific Requirements
7-5C-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   This article is adopted to promote public safety and the general public
welfare; to protect property against loss from erosion, earth movement and
flooding; to maintain a superior community environment; to provide for the
continued orderly growth of the City; and to ensure the maximum preservation of
the natural scenic character of major portions of the City by establishing
minimum standards and requirements relating to land grading, excavations and
fills, and procedures by which these standards and requirements may be
enforced. It is intended that this article be administered with the foregoing
purposes in mind and specifically in an attempt to:
      1.   Minimize Hazards: Ensure that the development of each site occurs in
a manner harmonious with adjacent lands so as to minimize problems of drainage,
erosion, earth movement and similar hazards.
      2.   Protection Of Land: Ensure the public lands and places,
watercourses, streets and all other lands in the City are protected from
erosion, earth movement or drainage hazards.
      3.   Safety And Enjoyment: Ensure that the planning, design and
construction of all development will be done in a manner which provides maximum
safety and human enjoyment and except where specifically intended otherwise,
makes such construction as unobtrusive in the natural terrain as possible.
      4.   Retention Of Natural Vegetation: Ensure, insofar as practicable, the
maximum retention of natural vegetation to aid in protection against erosion,
earth movement and other hazards and to aid in preservation of the natural
scenic qualities of the City. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5C-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Conditional Use Permit: No person shall commence or perform any grading
or excavation, including those in gravel pits and rock quarries, in excess of
the limits specified below, without first obtaining a conditional use permit
for such grading or excavation.
   B.   Scope; Applicability: In this article, all references to "conditional
use permit" shall mean a conditional use permit for grading or excavation.
   C.   Types Of Excavations Applicable: A conditional use permit shall be
required in all cases where development comes under any one or more of the
following provisions, unless such work is otherwise exempted elsewhere in this
article:
      1.   Excavation, fill or any combination thereof exceeding one thousand
(1,000) cubic yards.
      2.   Fill exceeding five feet (5') in vertical depth at its deepest point
measured from the adjacent undisturbed ground surface.
      3.   An excavation exceeding five feet (5') in vertical depth at its
deepest point.
      4.   An excavation, fill or combination thereof exceeding an area of one
acre.
      5.   Vegetation removal from an area in excess of one acre.
   D.   Excavations Not Requiring Permit: A conditional use permit shall not be
required in the following cases:
      1.   Excavations below finished grade for which a building permit is
required and has been issued by the City, including, but not limited to, the
following:
         a.   Septic tanks and drainfields;
         b.   Tanks;
         c.   Vaults;
         d.   Tunnels;
         e.   Equipment basements;
         f.   Swimming pools;
         g.   Cellars; or
         h.   Footings for buildings or structures.
      2.   Excavation or removal of vegetation within property owned by public
utility companies or within public utility easements by public utility
companies.
      3.   Removal of vegetation as a part of the work authorized by an
approved building permit.
      4.   Tilling of soil or cutting of vegetation for agricultural or fire
protection purposes.
      5.   Commercial quarries operating with valid conditional use permits or
in appropriate industrial zones as provided for in this Code.
      6.   Engineered interior fills or surcharge on the property with respect
to industrial development.
      7.   Items not covered by this article which are exempted from required
permits by this Code and the Building Code adopted by the City.
      8.   Grading or excavation done pursuant to an approved final subdivision
plan. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5C-3: RESPONSIBILITY:
Failure of the City officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions, or to recommend denial of the conditional use permit, or of the
Planning Commission to deny said permit, shall not relieve the permittee from
responsibility for the condition or damages resulting therefrom. (Ord. 2018-04,
4-17-2018)
7-5C-4: RETENTION OF PLANS:
Plans, specifications and reports for all excavation conditional use permit
applications submitted to the City for approval shall be retained by the City
for a minimum period of two (2) years. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5C-5: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Requirements: The Community Development Director and building official,
with assistance from the City Engineer, shall make the inspections hereinafter
required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall
notify the permittee wherein the same fails to comply with this article. Where
it is found by inspection that conditions are not substantially as stated or
shown in the conditional use permit application, the inspector may stop further
work until and unless approval is obtained for a revised grading plan
conforming to the existing conditions.
   B.   Plans Maintained On Site: Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of
approval of the Planning Commission, shall be maintained at the site during the
progress of the grading. Until the final inspection is made, a card issued by
the City indicating permission to grade has been granted, shall be prominently
displayed near the front property line of the property involved so as to be
visible from the street on which the property fronts.
   C.   Notification Of Inspection: In order to obtain inspections, the
permittee shall notify the City at least twenty four (24) hours before said
inspection is to be made.
   D.   Time Of Inspections: Inspections shall be made:
      1.   Before commencement of grading operations and after required
construction stakes have been set; and
      2.   When all rough grading has been completed; and
      3.   When all work, including installation of all drainage and other
structures and required planting, has been completed. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
7-5C-6: STANDARDS AND SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: All grading and excavation shall comply with the
requirements set forth in title 10, chapter 7 of this Code in addition to other
requirements of this Code.
   B.   Hours Of Operation: All grading and excavation in or contiguous to
residential neighborhoods shall be carried on between the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. The City may waive this
requirement if it is shown that restricting the hours of operation would unduly
interfere with the development of the property and it is shown that other
properties or neighborhood values would not be adversely affected.
   C.   Dust And Dirt Control: All graded or disturbed surfaces of excavations,
and all equipment, materials and roadways on the site shall be dampened or
suitably treated, managed or contained to prevent the deposit of dust on
neighboring properties; all materials transported to or from the site shall be
so contained during the transportation as to prevent spillage on streets or
other property outside of the list.
   D.   Slopes: The City Engineer may require the percent of slope of a cut or
fill to be reduced if it is found that the cut or fill is subject to unusual or
excessive erosion, or if other conditions make such requirements necessary for
stability. The City Engineer may permit steeper slopes where the material being
cut is unusually stable.
   E.   Fill Material:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to place fill at any site in the City which is
not "clean" fill material within the reasonable standards of the construction
industry in the State. Generally, "clean" fill material may consist of soil and
rocks and related inert earth material which is substantially free from wood,
roots, bark, tree limbs, grass clippings, yard refuse and other similar
materials.
      2.   In any event, the following materials are not acceptable as "clean"
fill material at fill sites within the City:
         a.   Material which is toxic or which may be characterized as
hazardous waste.
         b.   Material which may be characterized as "solid waste".
         c.   Material containing detrimental amounts of organic material.
         d.   Material characterized as asphalt and related materials and
products, the composition of which includes oils or other petroleum based
products.
         e.   Rock, concrete and other irreducible materials with a maximum
dimension of greater than twelve inches (12").
   F.   Drainage: Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any surface
waters from damaging the cut face of an excavation or any portion of a fill.
All drainageways and structures shall carry surface waters without producing
erosion to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural watercourse
acceptable to the City Engineer as a safe place to deposit and receive such
waters. The City Engineer may require such drainage structures to be
constructed or installed as necessary to prevent erosion damage or to prevent
saturation of the fill or material behind cut slopes.
   G.   Finished Cuts And Slopes: The exposed or finished cuts or slopes of any
fill or excavation shall be smoothly graded. All exposed slopes of any cut or
fill shall be protected by approved planting, crib walls or walls and planting
or terracing, or combinations thereof.
   H.   Backfilling: Any pipe trench or other trenching or excavation made in
any slope of any excavation or filled site shall be backfilled and compacted to
the level of the surrounding grade.
   I.   Compaction Of Fills:
      1.   Unless otherwise directed by the City Engineer, all fills governed
by this Code intended to support buildings, structures, or where otherwise
required to be compacted for stability, shall be compacted, inspected and
tested in accordance with the following provisions:
         a.   The natural ground surface shall be prepared by removal of
topsoil and vegetation and, if necessary, shall be graded to a series of
terraces.
         b.   The fill shall be spread in a series of layers, each not
exceeding six inches (6") in thickness, and shall be compacted by "sheepsfoot"
roller compactor (after each layer is spread) or other method acceptable to the
City Engineer.
         c.   The moisture content of the fill material shall be controlled at
the time of spreading and compaction to obtain required maximum density.
         d.   The fill material after compaction shall have an average dry
density of not less than ninety five percent (95%) of maximum dry density and a
minimum of ninety percent (90%) in all portions of the fill requiring
compaction as determined by the AASHO soil compaction test method T99-57 or
T160-57, or other testing method acceptable to the City Engineer and Community
Development Director.
         e.   A written report of the compaction, showing location and depth of
test holes, materials used, moisture conditions, recommended soil bearing
pressures, and relative density obtained from all tests, prepared by a civil
engineer or soils engineer licensed by the State, shall be submitted to the
Community Development Director or City Engineer.
      2.   The City Engineer may require additional tests or information if the
conditions or materials are such that additional information is necessary, and
may modify or delete any of the above listed requirements that are unnecessary
to further the purpose of title 10 of this Code.
   J.   Erosion Control And Landscaping: All cut and fill surfaces created by
grading except for firebreak purposes shall be planted with a ground cover that
is compatible with the natural ground covers in the City. Topsoil is to be
stockpiled during rough grading and used on cut and fill slopes. When slopes
too steep to support continuous ground cover have been permitted and in lieu
thereof niches and ledges provided for planting, such slopes need not be
planted with a continuous ground cover, but may instead be screened with vines
and plantings. Cuts and fills along public roads may be required to be
landscaped so as to blend into the natural surrounds. All plant materials must
be approved by the Planning Commission prior to issuance of a conditional use
permit.
   K.   Filling For Agricultural And Fire Protection Purposes: Filling of the
ground for agricultural or fire protection purposes shall be accomplished with
such practices as will prevent erosion and damage to natural drainage channels.
   L.   Final Inspection: If upon final inspection of any grading it is found
that the work authorized by the conditional use permit has been satisfactorily
completed in accordance with the requirements of this Code and any other
requirements imposed, the Community Development Director shall so record in the
record.
      1.   The City shall have the power to stop work on any conditional use
permit or revoke temporary conditional use permits whenever it is found that
the work covered by the permit has been materially extended or altered without
prior approval, or that any planting, retaining walls, cribbing, drainage
structures, or other protective devices as shown on the approved plans and
specifications submitted with the application for a permit have not been
maintained in good order and repair.
      2.   Before such revocation, the City shall first give written notice to
the owner of the property involved, specifying the defective condition and
stating that unless such defective condition is remedied satisfactorily within
thirty (30) days, the conditional use permit may be revoked. If the defective
condition is remedied to the satisfaction of the City, the permit shall not be
revoked.
   M.   Special Precautions: Special precautions shall be taken to preserve
life, property values, stable soils conditions and aesthetics, including, but
not limited to, the following:
      1.   Requiring a more level exposed slope, construction of additional
drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing, installation of
plant materials for erosion control, and reports of a registered soils engineer
or engineering geologist whose recommendation may be made a requirement for
further work. Such requirement by the City Engineer shall constitute a change
order in the work.
      2.   Where it appears that storm damage may result from work performed
hereunder, such work may be stopped and the permittee required to take such
measures as may be necessary to protect adjoining property or the public
safety. On large operations or where unusual site conditions prevail, the City
may specify the time at which grading may proceed and the time of completion or
may require that the operation be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure
completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal
rains.
   N.   Excavations; Exception: All excavations shall be limited as follows:
      1.   No cut slope shall exceed a vertical height of one hundred feet
(100') unless horizontal benches with a minimum width of thirty feet (30') are
installed at each one hundred feet (100') of vertical height.
      2.   No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than a
ratio of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1).
      3.   The Planning Commission, upon appeal, may permit the excavation to
be made with a cut face steeper in slope than a ratio of two horizontal to one
vertical (2:1) if the applicant can reasonably show that the material making up
the slope of the excavation and the underlying bedrock material is capable of
holding satisfactorily on a steeper gradient. No slopes shall be cut steeper
than the bedding planes, fault or joint in any formation where the cut slope
will lie on the dip side of the strike line of the fracture, bedding plane,
fault or joint. No slopes shall be cut in an existing landslide, mudflow or
other form of naturally unstable slope except as recommended by a qualified
geological engineer. Where the excavation is exposed straight above the top of
the cut which will permit the entry of water along bedding planes, this area
shall be sealed with a compacted soil blanket having a minimum thickness of two
feet (2'). The soil for this blanket shall be relatively impervious and must be
approved for such use by the soils engineering geologist. If the material of
the slope is of such composition and character as to be unstable under the
anticipated maximum moisture content, the slope angle shall be reduced to a
stable value.
      4.   No excavation for construction of new utility and telephone lines
shall be made in paved streets within five (5) years after paving. During said
five (5) year period, tunneling under such streets may be authorized if
otherwise in compliance with title 10, chapter 7 of this Code, where to do so
would facilitate construction of new utility and telephone lines, or
maintenance.
   O.   Fills:
      1.   Limitations: All fills shall be limited as follows:
         a.   No fill slope shall exceed a vertical height of one hundred feet
(100') unless horizontal benches with a minimum width of thirty feet (30') are
installed at each one hundred feet (100') of vertical height.
         b.   No fill shall be made which creates an exposed surface steeper in
slope than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless the fill material is of
such a nature that a one to one (1:1) slope may be permitted with the
permission of the City Engineer.
      2.   Exception: The Planning Commission, in case an appeal is made, may
permit a fill to be made which creates an exposed surface steeper in slope than
two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) if the applicant can reasonably show the
Planning Commission that the strength characteristics of the material to be
used in the fill are such as to produce an equivalent degree of slope stability
and sufficient strength characteristics to support the fill within reasonable
settlement values so as to produce an equivalent degree of safety.
   P.   Prohibited Activities:
      1.   The provisions of this article shall not be construed as permitting
the removal of topsoil solely for resale, or of permitting quarrying of any
site within the limits of the City unless in a zoning district allowing such
activities.
      2.   This article shall also not be construed as authorizing any person
to maintain a private or public nuisance upon his or her property, and
compliance with the provisions of this article shall not be a defense in any
action to abate such nuisance. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
CHAPTER 6
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Policy
7-6-2: Purpose And Objective
7-6-3: Definitions
7-6-4: Guidelines
7-6-5: Fee Waivers
7-6-6: Appeal Process
7-6-1: POLICY:
It is the policy of the city that special events be encouraged as an
enhancement to the quality of life for the city residents. It is further the
policy of the city that such events be conducted with minimal disturbance to
neighborhoods and traffic. (Ord. 92-13, 9-15-1992)
7-6-2: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that races, runs,
walks, bicycle races, block parties, filming of movies and commercials, and any
and all other special events in or affecting the use of the public ways are
conducted so that traffic and neighborhoods are minimally impacted.
   B.   Objective: The objective of this chapter is to designate methods by
which special events will be fairly and expeditiously managed by the city.
(Ord. 92-13, 9-15-1992)
7-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ORGANIZER: The individual or organization responsible for event arrangements,
including financial responsibility.
PROCESSING FEE: A fee, in such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee
schedule resolution, charged by the city for processing special event
petitions. This fee is necessary to reimburse the city for a portion of the
staff time and materials used in reviewing petitions. This fee may be waived
under four (4) circumstances: a) an event sponsored or cosponsored by the city;
b) an event has utilized the same venue, date and time for at least five (5)
years; c) the event is protected by the first amendment of the United States
constitution; or d) a waiver is allowable under section
7-6-5 of this chapter.
SPECIAL EVENT: An event occurring out of the ordinary course of neighborhood
functions, e.g., races, runs, walks, bicycle races, block parties, filming of
movies. These events are primarily for the purpose of entertainment or
fundraising and attract participants and/or observers.
SUPPORT FEE: A fee may be charged by the city for the cost of providing police
protection, park maintenance, and fees for the closure of metered roads and
streets. A deposit, in such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee
schedule resolution, at the time of approval is applied towards this fee. This
fee may be waived under two (2) circumstances: a) the event is protected by the
first amendment of the United States constitution; or b) a waiver is allowable
under section
7-6-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 92-13, 9-15-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
7-6-4: GUIDELINES:
   A.   Petition: Requests to conduct races, runs, walks, bicycle races, block
parties, filming of movies and commercials, and other special events in or
affecting the use of the public way are considered petitions. (Ord. 92-13, 9-
15-1992)
   B.   Request Submitted: Requests to hold special events, accompanied by the
processing fee in such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule
resolution, except as noted in the definitions of "support fee" and "processing
fee", as defined in section
7-6-3 of this chapter, must be submitted to the police department, as the
coordinating department, at least thirty (30) days before any advertising for
that event commences. The police department will notify the petitioner of
approval or disapproval within two (2) to three (3) weeks. Any request
submitted after the thirty (30) day deadline must be accompanied by an
additional nonrefundable late fee in such amount as specified in the
comprehensive fee schedule resolution, to cover the cost of expediting the
request. The city does not guarantee that the request will be approved. (Ord.
92-13, 9-15-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Information Required: Requests or petitions for special events must
include the following information:
      1.   Name of the organizer, contact person and telephone number.
      2.   Type of event.
      3.   Date and time the event will be held.
      4.   Map of the proposed route or site with barricade plan.
      5.   Expected length and duration of event.
      6.   Expected number of attendees.
      7.   Services required from the streets department (electrical power,
water, stage, sound system, etc.).
      8.   Any admission fee or donation to be charged or requested.
      9.   Any request for fee waiver.
   D.   City Support; Liability For Damages: City support will be provided, at
cost, payable by the event organizer, for special events. Petitioners will be
charged for damage costs caused by inappropriate use of city parks and other
facilities.
      1.   Races, runs, walks, bicycle races, etc., are encouraged to be held
along less traveled streets, other than a state highway, within the city. These
routes require limited city support and are therefor less costly for the event
organizer. (Ord. 92-13, 9-15-1992)
      2.   The event organizer will be required to pay a deposit, in such
amount as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution, applied
towards costs, to the police department at the time permission to hold the
event or begin filming is granted. (Ord. 92-13, 9-15-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
      3.   City support costs include, but are not limited to, police
protection, park maintenance, and fees for the closure of roads and streets.
(Ord. 92-13, 9-15-1992)
      4.   City support shall be limited to the minimum necessary, or more at
the discretion of the city manager, to ensure a successful event. Police
protection needs shall be determined and assigned by the chief of police or his
designee. Park maintenance shall be performed by the public works department.
Closure of roads and streets shall be administered by the public works
department in cooperation with the police department. (Ord. 92-13, 9-15-1992;
amd. 2012 Code)
   E.   Barricades: Barricades must be provided by the event organizer and must
meet the requirements established by the public works department and the police
department.
   F.   User Fees For Facilities: The use of a park facility for the start and
finish of races, runs, walks, bicycle races, etc., is subject to charges for
services and will be held in accordance with established fees for use of city
parks.
   G.   Nonliability Of City; Release And Waiver Required: The city assumes no
liability for the safety of participants or spectators. The event organizer, at
the city's request, shall require that all participants in an event execute and
deliver to the city a release and waiver of liability prior to the occurrence
of the event.
   H.   Liability Insurance: Upon the recommendation of the city attorney,
liability insurance in the minimum amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per event may be required of organizers.
   I.   City Sponsored Events; No Fee: Services provided to events sponsored
fully or in part by the city may be permitted free of charge. (Ord. 92-13, 9-
15-1992)
7-6-5: FEE WAIVERS:
Event sponsors may apply for a processing and/or support fee waiver if they
meet the following criteria:
   A.   First year events without corporate sponsorship and which do not charge
admission are eligible for a one hundred percent (100%) fee waiver.
   B.   Second year events without corporate sponsorship and which do not
charge admission are eligible for a fifty percent (50%) fee waiver. No
additional fee waivers will be given beyond the second year of operation.
   C.   First year events with corporate sponsorship and which charge admission
or have some other source of funding are eligible for a fifty percent (50%)
waiver. No additional fee waivers will be given beyond the first year of
operation.
   D.   Nonprofit organization sponsored events having no corporate sponsorship
and which charge one dollar ninety nine cents ($1.99) or less admission or
offsetting donation, upon presentation of documents noting tax free status, are
eligible for a one hundred percent (100%) fee waiver until such time as the
status of the event changes.
   E.   Nonprofit organization sponsored events having corporate sponsorship or
charging two dollars ($2.00) or more admission or offsetting donation, or any
combination thereof, may receive a full, partial, or no fee waiver based upon
expected gross receipts. (Ord. 92-13, 9-15-1992; amd. 2012 Code)
7-6-6: APPEAL PROCESS:
Appeal of any decision made according to the guidelines of this chapter will be
submitted, in writing, to the mayor. Within seven (7) days of receipt of the
appeal, the mayor will notify the petitioner and the police department of the
mayor's decision. (Ord. 92-13, 9-15-1992)
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC PARKS
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 2025-
12, passed 6-17-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below
when the ordinance is codified.
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 2025-
13, passed 7-15-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below
when the ordinance is codified.
SECTION:
7-7-1: Park Hours
7-7-2: Camping
7-7-3: Beer And Alcoholic Beverages
7-7-4: Fire Making
7-7-5: Restroom Facility Usage
7-7-6: Penalty
7-7-1: PARK HOURS:
The hours of public use of city parks, trails and open space are established as
follows:
   A.   City parks, trails and open spaces shall be available to the use of the
public at all hours after five o'clock (5:00) A.M. in the morning and before
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. in the evening.
   B.   The hours of operation may be extended only for special events with the
prior approval of the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 2010-16, 6-15-2010)
7-7-2: CAMPING:
No person shall camp, lodge or pitch a tent, fly, lean-to, tarpaulin or any
other type of camping equipment in any park, except in cases of local emergency
as declared by the mayor. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person
using or benefiting from the use of any of the foregoing shelters or camping
equipment to fail to remove the same from any such park for more than five (5)
minutes after being requested to do so by any police officer or citizen. (Ord.
94-4, 4-19-1994)
7-7-3: BEER AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume beer or any alcoholic beverage,
or to have in his or her possession any beer or alcoholic beverage, within any
public park within the jurisdictional limits of the city. (Ord. 94-4, 4-19-
1994)
7-7-4: FIRE MAKING:
No person shall make or kindle a fire for any purpose in any park located
within the city, except in designated cooking areas. (Ord. 94-4, 4-19-1994)
7-7-5: RESTROOM FACILITY USAGE:
No person over eight (8) years of age shall enter or use any restroom
designated for members of the opposite sex in a public park. Restroom
facilities shall be closed to the public during park closure hours. (Ord. 94-4,
4-19-1994)
7-7-6: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall be a class C misdemeanor, punishable by both
fine and imprisonment as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2010-16, 6-15-2010; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 8
TELECOMMUNICATIONS USE OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
7-8-1: Definitions
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the
plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
AFFILIATES: Each person who has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest
in provider and/or each person in which a provider has, directly or indirectly,
a controlling interest; provided, however, that "affiliated person" shall in no
event mean the City.
APPLICABLE STANDARD: The structural standards for antenna supporting structures
and antenna, known as ANSI/TIA-222, from the American National Standards
Institute and the Telecommunications Industry Association.
APPLICANT, SMALL WIRELESS: Any person who submits an application to the City
and is a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider.
APPLICATION: The process by which a provider submits a request and indicates a
desire to be granted a franchise to utilize the rights-of-way of all, or a
part, of the City. An application includes all written documentation, verbal
statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a provider
to the City concerning: the construction of a telecommunications system over,
under, on or through the rights-of-way; the telecommunications services
proposed to be provided in the City by a provider; the area proposed to be
served within the City by a provider; the portion of the rights-of-way proposed
to be used by a provider; and any other matter pertaining to a proposed system
or service.
APPLICATION, SMALL WIRELESS: A request submitted by an applicant for a permit
to: a) collocate small wireless facilities; or, b) construct, install,
maintain, operate, replace or modify a utility pole or wireless support
structure.
CABLE, COMMUNICATIONS, FIBER OR ELECTRIC EASEMENT: An easement, granted to a
cable or video service provider, a communications service provider (including
without limitation a telephone utility), a fiber optics cable services
provider, or an electric services provider created or authorized by State law
to provide such services, that runs parallel to and abuts or within a right-
of-way and is occupied by existing utility poles or wireless support structures
carrying electric distribution lines, wires, cable, conduit, fiber optic cable
for telecommunications, cable or electric service or supporting Municipal
street lights, or security lights. The term cable, communications, fiber or
electric easement excludes easements for service drops or lines connecting the
customer's premises to the cable, communications, fiber or electrical provider.
CITY: North Salt Lake City, Utah.
CITY-OWNED POLE:
   A.   Utility pole owned or operated by the City in covered areas, including
a utility pole that provides lighting or traffic control functions, or other
law enforcement functions, including light poles, traffic signals, and
structures for signage, and
   B.   Pole or similar structure owned or operated by the City in a covered
area that supports only wireless facilities.
COLLOCATE: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one or more
wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless
support structure or utility pole located in covered areas within the
jurisdiction of the City. "Collocation" has a corresponding meaning.
COMPLETION DATE: The date that a provider begins providing services to
customers in the City.
CONSTRUCTION COSTS: All costs of constructing a system, including make ready
costs, other than engineering fees, attorney or accountant fees, or other
consulting fees.
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS: The telecommunication construction standards of the
City.
CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control in whatever manner
exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership,
management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the
system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control
or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly
or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more
than twenty five percent (25%) of any provider (which person or group of
persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or
"controlling interest", as used herein, may be held simultaneously by more than
one person or group of persons.
COVERED AREAS: The surface of, and the space above and below, any public
"rights-of-way", "ROW", "City rights-of-way", "public rights-of-way", and/or
"cable, communications, fiber or electric easement" as those terms are defined
herein.
DATE: The date that a provider begins providing services to customers in the
City.
DAY: Calendar day unless the last day for the City or an applicant to take
action under this chapter ends on a weekend, holiday, or time when all but City
emergency services are closed due to weather or some unforeseen situation.
DECORATIVE POLE: A utility pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic
purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially
designed informational or directional signage or a temporary holiday or special
event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to
nondiscriminatory Municipal practices.
DESIGN DISTRICT: An area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by Municipal
ordinance, and for which the City maintains and enforces unique design and
aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto.
FEE: A one-time charge.
FRANCHISE: The rights and obligation extended by the City to a provider to own,
lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a system in the rights-of-way within
the boundaries of the City. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted,
shall not mean or include: a) any other permit or authorization required for
the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City
required by the ordinances and laws of the City; b) any permit, agreement or
authorization required in connection with operations on rights-of-way or public
property, including, without limitation, permits and agreements for placing
devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned by the City
or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along the
rights-of-way.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contract entered into in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter between the City and a franchisee that sets forth, subject to
this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be
exercised.
FRANCHISEE: A provider who is given a franchise.
GROSS REVENUE: Includes all revenues of a provider that may be included as
gross revenue within the meaning of Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 26,
as amended.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: A group of buildings, properties, or sites that are:
   A.   In accordance with 47 CFR part 1, appendix C:
      1.   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places; or
      2.   Formally determined eligible for listing in the National Register of
Historic Places by the Keeper of the National Register; or
   B.   In a historic district or area created under State Code section 10-9a-
503.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the rights-of-way.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that meets the following
qualifications:
   A.   Is not larger in dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length,
fifteen inches (15") in width, and twelve inches (12") in height; and,
   B.   Any exterior antenna is no longer than eleven inches (11").
NONDISCRIMINATORY: Treating similarly situated entities the same absent a
reasonable, and competitively neutral basis, for different treatment.
OPEN VIDEO SERVICE: Any video programming services provided to any person
through the use of rights-of-way, by a provider that is certified by the FCC to
operate an open video system pursuant to section 651 et seq., of the
Telecommunications Act, 47 USC title VI, part V, regardless of the facilities
used.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: A system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic
fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment or
facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying or distributing open video services to or from subscribers or
locations within the City.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and
directly or through one or more affiliates owns an interest in such system, or
who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a system.
ORDINANCE OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE: This telecommunications chapter
concerning the granting of franchises in and by the City for the construction,
ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
PERMIT: A written authorization an authority requires for a wireless provider
to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization, including the City.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES: Has the same meaning as provided in
section 704 of the Act (42 USC 322(6)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly
known as cellular and PCS services that do not install any system or portion of
a system in the rights- of-way.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller or system lessee.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RESELLER: Refers to any person that provides service over a system for which a
separate charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the underlying
system used for the transmission and does not install any system in the rights-
of- way.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY OR ROW OR CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY OR PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF- WAY: That area
on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley
dedicated to, managed or controlled by the City, County or the State of Utah,
but not including a Federal interstate highway, in the City.
SIGNAL: Any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or laser
or radio frequency energy or optical information in either analog or digital
format.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than
twenty eight (28) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated
ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume:
electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box,
ground- based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off
switch, vertical cable runs for the connection of power or other services,
wireless provider antenna, or coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately
adjacent to or directly associated with a particular collocation, unless the
cable is a wireline backhaul facility.
SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION:
   A.   A proposed modification or replacement to an existing wireless support
structure that will substantially change the physical dimensions of the
wireless support structure under the substantial change standard established in
47 CFR section 1.40001(7); or
   B.   A proposed modification in excess of the site dimensions specified in
47 CFR part 1, appendix C, section III.B.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific portion
of a system to provide services.
TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE: Means that by virtue of engineering or spectrum usage,
the proposed placement for a small wireless facility, or the small wireless
facility's design or site location, can be implemented without a significant
reduction or impairment to the functionality of the small wireless facility.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the
user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video and voice),
without change in the form or content of the information sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE OR SERVICES: Any telecommunications services
provided by a provider within the City that the provider is authorized to
provide under Federal, State and local law, and any equipment or facilities
required for and integrated with the services provided within the City, except
that these terms do not include "cable service", as defined in the Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, 47 USC 521 et seq., and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and any other electronic devices, equipment, wire and
appurtenances owned, leased or used by a provider, located in the rights-of-
way, and utilized in the provision of services, including fully digital or
analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced telecommunications
services. Telecommunications system or systems also includes an open video
system.
TRANSMISSION POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
to carry electric transmission (as opposed to distribution) lines.
UNDERGROUND DISTRICT: An area that is designated by ordinances, zoning
regulations, State law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private
restrictions, that prohibit installing above ground structures in a covered
area and for which the City maintains and enforces standards on a uniform and
nondiscriminatory basis.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part for
the purpose of carrying electric distribution lines or cables or wires for
telecommunications, cable or electric service, or for lighting, traffic control
devices, traffic control or directional signage, or a similar function
regardless of ownership, including City-owned poles. Such term shall not
include wireless support structures, a structure that supports electric
transmission lines, or a Municipally owned structure that supports electric
lines used for the provision of Municipal electric service.
WIRE: Fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless services
between user equipment and a communications network, including: a) equipment
associated with wireless communications; b) radio transceivers, antennas,
coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration. The term includes small
wireless facilities. The term does not include the structure or improvements
on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated, wireline backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support
structures or utility poles or coaxial or fiber optic cable that is otherwise
not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person including a person authorized to
provide telecommunications service in the State, that builds, installs or
maintains utility poles, wireless communication transmission equipment,
wireless facilities or wireless support structures.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided using licensed or unlicensed spectrum,
including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, delivered to
the public using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole or,
other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of
supporting wireless facilities. Such term shall not include a utility pole.
WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY: A facility used to transport communications by wire
from a wireless facility to a communications network.
WRITTEN OR IN WRITING: A tangible or electronic record of a communication or
representation, including a communication or representation that is
handwritten, typewritten, printed, photostated, photographed, or electronic.
(Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
ARTICLE A. FRANCHISES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
7-8A-1: Declaration Of Findings And Intent; Scope Of Regulations
7-8A-2: Franchise Required
7-8A-3: Compensation And Other Payments
7-8A-4: Application For Franchise
7-8A-5: Construction And Technical Requirements
7-8A-6: Franchise And License Nontransferable
7-8A-7: Oversight And Regulation
7-8A-8: Rights Of City
7-8A-9: Obligation To Notify
7-8A-10: General Provisions
7-8A-11: Federal, State And City Jurisdiction
7-8A-1: DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND INTENT; SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
   A.   Declaration Of Findings And Intent:
      1.   The City finds the rights-of-way within the City:
         a.   Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property
in the business and social life of the City;
         b.   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled
consistent with that intent;
         c.   Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and
other public service entities delivering utility and public services rendered
for profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare and general economic
well-being of the City and its citizens; and
         d.   Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper
management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the
taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience and negative
impact upon the public from such facilities' construction, placement,
relocation and maintenance in the rights-of-way;
      2.   The City finds that the right to occupy portions of the rights-of-
way for limited times for the business of providing telecommunications services
is a valuable use of a unique public resource that has been acquired and is
maintained at great expense to the City and its taxpayers, and the taxpayers of
the City should receive fair and reasonable compensation.
      3.   The City finds that while telecommunications systems are in part an
extension of interstate commerce, their operations also involve rights-of-way,
Municipal franchising and vital business and community service, which are of
local concern.
      4.   The City finds that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and
citizens to promote the rapid development of telecommunications services, on a
nondiscriminatory basis, responsive to community and public interest, and to
assure availability for Municipal, educational and community services.
      5.   The City finds that it is in the interests of the public to
franchise and to establish standards for franchising providers in a manner
that:
         a.   Fairly and reasonably compensates the City on a competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
         b.   Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under
which providers may use valuable public property to serve the public;
         c.   Fully protects the public interests and the City from any harm
that may flow from such private commercial use of rights-of-way;
         d.   Protects the regulatory authority of the City, in a manner
consistent with Federal and State law;
         e.   Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and
use of the City infrastructure;
         f.   Protects the public investment in improvements in the rights- of-
way; and
         g.   Ensures that no barriers to entry of telecommunications providers
are created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting telecommunication services, within
the meaning of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 ("Act" [PL no. 104-104]).
      6.   The City adopts this telecommunications article pursuant to its
power to manage the rights-of-way by providers as expressly set forth by
sections 253 and 653 of the Act.
   B.   Scope: This article shall provide the basic local scheme for providers
of telecommunications services and systems that requires the use of the rights-
of-way, including providers of both the system and service, providers of the
system only and providers of services only. This article shall apply to all
future providers in the City prior to the effective date hereof, whether
operating with or without a franchise as set forth in subsection
 7-8A-2B of this article.
   C.   Excluded Activities:
      1.   This article shall not apply to cable television operators otherwise
regulated by a cable television ordinance.
      2.   This article shall not apply to wireless telecommunication systems.
      3.   Providers excused by other laws that prohibit the City from
requiring a franchise shall not be required to obtain a franchise, but all of
the requirements imposed by this article through the exercise of the City
police power, and not preempted by other law, shall be applicable. (Ord. 2018-
09, 9-4-2018)
7-8A-2: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
   A.   Authority Of City To Grant Franchise: The City is empowered and
authorized to issue nonexclusive franchises governing the installation,
construction, operation, use and maintenance of systems in the City rights-of-
way.
   B.   Every Provider Shall Obtain: Every provider shall obtain a franchise
prior to constructing a telecommunications system or providing
telecommunications services, or an open video system or providing services via
an open video system. The fact that particular telecommunications systems may
be used for multiple purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a franchise
for other purposes. By way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator
of a cable system must obtain a cable franchise, and, should it intend to
provide telecommunications services over the same system, must also obtain a
telecommunications franchise.
   C.   Nature Of Grant: A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or
legal, in the rights-of-way. A franchise is only the right to occupy rights-of-
way for the purposes and for the period stated in the franchise; the right may
not be subdivided or subleased. A franchise does not excuse a provider from
obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before collocating
its system on the property of others, including the City's property.
   D.   Current Providers: Except to the extent required by Federal or State
law, any provider acting without a franchise on the effective date hereof shall
request issuance of a franchise from the City within ninety (90) days of the
effective date hereof. If such request is made, the provider may continue
providing service during the course of negotiations. If a timely request is not
made, or if negotiations cease and a franchise is not granted, the provider
shall comply with the provisions of subsection
7-8A-8D of this article.
   E.   Nature Of Franchise: The franchise granted by the City under the
provisions of this article shall be a nonexclusive franchise providing the
right and consent to install, operate, repair, maintain, remove and replace its
system on, over and under the rights-of-way in order to provide services that
originate or terminate in or transit the franchise.
   F.   Regulatory Approval Needed: Before offering or providing any services
pursuant to the franchise, a provider shall obtain any and all regulatory
approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of
such services from the appropriate Federal, State and local authorities, if
required, and shall submit to the City, upon the written request of the City,
evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
   G.   Other Permits And Agreements: A provider shall obtain and pay for all
pole attachment agreements, construction, building, road cut or other permits
or approvals necessary under Federal, State or City law or ordinance, before
installing its system. Providers shall comply with all of the provisions of
said agreement or permits and shall promptly complete all work contemplated
under such permits and agreements.
   H.   Term Of Franchise: No franchise issued pursuant to this article shall
have a term of less than five (5) years or greater than fifteen (15) years.
(Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8A-3: COMPENSATION AND OTHER PAYMENTS:
   A.   Compensation:
      1.   Compensation: As fair and reasonable compensation for any franchise
granted pursuant to this article, a provider shall have the following
obligations:
         a.   Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the City to
review an application for a franchise and in addition to all other fees,
permits or charges, a provider shall pay to the City, at the time of
application, a nonrefundable application fee and an up front franchise fee, in
such amounts as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution. The
provider may offset the franchise fee paid pursuant to subsection A1b of this
section up to the amount of the up front franchise fee paid to the City. Only
the application fee shall be paid when an amendment to an application is filed
with the City.
         b.   Franchise Fees: The obligation to pay franchise fees shall
commence on the completion date.
            (1)   The franchise fee shall be six percent (6%) of gross
revenues, but cannot exceed six percent (6%). This fee is offset by any
Business License Tax or fee enacted by the City.
            (2)   The City may, at its option, agree to accept services or
excess capacity on a system in lieu of all or part of the franchise fee. The
value of the services or excess capacity in the system shall be fairly
negotiated between the City and the provider.
         c.   Excavation Permits: The provider shall also pay fees required for
an excavation permit as provided in chapter 5, article B of this title.
      2.   Timing: Unless otherwise agreed to in writing, all fees shall be
paid on a monthly basis within thirty (30) days of the close of each calendar
month.
   B.   Future Costs: A provider shall pay to the City or to third parties, at
the direction of the City, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and expenses
that the City incurs for the services of third parties (including, but not
limited to, attorneys and other consultants) in connection with any renewal or
provider initiated renegotiation, transfer, amendment or other modification of
this article or a franchise; provided, however, that in the case of renewal
only, the parties shall agree upon a reasonable financial cap at the outset of
negotiations. Any costs associated with any work to be done by the Power and
Public Works Department to provide space on City owned poles shall be borne by
the provider.
   C.   Taxes And Assessments: To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by taxing authorities, other than the City on the use of the City
property as a result of a provider's use or occupation of the rights-of-way,
the provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such
taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such
payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
article.
   D.   Interest On Late Payments: In the event that any payment is not
actually received by the City on or before the applicable date fixed in the
franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the
rate charged for delinquent State taxes.
   E.   Fee Statement: Unless a franchise provides otherwise, each fee payment
shall be accompanied by a statement showing the manner in which the fee was
calculated.
   F.   No Accord And Satisfaction: No acceptance by the City of any fee shall
be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount,
nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any
claim the City may have for additional sums payable.
   G.   Not In Lieu Of Other Taxes Or Fees: The fee payment is not a payment in
lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment, except as specifically provided in
this article, or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not
limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the City owned
poles are not waived and remain applicable.
   H.   Continuing Obligation And Holdover: In the event a provider continues
to operate all or any part of the system after the term of the franchise, such
operator shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this
article and the franchise, including, without limitation, all compensation and
other payment provisions throughout the period of such continued operation;
provided, that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a
renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as a limitation on the
remedies, if any, available to the City as a result of such continued operation
after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution.
   I.   Costs Of Publication: A provider shall assume any publication costs
associated with its franchise that may be required by law. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-
2018)
7-8A-4: APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE:
   A.   Form Of Application: To obtain a franchise to construct, own, operate,
maintain or provide services through any system within the City, to obtain a
renewal of a franchise granted pursuant to this article, or to obtain the City
approval of a sale, transfer, lease, sublet or other disposal of a system, or
franchise granted pursuant to this article, an application must be filed with
City.
   B.   Considerations: In making a determination as to an application filed
pursuant to this article, the City may, but shall not be limited to, consider
the following:
      1.   If requested, show evidence that the provider has obtained the
necessary approvals, licenses or permits required by Federal or State law to
provide telecommunications services;
      2.   If requested, provider's financial ability to compensate the City
for provider's intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights- of-way during the
franchise term proposed by the provider;
      3.   Provider's agreements to comply with the requirements of section
7-8A-5 of this article;
      4.   The willingness to enter into a pole attachment agreement with the
City.
   C.   Award Of Franchise: The City, in its discretion, shall determine the
award of any franchise on the basis of these and other considerations relevant
to the uses of the rights-of-way, without competitive bidding. (Ord. 2018-09,
9-4-2018)
7-8A-5: CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   No provider shall receive a franchise unless it agrees to comply
with each of the terms set forth in this section governing construction and
technical requirements for its system, in addition to any other requirements or
procedures specified by the City and the franchise, including requirements
regarding collocation and cost sharing.
      2.   A provider shall obtain all necessary excavation permits before
commencing any work in the rights-of-way. To obtain an excavation permit, the
following factors shall be considered:
         a.   The capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate the provider's
proposed system;
         b.   The capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate multiple wire in
addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of other users of the rights-of-way,
such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewage utilities;
         c.   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private
facilities, improvements or landscaping; or
         d.   Public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction from numerous excavations of the rights-of-way.
   B.   Quality: All work involved in the construction, operation, maintenance,
repair, upgrade and removal of the system shall be performed in a safe,
thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If,
at any time, it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority
by Federal law or the FCC to make such determination, that any part of the
system, including, without limitation, any means used to distribute signals
over or within the system, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare,
or quality of service or reliability, then a provider shall, at its own cost
and expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
   C.   Licenses And Permits: A provider shall have the sole responsibility for
diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or
other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, operate,
maintain, upgrade or repair the system, including, but not limited to, any
necessary approvals from persons and/or the City to use private property,
easements, poles and conduits. A provider shall obtain any required permit,
license, approval or authorization, including, but not limited to, excavation
permits, pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the
activity for which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
   D.   Relocation Of System:
      1.   New Grades Or Lines: If the grades or lines of any rights-of- way
are changed at any time in a manner affecting the system, then a provider
shall, at its own cost and expense and upon reasonable written notice by the
City, promptly protect or promptly alter or relocate the system, or part
thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event that a
provider unreasonably refuses or neglects to so protect, alter or relocate all
or part of the system, the City shall have the right to break through, remove,
alter or relocate such part of the system, without any liability to a provider,
and a provider shall pay to the City the costs, including overhead, incurred in
connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration or relocation.
      2.   City Authority To Move System: The City may, at any time, in case of
fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the City in its reasonable
discretion, cut or move any parts of the grades or lines under the rights-of-
way of the City, in which event the City shall not be liable therefor to a
provider. The City shall notify a provider in writing prior to, if practicable,
but in any event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next
business day following action taken under this subsection. Notice shall be
given as provided in subsection
7-8A-10D of this article.
      3.   Provider Required To Move System: A provider shall, upon prior
reasonable written notice by the City or any person holding a permit to move
any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances,
temporarily move any part of its system to permit the moving of said structure.
A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any person other than the City for
any such movement of its systems.
   E.   Protect Structures: In connection with the construction, operation,
maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the system, a provider shall, at its
own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the
City and all designated landmarks, as well as all other structures within any
designated landmark district. A provider shall obtain the prior written consent
of the City to alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage
system, or any other Municipal structure on, over or under the rights-of-way of
the City required because of the presence of the system. Any such alteration
shall be made by the City or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A provider
agrees that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the City to replace or
repair and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably
specified by the City, any Municipal structure or any other rights-of-way of
the City involved in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade
or removal of system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any
work thereon by or on behalf of provider pursuant to franchise.
   F.   No Obstruction: In connection with the construction, operation,
maintenance, upgrade, repair or removal of the system, a provider shall not
unreasonably obstruct the rights-of-way of fixed guideway systems, railways,
passenger travel, or other traffic to, from or within the City without the
prior consent of the appropriate authorities.
   G.   Safety Precautions: A provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its
work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such
other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply
with all applicable Federal, State and local requirements, including, but not
limited to, the National Electrical Code.
   H.   Repair: After written reasonable notice to the provider, unless, in the
sole determination of the City, an eminent danger exists, any rights-of-way
within the City which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
operation, maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its system may be
repaired by the City at the provider's expense, to a condition as good as that
prevailing before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the City shall submit
to such a provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and
restoring the rights-of-ways intruded upon. The provider shall, within thirty
(30) days after receipt of the statement, pay to the City the entire amount
thereof.
   I.   System Maintenance: A provider shall:
      1.   Install and maintain all parts of its system in nondangerous
condition throughout the entire period of its franchise.
      2.   Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard prudent
engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the National
Electrical Code and all other applicable Federal, State and local laws or
regulations.
      3.   At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized
representative of the City of the system and its effect on the rights-of-way.
   J.   Trimming Of Trees: A provider shall have the authority to trim trees,
in accordance with all applicable utility, ordinance and easement restrictions,
upon and hanging over rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with its system. The City Forester or his
representatives shall have authority to supervise and approve all trimming of
trees conducted by a provider. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8A-6: FRANCHISE AND LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE:
   A.   No Sale Allowed: A provider shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign,
sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary
sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise, a franchise granted
pursuant to this article, or any of the rights or privileges granted thereby,
without the prior written consent of the City. This provision shall not apply
to sales of property or equipment by a provider in the normal course of
business. No consent from the City shall be required for a transfer in trust,
mortgage or other instrument of hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure
an indebtedness, or for a pro forma transfer to a corporation, partnership or
other entity controlling, controlled by or under common control with a
provider.
   B.   Events Of Sale: The following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance with this
section:
      1.   The sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a
provider's assets to another person;
      2.   The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or
partnership, membership or other equity interests in a provider by one or more
of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to
create a new controlling interest in a provider;
      3.   The issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership
or other equity interest by a provider so as to create a new controlling
interest in such a provider; or
      4.   The entry by a provider into an agreement with respect to the
management or operation of such provider or its system. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-
2018)
7-8A-7: OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION:
   A.   Insurance, Indemnity And Security: Prior to the execution of a
franchise, a provider will deposit with the City an irrevocable, unconditional
letter of credit and/or surety bond as required by the terms of the franchise,
and shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the
franchise. A provider shall also indemnify the City as set forth in the
franchise.
   B.   Oversight: The City shall have the right to oversee, regulate and
inspect periodically the construction, maintenance, operation and upgrade of
the system, and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the
franchise and applicable law. A provider shall establish and maintain
managerial and operational records, standards, procedures and controls to
enable a provider to prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the
City at all times throughout the term, that a provider is in compliance with
the franchise. A provider shall retain such records for not less than the
applicable statute of limitations.
   C.   Maintain Records: A provider shall at all times maintain:
      1.   On file with the City, a full and complete set of plans, records and
as built hard copy maps or in electronic format compatible with the City's
existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the types
of equipment and systems installed or constructed in the rights-of-way,
properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by
appropriate symbols and marks, which shall include annotations of all rights-
of-ways where work will be undertaken. Maps shall be drawn to scale. As built
maps shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of completion of work or within
thirty (30) days after completion of modification and repairs. Such as built
maps shall be submitted on hard copy and in an appropriate electronic format.
As built maps are not required of the provider who is the carrier of last
resort for the existing system to the extent they do not exist.
      2.   Throughout the term, a provider shall maintain complete and accurate
books of account and records of the business, ownership and operations of a
provider with respect to the system in a manner that allows the City at all
times to determine whether a provider is in compliance with the franchise.
Should the City reasonably determine that the records are not being maintained
in such a manner, a provider shall alter the manner in which the books and/or
records are maintained so that a provider comes into compliance with this
subsection. All financial books and records which are maintained in accordance
with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that regulates
utilities in the State, and generally accepted accounting principles, shall be
deemed to be acceptable under this subsection. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8A-8: RIGHTS OF CITY:
   A.   Enforcement And Remedies:
      1.   City Designee To Enforce: The City is responsible for enforcing and
administering this article, and the City or its designee is authorized to give
any notice required by law or under any franchise.
      2.   Enforcement Provision: Any franchise granted pursuant to this
article shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation and
protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this article,
including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for
accessing the bond/Security Fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
   B.   Force Majeure: In the event a provider's performance of any of the
terms, conditions or obligations required by this article, or a franchise, is
prevented by a cause or event not within a provider's control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this subsection, causes or
events not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation,
acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of
utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires.
   C.   Extended Operation And Continuity Of Services: Upon either expiration
or revocation of a franchise granted pursuant to this article, the City shall
have discretion to permit or require a provider to continue to operate its
system or provide services for an extended period of time not to exceed six (6)
months from the date of such expiration or revocation. A provider shall
continue to operate its system under the terms and conditions of this article
and the franchise granted pursuant to this article.
   D.   Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property:
      1.   In the event that: a) the use of all facilities in the City is
discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months; b) any facilities
have been installed in the rights-of-way without complying with the
requirements of this article or the franchise; or c) the provisions of
subsection
7-8A-2E of this article are applicable and no franchise is granted, a provider,
except the provider who is a carrier of last resort, shall be deemed to have
abandoned such facilities.
      2.   The City, upon such terms as it may impose, may give a provider
written permission to abandon, without removing any of the system, facilities
or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under a
franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in
this article, a provider shall remove within a reasonable time all abandoned
facilities and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any
affected rights-of-way to their former state at the time such facilities and
equipment were installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its
plant, structures and equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense,
any excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights-of- way in as
good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially
interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires,
poles or attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the
condition of the rights-of-way, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to
and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this
article and any Security Fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a
provider with the terms and conditions of this subsection.
      3.   Upon abandonment of any facilities in place, a provider, if required
by the City, shall submit to the City a written instrument, satisfactory in
form to the City, transferring to the City the ownership of the facilities
abandoned.
      4.   At the expiration of the term for which a franchise is granted, or
upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for by this article, in
any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the City shall have the
right to require a provider to remove, at its expense, all aboveground portions
of a system or systems from rights-of-way within a reasonable period of time,
which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days.
      5.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this article,
a provider may abandon any underground facilities in place so long as it does
not materially interfere with the use of the rights-of-way or with the use
thereof by any public utility, cable or other person. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8A-9: OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY:
Before entering onto any private property, a provider shall make a good faith
attempt to contact the property owners in advance, and describe the work to be
performed. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8A-10: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Conflicts: In the event of a conflict between any provision of this
article and a franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this article
shall control.
   B.   Separability: If any provision of this article is held by any Federal,
State or local court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting
with any Federal or State Statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in
any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, shall not
affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the
event that such law is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise
changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no
longer in conflict, the provision in question shall return to full force and
effect and shall again be binding on the City and the provider; provided, that
the City shall give the provider thirty (30) days, or a longer period of time
as may be reasonably required, for a provider to comply with such valid
provision.
   C.   New Development: It shall be the policy of the City to liberally amend
this article, upon application of a provider, when necessary to enable the
provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of
telecommunications which will afford the provider an opportunity to more
effectively, efficiently or economically serve itself or the public.
   D.   Notices: All notices from a provider to the City required under this
article or pursuant to a franchise granted pursuant to this article, shall be
directed to the officer as designated by the City Manager. A provider shall
provide in any application for a franchise the identity, address and phone
number to receive notices from the City.
   E.   Regulation By City: To the full extent permitted by applicable law
either now or in the future, the City reserves the right to adopt or issue such
rules, regulations, orders or other directives governing telecommunications
that it finds necessary or appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police
powers. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8A-11: FEDERAL, STATE AND CITY JURISDICTION:
   A.   This article shall be construed in a manner consistent with all
applicable Federal and State Statutes.
   B.   This article shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the
effective date hereof. Unless otherwise agreed to by the City, this article
shall further apply, to the extent permitted by applicable Federal or State
law, to all existing franchises granted prior to the effective date hereof, and
to a provider providing services, without a franchise, prior to the effective
date hereof.
   C.   A provider's rights are subject to the police powers of the City to
adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the
public. A provider shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances
enacted by the City pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all providers
shall comply with the City zoning and other land use requirements.
   D.   A provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any
of the provisions of this article, or any franchise granted pursuant to this
article, by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance.
(Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
ARTICLE B. WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
7-8B-1: Declaration Of Finding And Intent
7-8B-2: Purpose And Goals
7-8B-3: Scope And Applicability
7-8B-4: Small Wireless Sites; Permitted Use, Application Process, And Fees
7-8B-5: Small Wireless Sites; Action On Permit Application
7-8B-6: Requirements For Small Wireless Facilities In Covered Areas
7-8B-7: Effect Of Permit
7-8B-8: Removal, Relocation Or Modification Of A Small Wireless Facility In The
ROW
7-8B-9: Attachment To City-Owned Utility Poles In The Covered Areas
7-8B-10: Design Standards
7-8B-1: DECLARATION OF FINDING AND INTENT:
   A.   The City finds the rights-of-way within the City:
      1.   Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in
the business and social life of the City;
      2.   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled
consistent with that intent;
      3.   Can be partially occupied by the small wireless facilities of
service providers, to the enhancement of the health, welfare and general
economic well-being of the City and its citizens; and
      4.   Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper
management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the
taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience and negative
impact upon the public from such facilities' construction, placement,
relocation and maintenance in the rights-of-way. This includes placing wires
and equipment inside poles and below ground.
   B.   The City finds that the right to occupy portions of the rights-of-way
for limited times for the business of providing wireless services is a valuable
use of a unique public resource that has been acquired and is maintained at
great expense to the City and its taxpayers, and the taxpayers of the City
should receive fair and reasonable compensation.
   C.   The City finds that while small wireless facilities are in part an
extension of interstate commerce, their operations also involve public rights-
of-way, Municipal zoning and vital business and community service, which are of
local concern. The City also finds that it has the proprietary right to
determine what persons and entities are granted permission to use City rights-
of-way, and to determine the reasonable and nondiscriminatory terms and
conditions of such use.
   D.   The City finds that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and
citizens to promote the development of wireless services, on a
nondiscriminatory basis, responsive to community and public interest, and to
assure availability for Municipal, educational and community services.
   E.   The City finds that towers and other supporting structures present
aesthetic and land use concerns that should be dealt with by encouraging
collocation, and minimizing the number of structures in a manner that does not
discourage market access or completion.
   F.   The City finds that it is in the interests of the public to grant small
wireless facilities permits to providers that:
      1.   Fairly and reasonably compensates the City on a competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
      2.   Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under
which providers may use valuable public property to serve the public;
      3.   Fully protects the public interests and the City from any harm that
may flow from such private commercial use of rights-of-way;
      4.   Protects the regulatory authority of the City, in a manner
consistent with Federal and State law;
      5.   Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use
of the City infrastructure; and
      6.   Protects the public investment in improvements in the rights- of-
way. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8B-2: PURPOSE AND GOALS:
   A.   The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the siting
and use of small wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way in a manner
that facilitates the delivery of wireless services within the City, while
minimizing associated adverse impacts. The goals of this article are to:
      1.   Provide for the managed development and installation, maintenance,
modification, and removal of small wireless services infrastructure in the
City, to provide adequate wireless communications coverage, without
unreasonably discriminating against providers of functionally equivalent
services including all of those who install, maintain, and operate small
wireless facilities.
      2.   Promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and
specifically, protect aesthetic values, by reducing the visibility of small
wireless facilities and structures to the fullest extent possible through
techniques including but not limited to camouflage/concealment, design
techniques, and undergrounding of wireless facilities and the equipment
associated therewith, where possible.
      3.   Encourage the deployment of smaller, less intrusive small wireless
facilities to supplement existing telecommunications facilities.
      4.   Encourage the location of structures in a manner that is least
intrusive to the community.
      5.   Encourage owners and users of antennas and structures to locate
them, to the extent possible, where the adverse impact on the community is
minimized.
      6.   Enhance the ability of providers to provide such wireless services
to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
      7.   Effectively manage small wireless facilities in the public right-of-
way. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8B-3: SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Scope: This article shall provide the basic local scheme for providers
of wireless services and systems that requires the use of the rights-of-way,
including providers of both the system and service, providers of the system
only and providers of services only.
   B.   Applicability: The requirements set forth in this article shall apply
to all small wireless facilities and structures located within public right-of-
way, and to all applications to locate or modify wireless facilities and
structures within the public right-of-way. This article shall apply to all
future providers and to all providers in the City prior to the effective date
hereof, whether operating with or without a license. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8B-4: SMALL WIRELESS SITES; PERMITTED USE, APPLICATION PROCESS, AND FEES:
   A.   Permitted Use And Consent: Collocation of a small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or a new or modified
utility pole or wireless support structure installed in a covered area shall be
a permitted use, except in supplemental review districts where such facilities
are a conditional use, subject to administrative staff review, conditions and
other requirements in section
7-8B-6 of this article.
   B.   Permit Required: No person shall place a small wireless facility in a
covered area without first filing a small wireless facility application and
obtaining a permit, except as otherwise provided in this article.
   C.   Permit Applications: All small wireless facility applications filed
pursuant to this article shall be on a form, paper or electronic, as required
by the City. The applicant may designate portions of its application materials
that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
"proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials
accordingly, and the City shall endeavor to protect materials so designated
from public disclosure to the fullest extent permitted by State law.
   D.   Application Requirements: The small wireless facility permit
application shall be made by the applicant, or its duly authorized
representative, and shall contain the following:
      1.   The applicant's name, address, telephone number and e-mail address;
      2.   Facility owner's name, address, telephone number and email address,
if different from applicant;
      3.   Intended facility use: owner operated or owner leased capacity;
      4.   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of all
consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with respect to the
filing of the application;
      5.   A general description of the proposed scope of work for the
collocation of the small wireless facility. The scope and detail of such
description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be
performed, with special emphasis on those matters, including but not limited to
sub-surface utilities, likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      6.   Identification of any consultant that is acting on behalf of the
applicant and that is authorized to speak with the City, or a designee of the
City, on the area of consultation for the applicant even if the applicant
cannot be available;
      7.   Verification from an appropriate representative of the applicant
that the small wireless facility shall comply with all applicable codes;
      8.   Verification of payment of the annual Municipal consent or
administrative fee for telecommunications companies to use public rights-of-
ways pursuant to Utah State Code Annotated section 54-21-502;
      9.   Verification of local business license;
      10.   Evidence the applicant is duly authorized to do business in Utah;
      11.   Evidence the applicant has received any necessary certificate of
public convenience and necessity or other required authority from the Utah
Public Service Commission or the Federal Communications Commission or evidence
that it is not required;
      12.   A copy of an approved Utah Department of Transportation
encroachment permit and all documents required by UDOT as part of the
encroachment permit application, if the proposed location is within a UDOT
right-of-way; and,
      13.   If the proposed location is outside of a UDOT right-of-way, a
statement that the applicant has a lease, attachment agreement or other
authorization from the owner of the utility pole or structure proposed for
collocation.
   E.   Routine Maintenance And Replacement: An application shall not be
required for:
      1.   Routine maintenance;
      2.   The replacement of a small wireless facility with another small
wireless facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, and
height; or
      3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement
of micro wireless facilities that are strung on cables between existing utility
poles and/or wireless support structures in compliance with the National
Electrical Safety Code by a wireless services provider or a wireless
infrastructure provider that is authorized to occupy the public rights-of-way
and that is remitting a consent, franchise, or administrative fee pursuant to
Utah Code Annotated section 54-21-303.
      4.   When routine maintenance will impede traffic, a traffic control plan
must be submitted to the City Engineering Department seventy two (72) hours
prior to beginning work.
   F.   Information Updates: Any amendment to information contained in a permit
application shall be submitted in writing to the City within ten (10) business
days after the change necessitating the amendment.
   G.   Consolidated Application: An applicant seeking to collocate multiple
small wireless facilities may, at the applicant's discretion, file a
consolidated application and receive a single permit for up to twenty five (25)
small wireless facilities. Provided, however, the City's denial of any site or
sites within a single application shall not affect other sites submitted in the
same application. The City shall grant a permit for any and all sites in a
single application that it does not deny subject to the requirements of this
section.
   H.   Application/Permit Fees: Unless otherwise provided by law, all
applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a
building permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each small wireless
facility, except that the fee for small wireless facilities addressed in a
consolidated application shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) each for the
first five (5) small wireless facilities and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
additional small wireless facility up to a maximum of twenty five (25) small
wireless facilities. For clarity, any applicant that pays either a franchise,
consent fee, or administrative fee pursuant to the requirements of Utah Code
section 54-21-502 shall not be required to pay any building permit fee, zoning
permit fee, encroachment fee, degradation fee, or any other fee assessed on a
telecommunications provider for its occupation of or work within the ROW.
   I.   Interference With Public Safety Equipment: A small wireless facility
shall be operated and maintained in a manner that does not interfere with
public safety (police, traffic control, fire and emergency services) equipment.
(Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8B-5: SMALL WIRELESS SITES; ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION:
   A.   Review Of Small Wireless Facility Applications: The City shall review
the application for a small wireless facility permit for conformity with
applicable requirements of this article, and shall issue a permit on
nondiscriminatory terms and conditions subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Within thirty (30) days of receiving an application, the City must
determine and notify in writing the applicant whether the application is
complete; or if an application is incomplete, the City must specifically
identify the missing information.
      2.   An application for a small wireless facility expires if the City
notifies the wireless provider that the wireless provider's application is
incomplete, and the wireless provider fails to respond within ninety (90) days
after the day on which the authority notifies the wireless provider under
subsection A1 of this section.
      3.   Make its final decision to approve or deny the application within
sixty (60) days of submission of a completed application.
      4.   Notify the applicant in writing of its final decision, and if the
application is denied, specify the basis for a denial, including citations to
Federal, State or local code provisions and/or statutes on which the denial was
based.
      5.   Notwithstanding an initial denial, the applicant may cure the
deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the application within thirty
(30) days of the denial, and the City shall approve or deny the revised
application within thirty (30) days of receipt of it. The subsequent review by
the City shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the original denial.
   B.   Review Deadline: If the City fails to act on an application within the
sixty (60) day review period (or within the 30 day review period for an amended
application), the applicant may provide notice that the time period for acting
has lapsed and the application is then deemed approved.
   C.   Review Of Eligible Facilities Requests: Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this article, the City shall approve and may not deny
applications that constitute eligible facilities requests for modification of
an eligible support structure that does not substantially change the physical
dimensions of such structure as provided in 47 CFR 1.40001, within sixty (60)
days according to the procedures established under 47 CFR 1.40001(c).
   D.   Compensation: Subject to the limitations set forth in subsection
7-8B-4H of this article, every permit shall include as a condition the
applicant's agreement to pay such lawful franchise fees, right-of-way use fee,
Business License Taxes, administrative fees and consent fees as are permitted
under applicable Utah Code and Federal law. The applicant shall also pay all
applicable ad valorem taxes, service fees, Sales Taxes, or other taxes and fees
as may now or hereafter be lawfully imposed on other businesses within the
City. In absence of a franchise agreement with the City and in accord with Utah
Code Annotated section 54-21-502, the applicant shall pay a yearly right-of-way
rate of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per small wireless facility with
payments remitted monthly. Wireless providers subject to the Municipal
Telecommunications License Tax under Utah State Code Annotated section
10-1-4, Municipal Telecommunications License Tax Act shall not be required to
pay the yearly right-of-way use fee. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8B-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN COVERED AREAS:
   A.   Administrative Review: The City shall perform an administrative review
of permit applications including the location or installation of new, modified,
or replacement utility poles and/or wireless support structures and the
attachment of wireless facilities and equipment on utility poles or wireless
support structures. Review factors, in addition to location, shall include the
size, shape, color, texture, and materials of the structures and attachments.
      1.   The proposed wireless facility shall be designed to not be
significantly more readily apparent or plainly visible (to a reasonable person
of ordinary sensibilities) from covered areas than existing utility structures,
poles and equipment located within five hundred (500) linear feet on the same
covered area as the subject utility pole or wireless support structure.
      2.   Where small wireless facilities are determined to be appropriate,
the use of reasonable stealth and concealment treatments, low profile equipment
and control boxes, and screening is required to avoid significant negative
impacts on the character and visual aesthetics of the area. However, such
requirements may be waived by the City upon a showing that the particular
location of a small wireless facility does not warrant stealth or concealment
treatments or imposes an excessive expense. The waiver shall be granted or
denied within forty five (45) days after the date of the request.
      3.   Supplemental review districts identified in subsection C of this
section shall be subject to a higher level of review.
   B.   Maximum Size Of Permitted Use:
      1.   The height of an antenna of a collocated small wireless facility
shall be limited to the greater of ten feet (10') above:
         a.   The height of an existing or modified utility pole or wireless
support structure; or
         b.   The height of a new utility pole or wireless support structure as
provided in subsection B2 of this section.
      2.   The height of a new or modified utility pole, or wireless support
structure is limited to the greater of:
         a.   The tallest utility pole, excluding transmission poles, or
wireless support structure located in the same covered area, measured from
grade, in place within five hundred (500) linear feet on the same covered area
as the subject utility pole or wireless support structure as of the effective
date of this article; or
         b.   In the absence of any such utility pole or wireless support
structure, either: 1) forty feet (40') in any area zoned exclusively for single
family residential use, unless a waiver is granted for good cause shown, or 2)
fifty feet (50') in any other area.
      3.   Collocation is not allowed on a decorative pole less than twenty
feet (20') in height.
   C.   Supplemental Review: Collocated small wireless facilitates and new or
modified utility poles or wireless support structures located in supplemental
review districts shall be a conditional use and subject to the design and
aesthetic requirements and review processes for structures specified in this
article establishing the supplemental review district(s) in addition to the
requirement of this article, provided that the City will work in good faith
with the applicant to accommodate the installation of collocated small wireless
facilities and new or modified utility poles or wireless support structures in
supplemental review districts to the fullest extent practicable. The City
reserves its right to maintain and implement the following types of
supplemental review districts.
      1.   Supplemental Review Districts Defined: The following areas shall be
designated as supplemental review districts:
         a.   North Salt Lake Town Center Master Plan Area.
         b.   U.S. Highway 89 Corridor (500 feet centerline).
         c.   Center Street Corridor from Orchard Drive to Legacy Parkway.
         d.   Redwood Road Corridor.
         e.   1100 North Corridor from U.S. Highway 89 to Redwood Road.
         f.   Approved Planned Districts.
      2.   Underground Districts: A wireless services provider or a wireless
infrastructure provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory requirements that
prohibit electric utilities, telecommunications or cable providers from
installing above- ground structures in the covered area in these districts.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use or replacement of existing
utility poles or wireless support structures in Underground Districts for the
collocation of small wireless facilities subject to administrative review by
the Zoning Administrator, appropriate design and concealment and a finding that
such use does not increase the height by more than three feet (3').
      3.   Historic Or Planned Districts: As a condition for approval of new
small wireless facilities or new wireless support structure in a Historic
District or a Planned District, the City requires that a wireless services
provider or a wireless infrastructure provider comply with the design and
aesthetic standards of the Historic District or Planned District to minimize
the impact to the aesthetics in a Historic District or on a Planned District's
decorative poles. If design and concealment treatments are determined on review
by the City to be insufficient to mitigate harm to the Historic District or
Planned District, the application may be denied.
This section may not be construed to limit the City's authority to enforce
historic preservation zoning regulations consistent with the preservation of
local zoning authority under 47 USC section 332(c)(7), the requirements for
facility modifications under 47 USC section 1455(a), or the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 (54 USC section 300101 et seq.), and the regulations
adopted to implement those laws.
   D.   Appeals, Special Exceptions And Variance Requirements: Appeals of
administrative decisions and requests for special exceptions or variances from
the provisions of this article, when strict application would result in an
unnecessary hardship or in the inability to deploy needed small wireless
facilities, shall be heard and decided by the Land Use Appeal Authority. An
applicant seeking a special exception to construct a new decorative pole,
utility pole or other wireless support structure to collocate a small wireless
facility in an Underground District shall demonstrate, including certification
through an engineer, that it has diligently attempted to locate the proposed
decorative pole, utility pole, wireless support structure, or small wireless
facility outside of the Underground District and that placement of the
decorative pole, utility pole, wireless support structure, or small wireless
facility within the Underground District is necessary to provide the needed
wireless coverage or capacity, and one or more of the following conditions
exist supporting a special exception:
      1.   No existing utility pole or wireless support structure is located
within the location search radius or to the extent a utility pole or wireless
support structure is located within the search radius, such utility pole or
wireless support structure:
         a.   Is not available for collocation under commercially reasonable
rates, terms, and conditions;
         b.   Cannot accommodate the collocation of the small wireless facility
and meet the technical requirements necessary to deliver adequate wireless
service coverage or capacity; or
         c.   Would require modifications exceeding the three foot (3') height
limitation imposed in subsection C2 of this section.
      2.   The only available option to deliver adequate wireless service
coverage or capacity in the search radius requires modifications to an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure exceeding the three foot (3') height
limitation imposed in subsection C2 of this section or the installation of a
new utility pole or wireless support structure for collocation of a small
wireless facility, or
      3.   The applicant has demonstrated other circumstances that, in the
reasonable discretion of the Hearing Officer, warrant a special exception or
variance.
      4.   The applicant shall abide by the design, stealth and concealment
treatments imposed as conditions of the special exception.
   E.   Existing Supplemental Review Districts: Supplemental review districts
approved by the City as of the effective date of this article are listed in
subsection C1 of this section. The Code provisions authorizing the district,
applicable design guidelines, and review authority and appeal jurisdiction are
specified in title 10 of this Code and applicable development agreements in
affect. Nothing in this article shall prohibit or otherwise limit the City from
establishing additional supplemental review districts, provided however, that
facilities and structures for which a permit was approved or deemed approved
pursuant to this article prior to the establishment of the additional
supplemental review district remain subject to the provisions of this article,
including routine maintenance and replacement of those facilities and
structures as set out in subsections
7-8B-4E1 and E2 of this article, and not to any provisions otherwise applicable
to the additional supplemental review district. If a wireless services provider
or a wireless infrastructure provider voluntarily replaces such facilities in a
manner that does not comply with subsection
7-8B-4E2 of this article, or if a wireless services provider or a wireless
infrastructure provider voluntarily relocates such facilities, such replacement
or relocation is subject to the then-existing provisions and requirements of
the additional supplemental review district.
   F.   Repair Of Damage: A wireless services provider or a wireless
infrastructure provider shall repair all damage to a City right- of-way
directly caused by the activities of the wireless services provider or the
wireless infrastructure provider, while occupying, installing, repairing, or
maintaining wireless facilities, wireless support structures, City utility
poles, or utility poles and to return the right-of-way to its functional
equivalence before the damage. If the wireless services provider or the
wireless infrastructure provider fails to make the repairs required by the City
within forty five (45) days after written notice, unless the City and the
wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider agree in
writing to a longer time period, the City may undertake those repairs and
charge the applicable party the reasonable and documented cost of the repairs.
The City may maintain an action to recover the costs of the repairs. (Ord.
2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8B-7: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the City authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this article, and does not create a property
right or grant any authority whatsoever to the applicant to impinge upon the
rights of others who may already have an interest in the covered area.
   B.   Duration: Unless construction has actually begun and is diligently
pursued to completion at that point, no permit for construction issued under
this article shall be valid for a period longer than two hundred seventy (270)
days unless both City and applicant agree to a reasonable extension and all
required fees are paid for the term regardless of construction. The inability
of the applicant to obtain electrical power or backhaul transport services to
serve the wireless facility such that it is operational within the two hundred
seventy (270) days due to the action or inaction of third-party utility
providers shall not result in the invalidity of the permit. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-
2018)
7-8B-8: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY IN THE
ROW:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the City,
a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider shall, at
its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect,
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any wireless facilities or
wireless support structures within the rights-of-way whenever the City, in its
reasonable discretion, has determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance,
or installation of any City improvement in or upon, or the operations of the
City in or upon, the rights-of-way.
   B.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The City retains the
right to cut or move any wireless facility or wireless support structure
located within its rights-of-way as the City, in its reasonable discretion, may
determine to be necessary, appropriate, or useful in response to any public
health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the City shall notify the
wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider and provide
opportunity to move its own wireless facilities or wireless support structure
prior to the City cutting or removing a wireless facility or wireless support
structure and the City shall notify the wireless services provider or the
wireless infrastructure provider after cutting or removing a wireless facility.
   C.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a wireless facility or
wireless support structure within the City rights-of- way, the wireless
services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider shall notify the City
within ninety (90) days of such abandonment. Following receipt of such notice
the City may direct the wireless services provider or the wireless
infrastructure provider to remove all or any portion of the wireless facility
or wireless support structure if the City, in its sole discretion, determines
that such removal will be in the best interests of the public health, safety,
and welfare.
   D.   Abandonment By Inaction: At any point when a wireless services provider
or a wireless infrastructure provider fails to pay any required fee, or annual
payment to the City, and fails to respond within sixty (60) days to a written
inquiry from the City as to whether the wireless services provider or the
wireless infrastructure provider intends to continue to operate a wireless
facility or wireless support structure, for whatever reason, the wireless
facility shall be deemed abandoned and the City may, at its sole option, remove
all or any portion of the wireless facility or wireless support structure, or
take other action as authorized by law, including recovery of actual costs
incurred in removing the wireless facility or wireless support structure. (Ord.
2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8B-9: ATTACHMENT TO CITY-OWNED UTILITY POLES IN THE COVERED AREAS:
   A.   Annual Rate: The rate to place a small wireless facility on a City-
owned pole in covered areas shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year per wooden
pole or two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year for all other City-owned poles.
This rate is in addition to reimbursement to the City for any expenses for
make-ready work. The City reserves the right to require a pole attachment
agreement to further define the terms and conditions of attachments to City-
owned poles.
   B.   Cease Payment: A wireless services provider or a wireless
infrastructure provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from
a City-owned pole in covered areas and cease paying the annual rate to the City
as of the next due date for payment following the removal.
   C.   Make-Ready: For City-owned utility poles in covered areas, the
applicant shall reimburse the City for expenses for any reasonable make-ready
work. The City shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work
necessary to enable the pole to support the requested small wireless facility,
including pole replacement if necessary, within sixty (60) days after receipt
of a completed request. Make-ready work including any pole replacement shall be
completed within sixty (60) days of written acceptance of the good faith
estimate by the wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure
provider. (Ord. 2018-09, 9-4-2018)
7-8B-10: DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Existing Streetlight Poles; Pole Criteria:
      1.   Purpose Of Streetlight Pole: The primary purpose of the pole shall
remain as a pole structure supporting a streetlight luminaire and related
streetlight fixtures used to provide lighting to the City ROW. The attachment
of wireless equipment to an existing streetlight pole or to a replacement pole
that impedes this primary purpose will not be approved.
      2.   General Requirement:
         a.   A small wireless facility shall be designed to blend in with the
surrounding streetscape with minimal, if any, visual impact.
         b.   A replacement pole shall match the existing City of North Salt
Lake streetlight pole as closely as possible, subject to more specific criteria
below.
         c.   Poles shall be engineered to support a luminaire and mast arm of
length equal to that of the existing pole or of a length specified by the City
based on the location of the new or replacement pole; and to support the
largest antenna and ancillary equipment that may be installed on the pole.
         d.   For each individual pole type or style used to support the
wireless equipment, one spare replacement pole shall be procured and stored by
the wireless provider so the pole and City owned equipment can be replaced by
the wireless provider within seven (7) calendar days in case of a knockdown.
         e.   All plans shall be signed and stamped by a professional civil and
electrical engineer.
         f.   All other adopted Standard Specifications for Public Improvements
shall apply.
      3.   Specific Criteria:
         a.   Overall Height Of Replacement Pole:
            (1)   The "base" height of an existing streetlight pole shall be
the height of the vertical pole section from the existing grade. The height of
the luminaire mast arm, if higher than the vertical pole section, shall not be
used to determine the new overall height of the replacement pole.
            (2)   If the antennas are the highest vertical element of the site,
then the new overall height of the replacement pole is measured from the
existing grade to the top of the canister or the top of the panel antenna.
         b.   Increase In Outside Diameter (OD) Of Pole: The non-tapered
replacement pole outside diameter (OD) of the base section shall be equal to
the top section, and the OD shall not exceed eight and five-eighths inches (85/
8") (the pole manufacturing industry standard OD for an 8 inch diameter pole)
or a one hundred percent (100%) increase in diameter of the original pole,
whichever is less.
         c.   Luminaire Mast Arms:
            (1)   All luminaire mast arms shall be the same length as the
original luminaire arm, unless the City requires the mast arm to be different
(longer or shorter) based upon the location of the replacement pole.
            (2)   Unless otherwise approved, all luminaire mast arms shall
match the arc (if applicable) and style of the original luminaire arm.
         d.   Replacement Mast Arms: The replacement luminaire mast arm shall
be at the same height above the ground as the existing luminaire.
         e.   Light Fixtures:
            (1)   All replacement poles shall have a new light-emitting diode
(LED) light fixture of the same manufacturer, model and light output of the
removed fixture installed.
            (2)   All replacement light fixtures shall be equipped with a new
7-pin photocell receptacle and ROAM node as specified by the City.
            (3)   Replacement light fixtures shall carry five (5) year
manufacturer's full-replacement warranty.
         f.   Pole Foundation:
            (1)   All pole foundations shall conform to the City's adopted
standards and specifications on streetlight design, water meter separation, and
shall be modified for wireless communications equipment and cables.
               (A)   Foundations shall be engineered to support the pole, mast
arm and luminaire, and the largest antenna that may be mounted on the pole.
               (B)   All plans shall be signed and stamped by a professional
civil engineer.
         g.   Painting Of Replacement Pole:
            (1)   If the replacement pole is an unpainted galvanized pole, the
pole shall not be painted or have a finish unless otherwise specified by the
City.
            (2)   For powder coated or painted poles, the wireless provider
shall replace with powder coated or painted color and/or color combination to
match existing neighboring poles as directed by the City.
         h.   Painting Antennas And Mounting Equipment:
            (1)   All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting
posts, cables, shrouds and other equipment mounted on a new or replacement
unpainted galvanized pole shall be painted to match the surrounding poles,
unless specified otherwise by the City.
            (2)   All antenna mounting brackets and hardware, antenna mounting
posts, cables, shrouds and all other equipment mounted on a painted new or
replacement pole shall be painted a color specified by the City.
   B.   Existing Traffic Signal Poles:
      1.   Purpose Of Traffic Signal Pole: The primary purpose of the traffic
signal pole shall remain as a pole structure supporting a traffic signal and
related streetlight fixtures used to provide traffic control and lighting to
the City ROW. The attachment of wireless equipment to a new or replacement
traffic signal pole that impedes this primary purpose will not be approved.
      2.   General Requirement:
         a.   An SWF shall be designed to blend in with the surrounding
streetscape with minimal, if any, visual impact.
         b.   A replacement pole shall match the existing City of North Salt
Lake traffic signal pole, as closely as possible, subject to more specific
criteria below.
         c.   For each individual pole type or style used to support the
wireless equipment, one spare replacement pole shall be procured and stored by
the wireless provider so the pole can be replaced within forty eight (48)
hours, exclusive of required concrete cure time, by the wireless provider in
case of a knockdown.
         d.   Poles shall be engineered to support a luminaire mast arm of
equal to that of the existing pole, or of a length specified by the City based
on the location of the new or replacement pole; and to support the largest
antenna that may be installed on the pole.
         e.   All plans shall be signed and sealed by a professional civil
engineer.
         f.   All other details in the current edition of the Pima Association
of Governments Standard Specifications for Public Improvements volume 1 and
Standard Specifications for Public Improvements Details volume 2 shall apply.
      3.   Specific Criteria:
         a.   Overall Height Of Replacement Pole: The height of the replacement
pole is measured from grade to the top of the antenna canister or the top of
the panel antennas if the antennas are the highest elements.
         b.   Increase In Outside Diameter (OD) Of Pole:
            (1)   If the replacement pole is a taper design, the diameter of
the base section of the replacement pole OD shall not exceed thirteen and one-
half inches (13.5") or a one hundred percent (100%) increase in the OD of the
base section, whichever is less.
            (2)   If the replacement pole is non-tapered, then the diameter of
the base section shall be equal to the top section and the OD shall not exceed
twelve inches (12") or a one hundred percent (100%) increase, whichever is
less.
         c.   Signal Head Mast Arms:
            (1)   The traffic signal head mast arms shall be the same length as
the original signal head mast arm unless the City requires the mast arm to be
different (longer or shorter) based upon the location of the replacement pole.
            (2)   All signal head mast arms shall match the arc (if applicable)
and style of the original signal head mast arm.
         d.   Luminaire Mast Arms:
            (1)   All luminaire mast arms shall be the same length as the
original luminaire arm unless the City requires the mast arm to be different
(longer or shorter) based upon the location of the replacement pole.
            (2)   All luminaire mast arms shall match the arc (if applicable)
and style of the original luminaire arm.
         e.   Signal Heads:
            (1)   All existing signal heads and mounts shall be replaced, at no
cost to City, with new light-emitting diode (LED) signal heads.
            (2)   All signal heads shall be procured from a City approved
signal heads supplier or manufacturer.
            (3)   Signals mounted on mast arms shall be metal.
         f.   Light Fixtures:
            (1)   All replacement poles shall have a new light-emitting diode
(LED) light fixture of the same manufacturer, model, and light output of the
removed fixture.
            (2)   All replacement light fixtures shall be equipped with a new
7-pin photocell receptacle and ROAM node specified by the City.
         g.   Other City Elements On Signal Mast Arm Or Pole: All existing
emergency vehicle detection units, video detection cameras, video cameras,
cross walk service buttons, cross walk signals, and any other pedestrian or
traffic devices shall be replaced with new units by wireless provider and
installed at no cost to the City. All equipment shall be the same model and
manufacturer of the existing equipment. If identical equipment is not
available, the City shall specify an acceptable alternate model, design, or
manufacturer. All equipment shall be procured from a list of City approved
suppliers.
         h.   Signs And Other Miscellaneous: All street name plates or signs,
directional signs and any other City approved signs shall be replaced with new
signs at no cost to the City. All signs and attachments shall be of the same
type as existing devices and shall be procured from a list of City approved
suppliers.
         i.   Traffic Signal Pole Foundation:
            (1)   All pole foundations shall conform to the City's standards
and specifications on traffic signal pole design and shall be modified for
wireless communications equipment, hand holes and cables.
            (2)   Foundations shall be engineered to support the pole, mast
arms, signal heads, luminaire, and all other equipment and hardware necessary
to operate the traffic signal, and the largest antenna and associated ancillary
equipment that may be mounted on the pole.
         j.   Painting Of Pole, Antennas And Mounting Equipment:
            (1)   Specifications on paint color and painting process shall be
provided by the City of North Salt Lake when required.
            (2)   For powder-coated traffic signal poles, the wireless provider
shall replace with same powder-coated color and/or color combination.
         k.   Construction Of Traffic Signal:
            (1)   The installation work of the replacement traffic signal pole,
including mast arms, signal heads and devices, must be performed by a UT
licensed traffic signal contractor with a minimum of five (5) years of
experience installing traffic signals that is familiar with City of North Salt
Lake standards.
            (2)   Not less than one International Municipal Signal Association
certified traffic signal technician level II (field or construction) worker
shall be on site while any traffic signal work is taking place.
   C.   New Poles In Right-Of-Way: The following design standards, in addition
to the Common Standards Design Concepts, Requirements and Details that are
included in this document, shall apply to a small wireless facility (SWF) that
a wireless provider may install in the ROW that is not either a replacement
pole for an existing streetlight, or a replacement pole for an existing traffic
signal.
A new wireless support structure, including a monopole that is up to twenty
four inches (24") in diameter shall incorporate the highest level of stealth
and concealment of the antennas and wireless equipment in order to minimize the
visual impact of the site to the public.
      1.   Purpose Of Wireless Support Structure: The sole purpose of a new
vertical element or wireless support structure is to attach antennas for the
provision of wireless services by a wireless provider in the City's right-of-
way.
      2.   General Requirement:
         a.   A new wireless support structure shall be designed to minimize
the visual and aesthetic impact of the new vertical element and associated
equipment upon the look, feel, theme, and use of the surrounding area.
         b.   An SWF shall be designed to blend in with the surrounding
streetscape with minimal, if any, visual impact.
         c.   The new wireless support structure shall be architecturally
integrated and compatible with the use of the surrounding area.
         d.   The height of the new wireless support structure cannot exceed
the maximum allowed building height of the zoning district that the site is
proposed.
         e.   All plans shall be signed and sealed by a professional civil
engineer.
      3.   Specific Criteria:
         a.   Overall Height Of New Pole: The height of the new wireless
support structure is measured from grade to top of the antenna canister, or the
top of the panel antenna if the antennas are the highest elements of the site.
Otherwise, the measured height shall be from existing grade to the highest
point of the wireless support structure.
         b.   Diameter Of Monopole: The maximum outside diameter of a monopole
shall not exceed twenty four inches (24").
         c.   Stealth And Concealment Elements: As part of the stealth and
concealment elements of the wireless support structure, the City may require
the wireless provider to provide and install street name plates, directional
signs, and other decorative signs or artistic elements on the structure.
            (1)   The wireless provider is solely responsible for the cost of
all stealth and concealment elements and the installation of other elements
required by the City.
            (2)   The wireless provider is responsible for the performance of
and any costs incurred for regular upkeep, maintenance and replacement (if
necessary) of these stealth and concealment elements.
         d.   Architectural Integration With Surrounding Area:
            (1)   The new wireless support structure shall be designed in
consultation with various internal City stakeholders and may include external
stakeholders.
            (2)   No new wireless support structure shall be constructed
without the consent and simple majority approval of the key stakeholders.
            (3)   The City may require the new wireless support structure to be
constructed of a specific material that will enhance the stealth and
concealment of the site.
         e.   Pole Foundation:
            (1)   The pole foundation for the wireless support structure, if
required, shall conform to civil and structural engineering standards
acceptable to the City, with design modifications for wireless communications
equipment and cables.
            (2)   The height of the pole foundation shall be flush with the
finished grade. However, if the pole foundation is adjacent to or within a
sidewalk or ramp, the height of the pole cap shall be flush with the surface of
the immediate area.
            (3)   Shrouds for the pole mounting bolts may be required.
         f.   Painting Of Wireless Support Structure, Antennas And Mounting
Equipment:
            (1)   The City shall identify the paint colors, location of paint
and any decorative work that may be painted onto the new wireless support
structure.
            (2)   The City shall identify the paint colors for the antennas,
antenna mounting brackets and posts, antenna shrouds, and cables.
            (3)   The City may require the new wireless support structure to be
painted using a powder-coat process.
         g.   Ground Mounted Equipment: The City may require the ground-
mounted wireless equipment to be screened, buried, or concealed to reduce the
visual impact to the surrounding area. The screening or concealment shall take
into account the location of the site, the use of the immediate area, and the
existing aesthetic elements surrounding the site.
   D.   Common Standard Designs Requirements: The following standard design
requirements shall be applied to all new small wireless facilities in the ROW,
whether for a small wireless facility to be installed on an existing or
replacement streetlight pole, an existing or replacement traffic signal pole,
or on a new wireless support structure.
      1.   Replacement Pole Clearances - Underground Utilities: All ground-
mounted electrical equipment shall maintain minimum horizontal clearance from
underground utilities.
         a.   Horizontal clearance from water lines shall be at least five feet
(5'). Vertical clearance shall be at least one foot (1').
         b.   Clearance from sanitary sewer lines shall be at least five feet
(5').
         c.   Clearance from telecommunications shall be at least one foot
(1').
         d.   Clearance from cable television lines shall be at least one foot
(1').
         e.   Clearance from all other types of underground infrastructure
shall be at least five feet (5').
The City, in its sole discretion, may grant a variance, upon approval by the
City Engineer, from these horizontal separation distances on a case-by-case
basis. The approval of a variance is dependent upon factors specific to the
site.
In the case where there is an issue with horizontal separation from other
underground utilities, the wireless provider may elect to work with the
impacted utility to have lines, pipes or property moved so that minimum
clearance is achieved. All relocation of City owned or a privately-owned
utility shall be at the sole expense of the wireless provider.
      2.   Replacement Pole Clearance - Original Streetlight Pole Or Traffic
Signal Pole: The minimum distance of the replacement pole from the original
pole location shall be sixty inches (60") or more so that construction can
occur safely. The City may change this minimum distance on a case-by-case
basis.
      3.   Replacement Pole Clearances - Sidewalks: The new or replacement pole
shall maintain twelve inch (12") minimum clearance distance from sidewalks. The
City, in its sole discretion, may increase that minimum clearance on a case-by-
case basis to ensure the safe use of the sidewalk and adjacent area.
      4.   Clear View Area: All new and replacement poles shall be installed in
a location that does not impair or interfere with clear view area safety
requirements as defined in title 10 of this Code.
      5.   Cables, Wires And Jumpers:
         a.   All cables for the wireless equipment and antennas - except where
such cables or wires attach to the ports in the antenna - shall be located
inside a conduit, inside the caisson and pole. There shall not be any "dog
house" or externally visible conduit or entry point of the cables.
         b.   All electrical wires for the streetlight luminaire, traffic
signal heads, and any City device on the pole shall be new and connected to the
existing power source.
      6.   Hand-Holes:
         a.   All hand-hole locations shall be called out on the plans.
         b.   All hand-holes near antennas shall have the top of the hand- hole
no lower than the bottom height of the antennas.
         c.   The bottom of the hand-hole should not exceed six inches (6")
below the bottom of the antenna.
      7.   Wireless Facility Identification Information:
         a.   A four inch (4") by six inch (6") radio frequency safety sticker
may be mounted no less than twenty four inches (24") from the bottom of the
antenna, facing away from traffic.
         b.   The wireless provider may place a discreet site identification or
number. The size, color and location of this identifier shall be determined by
the City.
         c.   No wireless provider signs may be placed on a streetlight pole
including a replacement pole except to the extent required by local, State or
Federal law or regulations.
      8.   Interference With City Wireless Network: The City has certain
wireless devices in a network that connects traffic signals, community centers,
water sites, and other locations for the City's proprietary use. The selection
of a location for a wireless site shall consider the potential interference of
the City's wireless network with RF from a wireless provider's proposed site.
         a.   The City, in its sole discretion, after researching the proposed
site, radio frequencies, line of sight to other wireless locations in the
City's network, and other technical factors may allow a wireless provider to
install a site in the ROW.
      9.   Removal Of Original Signal Pole, Mast Arm, Signal Heads And
Luminaire:
         a.   The City shall determine what original components, (e.g.,
original pole, mast arm(s), signal heads and luminaire, etc.), shall be
delivered at no cost to the City's streets and traffic maintenance facility by
the wireless provider.
         b.   If the City declines to accept some or all of the original
components, then only those components the City wants to retain shall be
delivered by the wireless company to the City streets and traffic maintenance
facility and the remaining components shall be discarded by the wireless
provider.
      10.   Removal Of Original Streetlight Or Traffic Signal Pole Foundation:
The concrete pole foundation for the original streetlight or traffic signal
pole shall be completely removed by the wireless provider as instructed by the
City:
         a.   Complete Removal: The entire original pole foundation shall be
removed, and all materials (concrete, rebar, metals, bolts, etc.) shall be
removed by the SWF provider at no expense to the City. The City's inspector
shall determine, on a case-by-case basis, the type of backfill material and
compaction required - ranging from native soil that is compacted to a half (1/
2) sack slurry for the entire depth, or a combination of native soil and
slurry.
      11.   Antennas, RRH/RRU, Cables And Mounting On Pole:
         a.   General Requirement: All antennas shall be installed in a manner
that minimizes the visual impact to the general public. All work shall be
performed in a professional manner that is consistent with the highest
standards of workmanship.
         b.   Antenna Mounting Posts And Brackets:
            (1)   All panel antennas shall be mounted directly to the pole or
onto a mounting pole so that the distance from the "face" of the streetlight
pole to the back of the antenna does not exceed nine inches (9").
            (2)   All mounting posts shall be trimmed so that the poles do not
extend higher than the top of the antenna or protrude lower than the antenna
unless necessary to install the shroud.
            (3)   All pole attached wireless equipment must be a minimum ten
feet (10') from the sidewalk elevation.
         c.   Panel Antennas:
            (1)   All panel antennas for a small cell site shall fit within an
imaginary enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume. (Note: This
volume does not include antenna cable shrouds when required.)
            (2)   All panel antennas with exposed cables from the bottom of the
antenna shall have a shroud installed on the antenna or antenna mounting posts
to conceal the cables.
            (3)   The type of shroud may be a forty five degree (45°) angle
(away from the bottom of the antenna; toward the pole) or a ninety degree (90°)
angle (parallel to the bottom of the antenna) depending on the location of the
site.
            (4)   The shroud shall extend from the bottom of the antenna to two
inches (2") below the bottom of the nearest hand-hole.
         d.   Canister Antennas:
            (1)   All canister antennas shall fit within an imaginary enclosure
of not more than six (6) cubic feet in volume. (Note: This volume does not
include the canister as it is a stealth device and not the antenna.)
            (2)   The canister shall be no larger than eighteen inches (18") in
diameter.
            (3)   All canister antennas shall be located in a canister that is
mounted to a base plate at the top of the vertical section of the replacement
pole.
            (4)   All cables protruding from the canister shall be concealed
within the canister or by a shroud at the point where the canister is mounted
to the base plate.
         e.   City Review: On a case-by-case basis, the City in its sole
discretion and upon reviewing the landscape in the immediate surrounding area,
the location of the pole, and stealth options, may allow a site to have an RRH/
RRU installed on the pole.
      12.   Ground-Mounted Equipment:
         a.   General Requirement: All ground-mounted equipment shall be
installed in a manner that minimizes the visual and ingress/egress impact to
the general public. Under no conditions shall ground mounted equipment violate
the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA); nor shall ground mounted equipment
cause a violation of the ADA that would not otherwise have existed but for the
installation of said equipment. All work shall be performed in a professional
manner that is consistent with the highest standards of workmanship.
         b.   Specific Criteria:
            (1)   Clear View Area: All ground-based wireless equipment shall be
installed in a location that does not impair or interfere with the clear view
area of any corner as defined in title 10 of this Code. The City, in its sole
discretion, may grant a variance upon approval from the City Traffic Engineer,
however, under no circumstances shall any sight triangle be permitted that is
less than that specified in the current edition of the AASHTO Policy On
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets.
            (2)   Ground Equipment Location: Generally, all ground-based
wireless equipment, including but not limited to equipment cabinets or power
pedestals, shall be placed as far as practical to the back of the ROW while
maintaining at least three feet (3') of ingress/egress in the ROW or public
utility easement (PUE) around the equipment.
            (3)   Ground Equipment Clearances - Underground Utilities:
               (A)   All ground-mounted electrical equipment shall maintain
minimum horizontal clearance from below-ground utilities:
                  (i)   For water distribution mains (12 inch diameter or
smaller) the horizontal separation shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from
the outside wall of the water main to the outside of the pole foundation. For
transmission mains (greater than 12 inch diameter) the horizontal separation
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') from outside wall of water main to outside
of pole foundation.
                  (ii)   Clearance from sewer lines shall be at least five feet
(5').
                  (iii)   Clearance from telecommunications shall be at least
one foot (1').
                  (iv)   Clearance from cable television lines shall be at
least one foot (1').
                  (v)   Clearance from all other types of underground
infrastructure shall be at least five feet (5').
               (B)   The City, in its sole discretion, may grant a variance
upon approval from the City Engineer, from these horizontal separation
distances on a case-by-case basis. The approval of a variance is dependent on
factors specific to the site.
               (C)   In the case where there is an issue with horizontal
separation from other underground utilities, the wireless provider may elect to
work with the impacted utility to have its lines, pipes or property moved so
that minimum clearance is achieved. All relocation work of City-owned or a
privately-owned utility shall be at the sole expense of the wireless provider.
            (4)   Ground Equipment Clearance - Sidewalks: The ground equipment
shall maintain a minimum twelve inch (12") clearance distance from sidewalks.
The City, in its sole discretion, may increase the minimum clearance on a case-
by-case basis to ensure the safe use of the sidewalk and adjacent area.
            (5)   Compliance With Height Requirements: Evidence or
documentation that, where the above-ground structure is over eighteen inches
(18") in height, given its proposed location, the structure will comply or be
in compliance with applicable City of North Salt Lake land use ordinance.
            (6)   Screening Of Ground Equipment: The City, in its sole
discretion, may require the ground-mounted equipment to be screened; the type
of screening materials and design will be addressed on a case-by-case basis. In
cases when screening is not required, the City may specify the paint color of
the ground- mounted equipment.
            (7)   Decals And Labels:
               (A)   All equipment manufacturers' decals, logos and other
identification information shall be removed unless required for warranty
purposes.
               (B)   The wireless provider of the site may place an "Emergency
Contact" decal or emblem on the ground equipment.
               (C)   The ground-mounted equipment shall not have any flashing
lights, sirens or regular noise other than a cooling fan that may run
intermittently.
            (8)   Equipment Cabinets On Residential Property:
               (A)   Residential Single-Family Lot: The wireless equipment and
ancillary equipment shall not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height in the
front yard of a residential single-family zoned property.
               (B)   Air-Conditioning Units: Unless otherwise specified by the
City, a wireless equipment cabinet with air-conditioning (not a fan only) shall
be enclosed by walls and set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from lots
where the existing or planned primary use is a residential single-family
dwelling.
            (9)   Electric Company Meter:
               (A)   All electric company meters shall be installed in the ROW
or PUE. The location of the meter equipment shall have minimum ingress and
egress clearance from private property lines and driveways.
               (B)   All electric company meters shall maintain minimum
clearance from above-ground utility cabinets and below-ground utilities.
               (C)   All electric company meters shall be installed in a
location that does not impair or interfere with the clear view area
requirements of the City.
               (D)   The electric company meters shall be screened or contained
within a pedestal cabinet that is painted to match the ground equipment or as
specified by the City.
               (E)   In the case where screening is not required, the City may
specify the paint color of the meter cabinet on a case-by-case basis. (Ord.
2018-09, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 9
COMMUNITY FORESTRY
SECTION:
7-9-1: Purpose
7-9-2: Definitions
7-9-3: Standards And References
7-9-4: Role Of Parks Superintendent
7-9-5: Public Nuisances/Abatement Of Public Nuisances
7-9-6: Tree Maintenance And Pruning
7-9-7: Tree Removal
7-9-8: Tree Planting
7-9-9: Tree Selection
7-9-10: Tree Permits
7-9-11: Damaging, Destroying Or Mutilating Public Trees
7-9-12: Penalties For Violation
7-9-1: PURPOSE:
This ordinance establishes regulations and standards to ensure that the City
realizes the benefits provided by street trees planted in public rights-of-way.
It is not intended to resolve or regulate disputes over trees on private
property that do not affect general public safety. This ordinance is enacted
to:
   A.   Promote the general welfare of the City by establishing and maintaining
the maximum amount of canopy coverage provided by trees;
   B.   Preserve and enhance the City’s environmental, economic and social
character with mature trees;
   C.   Protect public safety, health and welfare;
   D.   Encourage site and utility planning, building, and development
practices to prevent indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees and avoid
unnecessary disturbance to trees within the City and its Area of Impact;
   E.   Maintain trees in a healthy, non-hazardous condition through the
application of tree care standards contained in these ordinances;
   F.   Establish and maintain appropriate species diversity and age classes in
order to provide a stable and sustainable community forest;
   G.   Establish a process by which trees are to be planted, pruned and
removed; and
   H.   Implement the goals and objectives of the General Plan. (Ord. 2019-11,
9-17-2019)
7-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
ADJACENT        Any person owning property adjacent to public rights-of- way.
PROPERTY OWNER:
ALTERNATE HOST  One of two kinds of plants on which a pest must develop to complete its life cycle.
PLANT:
                The American National Standard for Tree Care Operations - Tree, Shrub and Other Woody
ANSI A300:      Plant Maintenance - Standard Practices. This is a document offering basic performance
                standards for tree pruning, published in 1995 by the American National Standards
                Institute (ANSI) or the same as amended from time to time.
ARBORICULTURE:  The cultivation of trees, including planting, pruning, removal or any other action
                which affects the growth and maintenance of trees.
CITY:           City of North Salt Lake, Utah.
CRITICAL ROOT   The area under a tree extending from the base of a tree in all directions to an
ZONE:           imaginary line 10 feet outside of the dripline or as determined at a preliminary site
                inspection by the Parks Superintendent.
DUTCH ELM       A disease condition in elm trees caused by fungal organisms known by the scientific
DISEASE:        names Ophiostoma ulmi or Ophiostoma novo-ulmi.
FAMILY:         Single or group of genera of trees that closely or uniformly resemble each other in
                general appearance and technical character.
GENUS:          A group of tree species that have fundamental traits in common but that differ in
                other, lesser characteristics.
HAZARD:         Any tree, public or private, with visibly defined structural defects likely to cause
                failure of all or part of the tree, and be a danger to public safety.
PARKS           The North Salt Lake Parks and Recreation Superintendent or designee.
SUPERINTENDENT:
PERMIT:         Written approval issued by the City for any activity on public trees or within the
                critical root zone of public trees.
PERSON:         Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company or organization
                of any kind.
PEST:           Any insect, disease or other organism harmful to trees.
PRUNING:        The practice of cutting tree limbs according to standards contained in ANSI A300.
                For the purpose of this Chapter, the term “public nuisance” is defined to mean any
                condition or use of street trees that are detrimental to the health or safety of
                persons, or the property of others, or which is declared to be a nuisance by this
                Chapter, any other provision of this Code, or by any other State or Federal law. The
                following are defined and declared to be public nuisances under this Chapter:
                A.   Any dead or diseased tree or shrub harboring insects or disease which constitutes
                a threat to other trees in the City, whether located on public or private property.
PUBLIC          B.   Any tree with structural defects likely to cause failure of all or part of the
NUISANCE:       tree and pose a danger to public safety or property.
                C.   Any tree or shrub which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular
                traffic or which obstructs a traffic sign, or interferes with the clear sight zones at
                intersections.
                D.   The roots of any tree or shrub which cause the surface of the public street,
                curb, or sidewalk to be upheaved or otherwise disturbed.
                E.   Any tree species indicated in this Chapter as being undesirable or not suitable
                for use as a street tree.
PUBLIC          Any property owned by, dedicated to, or deeded to, the public or for the public’s use.
PROPERTY:       City parks, public rights-of-way and other publically owned, controlled, leased or
                managed properties are included in this definition.
                Improved or unimproved public property owned by, dedicated to, or deeded to the public
PUBLIC RIGHTS-  or for the public’s use, for the purpose of providing vehicular, pedestrian and other
OF-WAY:         public use. Such public property provides circulation and travel to abutting
                properties and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, landscaping,
                provisions for public utilities, cut and fill slopes, and open public space.
PUBLIC SAFETY:  The condition of being safe from bodily harm or property damage resulting from tree
                conditions or from failures while using public property.
PUBLIC TREES:   Any tree (inclusive of roots within the critical root zone) whose trunk is located,
                partly or in whole, on public property.
SPECIES:        A natural group of trees in the same genus made up of similar individuals.
STREET TREES:   All trees located within the public street rights-of-way, with a focus on street trees
                planted in park strips located on the edges of the associated roadway.
                “Rounding” or “heading back” or any other term that can be described as severe cutting
TOPPING:        back of limbs within a tree crown to buds, stubs, or laterals not large enough to
                assume a terminal role or as defined in ANSI A300.
                Any woody plant, which is 15 feet or more in height at maturity, with a single or
TREE:           multiple trunk, often unbranched for several feet above the ground and having a
                definite crown.
TREE LITTER:    Plant material such as leaves, bark, needles, twigs, and fruit that have fallen to the
                ground. (Ord. 2019-11, 9-17-2019)
 
7-9-3: STANDARDS AND REFERENCES:
   A.   Most recent versions of the following apply:
      1.   ANSI A300 Tree Care Operations - Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant
Maintenance - Standard Practices.
      2.   Tree Care Operations Standard ANSI Z-133.1, Pruning, Trimming,
Repairing, Maintaining, and Removing Trees, and Cutting Brush - Safety
Requirements.
      3.   ISA Best Management Practices.
   B.   In the case of a discrepancy between the standards between the
references above and City Code or Design Standards and Specifications, City
Code and Design Standards and Specifications take precedence. (Ord. 2019-11, 9-
17-2019)
7-9-4: ROLE OF PARKS SUPERINTENDENT:
   A.   Jurisdiction.
      1.   Public Property.
         a.   The Parks Superintendent shall manage and regulate the planting,
maintenance, protection, removal and replacement of all public trees within the
City limits, including park strips and medians.
      2.   Private Property.
         a.   The Parks Superintendent shall have jurisdiction to determine if
a tree located on private property constitutes a public nuisances as defined in
this section and if the trees should be pruned or removed.
   B.   The Parks Superintendent shall reserve the right to perform the duties
as follow:
      1.   Administrative Duties
         a.   Enforce specifications, as adopted, for tree planting on public
property.
         b.   Recommend modifications to tree lists or specifications.
         c.   Implement temporary restrictions on species which pose a threat
to the health of the tree.
      2.   Major Tree Maintenance Duties
         a.   Order the pruning of public trees to ensure public health, safety
and welfare while considering the health of the tree and other elements of the
infrastructure.
         b.   Declare trees as public nuisances.
      3.   Tree Removal Duties
         a.   Remove trees located on or near public rights-of-way which have
been declared to be a public nuisance.
   C.   It shall be unlawful to interfere with the Parks Superintendent, or
sub-contracted professionals, assigned to carry out the enforcement of this
Chapter. (Ord. 2019-11, 9-17-2019)
7-9-5: PUBLIC NUISANCES/ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES:
   A.   The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this Chapter:
      1.   Any tree or part thereof (public or private) which, by reason of
location or condition, constitutes a hazard to public safety as determined by
the Parks Superintendent;
      2.   Any tree or part thereof (on public or private property) which
obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on a public
street or right of way or which obstructs public street lighting;
      3.   Any tree or alternate host plant or part thereof (on public or
private property) which harbors pests which reasonably may be expected to
injure or harm public trees. This includes any standing elm tree infected to
any degree with Dutch Elm Disease or which harbors elm bark beetles, and any
dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs, stumps, or other elm material
from which the bark has not been removed.
   B.   Abatement Of Public Nuisances.
      1.   Any public nuisances shall be abated as provided in Title 12,
Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Program. (Ord. 2019-11, 9-17-2019)
7-9-6: TREE MAINTENANCE AND PRUNING:
   A.   City Powers. The City reserves the right to prune or order the pruning
of trees in the public rights-of-way and utility easements, as necessary,
including to maintain minimum clear heights for public trees in public rights-
of-way maintained by the City as provided in this Chapter.
   B.   Private Property Owner Responsibilities for Public Trees. Private
property owners, occupants and their agents shall have the following
responsibilities for the protections of trees in park strips abutting their
real property except those in park strips that are maintained by the City:
      1.   Maintain trees upon adjacent public rights-of-way and any trees upon
private property which may affect public property, in a safe, healthy condition
in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
         a.   Pruning of trees located on public rights-of-way adjacent to the
owner’s private real property.
            i.   Trees shall be pruned and maintained in accordance with ANSI
A300 and City Design Standards and Specifications.
            ii.   Topping, heading, shearing or rounding over are not
acceptable forms of tree pruning and are not allowed on public trees unless
first approved by the Parks Superintendent.
            iii.   Except as otherwise determined by the Parks Superintendent,
branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to provide
sufficient vertical clearance over the sidewalk and street so as not to
interfere with public travel. Trees shall be pruned to provide 8 feet of
clearance on the sidewalk side of the tree, and 14 feet of clearance on the
roadway side of the tree.
            iv.   Trees shall be pruned to remove dead limbs or other limbs
that are considered a public nuisance.
         b.   Control pests on trees located on public rights-of-way adjacent
to the owner’s private real property.
         c.   Provide water and fertilization sufficient to keep trees located
on public rights-of-way adjacent to the owner’s private real property in a
healthy, growing condition.
         d.   Rake, clean up, and properly dispose of tree litter that falls
from trees so litter does not impede the storm water system, sidewalks or
pedestrian walkways.
         e.   Notice is not required when determined to be an emergency or
immediate hazard to public safety by the Parks Superintendent.
         f.   If pruning of tree is anticipated to impede traffic in any way, a
permit must first be obtained from the City’s Engineering Department for
traffic control.
   C.   Tree Protection and Preservation
      1.   To avoid creating public nuisances or damaging trees in the public
rights-of-way, the City is authorized to require the protection (including the
critical root zone) from construction or other harmful practices.
      2.   Any person performing any activity which may harm any part of a tree
in the public rights-of-way, inclusive of the critical root zone, shall obtain
a permit from the City prior to commencing work.
      3.   Any person performing any activity which has harmed any part of a
public tree, inclusive of the critical root zone, shall notify the City.
      4.   No person shall use a public tree for the attachment of any items
such as signs, nails, wires, ropes, chains, swings, hammocks, slack lines, or
treehouses.
   D.   Private Property Owner Responsibilities for Private Trees. Private
property owners, occupants and their agents shall have the following
responsibilities for the protections of trees located on the owner’s private
real property:
      1.   Routine Tree Maintenance
         a.   Removal or pruning of trees located on the owner’s private real
property that are considered a public nuisance.
         b.   Branches that overhang sidewalks or streets shall be pruned to
provide sufficient vertical clearance over the sidewalk and street so as not to
interfere with public travel. Trees shall be pruned to provide 8 feet of
clearance on the sidewalk side of the tree, and 14 feet of clearance on the
roadway side of the tree.
         c.   Control of pests on trees located on the owner’s private real
property which may, upon determination by the Parks Superintendent, pose a
threat to public trees.
         d.   Removal of all debris (wood, branches and leaves) from public
property by sunset of the day on which any tree work is done.
         e.   Rake, clean up, and properly dispose of tree litter that falls
from trees so litter does not impede the storm water system, sidewalk or
pedestrian walkways.
         f.   If pruning of tree is anticipated to impede traffic in any way, a
permit must first be obtained from the City’s Engineering Department for
traffic control. (Ord. 2019-11, 9-17-2019)
7-9-7: TREE REMOVAL:
   A.   City Powers. The City reserves the right to:
      1.   Remove diseased or dying trees in park strips or other public
property maintained by the City that are beyond reclamation.
      2.   The Parks Superintendent shall make a determination of need to
remove trees in the public rights-of-way.
      3.   The City may require removal of any tree that is declared a public
nuisance, or that does not meet the requirements of this Chapter, at the
discretion of the Parks Superintendent. The City shall notify the property
owner adjacent to the public right-of-way, in writing, stating reason and date
for removal at least 7 days prior to removal.
      4.   Notice is not required when determined to be an emergency or
immediate hazard to public safety by the Parks Superintendent.
   B.   Private Property Owner Responsibilities
      1.   Private property owners, occupants and their agents shall have the
following responsibilities for the trees in park strips abutting their real
property except those in park strips that are maintained by the City:
         a.   Removal of diseased of dying trees that are beyond reclamation.
         b.   De-stumping.
         c.   Removal of all debris (wood, branches and leaves) from public
property by sunset of the day on which any tree work is done.
         d.   Obtain Permits.
            i.   Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for
removal of any public trees.
            ii.   Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary prior
to commencing repair of damage done to public streets or sidewalks adjacent to
any public trees.
         e.   If removal of tree is anticipated to impede traffic in any way, a
permit must first be obtained from the City’s Engineering Department for
traffic control. (Ord. 2019-11, 9-17-2019)
7-9-8: TREE PLANTING:
   A.   Responsibilities.
      1.   City Responsibilities.
         a.   Establish and maintain specifications for tree planting on public
property.
         b.   Plant trees in City owned and operated parks, on the grounds of
City buildings, and in park strips and medians that the City administration has
designated will be maintained by the City in accordance with this Chapter.
         c.   Issue permits, including approval of tree species and location.
      2.   Private Property/Owner Responsibilities.
         a.   Any person in possession of private property adjacent to public
rights-of-way shall plant new or replacement trees in public rights-of-ways in
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, including the acquisition of a
permit from the City.
         b.   Adjacent land owners shall purchase street trees at their own
expense, except where park strip is maintained by the City.
         c.   Obtain Permits.
            i.   Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary for
planting of any public trees.
            ii.   Meet all requirements and obtain all permits necessary prior
to commencing repair of damage done to public streets or sidewalks adjacent to
any public trees.
   B.   Planting Requirements.
      1.   Street trees shall be located in middle of parking strip
(equidistant between sidewalk and curb).
      2.   Adjacencies and proximity standards. Street trees shall be located
at minimum distances from infrastructure, objects, sidewalks, curbs, other
trees, signs, other elements, driveway cuts, etc. as indicated below. Distances
may be altered by the Parks Superintendent to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare.
         a.   Street trees shall be located 5 feet from:
            i.   Water meter or utility box;
            ii.   Side property line of the adjacent property;
            iii.   Non-traffic conducting signage;
            iv.   Utility pole or light;
            v.   traffic conducting signage not located within a clear-view
area.
         b.   Street trees shall be located 10 feet from:
            i.   Fire hydrant;
            ii.   Driveway.
         c.   Street trees shall be located 15 feet from:
            i.   Any tree that is small in size at maturity (less than 30 feet
tall).
         d.   Street trees shall be located 20 feet from:
            i.   Any tree that is medium in size at maturity (30 to 45 feet
tall).
         e.   Street trees shall be located 30 feet from:
            i.   Any tree that is large in size at maturity (more than 45 feet
tall).
         f.   Street trees shall be located 40 feet from:
            i.   The point of intersection of street curb lines at all
intersections.
         g.   Maintaining clear view of intersecting streets
            ii.   Street trees shall meet the City’s requirements for the clear
view of intersecting streets as provided in Section
10-1-31.
         h.   Trees in Parking Islands.
            i.   Trees in parking islands shall meet the City’s landscaping
standards as provided in Section
10-6-7D. (Ord. 2019-11, 9-17-2019)
7-9-9: TREE SELECTION:
Trees in the City’s Approved Street Tree List are those which, given proper and
consistent maintenance including supplemental irrigation, proper pruning and
avoidance of chemical contaminants, will be assets to the City’s urban tree
canopy. Any tree planted on public property, including park strips, shall
comply with the standards in this Chapter.
   A.   Any selected tree shall meet all requirements of this Chapter and be on
the City’s Approved Street Tree List, which addresses soil type, location and
park strip width.
      1.   Any tree not included on the approved Street Tree List may not be
planted in the public rights-of-way unless expressly permitted in writing.
      2.   Minimum Standards.
         a.   Nursery Stock Specifications.
            i.   Trees shall be grown in a recognized nursery in accordance
with good horticultural practice (American Association of Nurseryman Standards,
ANSI Z60.1).
            ii.   Trees shall be healthy, vigorous stock grown under climatic
conditions similar to the locality of the project and free of disease, insects,
eggs, larvae, and defects such as knots, sun-scale, injuries, abrasions, or
disfigurement.
         b.   Minimum Tree Size.
            i.   The minimum size of all trees planted in the public rights-of-
way shall be 2 inch caliper minimum as measured 4 feet above grade.
            ii.   Evergreen trees may not be planted in the public rights-of-
way unless expressly permitted in writing.
   B.   Prohibited Street Tree List. The following trees are not to be planted
on any public rights-of-way in the City:
      1.   American Elm - Ulmus americana (exceptions are new species that are
resistant to Dutch Elm disease)
      2.   Ash - Fraxnius sp.
      3.   Birch - Betula sp.
      4.   Black Locust - Robinia pseudoacacia.
      5.   Box Elder - Acer negundo.
      6.   Cottonwood, Quaking Aspen and Poplars - Populus sp.
      7.   Flowering Plum - Prunus cerasifera.
      8.   Idaho Locust - Robinia x ambigua.
      9.   London Plane Tree - Platanus sp.
      10.   Russian Olive - Elagnus angustifolia.
      11.   Siberian Elm - Ulmus pumilla.
      12.   Silver Maple - Acer saccharinum.
      13.   Trees of Heaven - Alianthus.
      14.   Willow - Salix sp.
      15.   Evergreens - including but not limited to Colorado Blue Spruce,
Austrian Pine, Ponderosa Pine, Pinyon Pine, Mugo Pine, White Fir, Douglas Fir,
Subalpine Fir, and Upright Junipers
   C.   Street Tree Selection Criteria.
      1.   Street trees shall be selected based on a combination of their
approximate size at maturity, the location within the City and the width of the
park strip. Soil Conditions, Tree Areas, and approved Street Trees are provided
in the North Salt Lake Design Standards and Specifications.
         a.   Size at maturity.
            i.   Small Trees - Less than 30 feet tall at maturity.
            ii.   Medium Trees - 30 to 45 feet tall at maturity.
            iii.   Large Trees - 45 feet tall or greater at maturity.
         b.   Location within the City. Several conditions including soil type
and location within the City warrant the use of different street trees. The
Tree Area map shall be found in the North Salt Lake Design Standards and
Specifications.
            i.   Tree Area A: Standard Soil Conditions.
               a.   Typical soils and conditions with few constraints.
Dominated by soils with good drainage and no salinity issues.
               b.   Mostly located east of the railroad, with a few areas near
the Jordan River.
            ii.   Tree Area B: Challenging Soil Conditions.
               a.   More challenging clay soils, often with drainage and
salinity issues.
               b.   Mostly located on the west side of the City.
            iii.   Tree Area C: Downtown/Urban Planting Conditions.
               a.   Urban soils and conditions. Requires planting in tree
grates, compacted soils and other particularly challenging urban planting/
growth conditions.
               b.   Located in the Town Center.
         c.   Park Strip Width.
            i.   Narrow Park Strip and Tree Grates: Select trees from the Small
Street Tree List.
               a.   Park strip or tree grate is 3 to 5 feet wide.
            ii.   Medium Width Park Strip: Select from the Medium Street Tree
List.
               a.   Park strip is 5 to 8 feet wide.
            iii.   Wide Park Strip: Select from the Large Street Tree List.
               a.   Park strip is greater than 8 feet wide.
            iv.   Park Strips of Any Width with Overhead High Voltage
Transmission Lines: Select tree specifically designated as approved for use
under power lines on City’s Approved Tree Lists. (Ord. 2019-11, 9-17-2019)
7-9-10: TREE PERMITS:
It shall be unlawful to plant or remove any tree on public property or to cause
such acts to be done by others without first obtaining a permit from the City.
The City may issue such permits if, in its judgment, the work is necessary and
if the proposed methods of workmanship are satisfactory. No permit fee is
required. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the specifications and
standards of practice adopted by the City and the specific conditions and
methods listed on the permit.
   A.   Application Process.
      1.   The applicant shall obtain a permit for planting or removing a
public tree prior to the commencement of the proposed work.
   B.   Requirements - Tree Planting Permits.
      1.   Each application for a planting permit shall designate the species
and location of public tree proposed.
      2.   The permit shall designate the proposed tree species, spacing,
placement and minimum tree well sizes.
      3.   The City may remove any public tree that has been planted without a
permit or that is in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   Requirements - Tree Removal Permits.
      1.   The applicant shall obtain a permit for the removal of any public
tree prior to its removal.
      2.   If a tree within public rights-of-way is removed, the applicant
shall replace the tree removed as a condition of issuance of a permit for
removal, unless such requirement is waived by the City for good cause shown.
(Ord. 2019-11, 9-17-2019)
7-9-11: DAMAGING, DESTROYING OR MUTILATING PUBLIC TREES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Damage, mutilate or destroy any public tree;
      2.   Attach any device or structure (i.e. tree houses, lights) to or on
public trees unless otherwise authorized by the Parks Superintendent;
      3.   Store, spill or dump substances, whether liquid or solid, which may
be harmful to trees, on any part of a public tree or within the critical root
zone of a public tree;
      4.   Damage public trees through construction activities in violation of
the conditions of a permit issued under this Chapter. Such activities include,
but are not limited to:
         a.   Making excavations or cuts in the soil near roots of public trees
unless otherwise approved by the Parks Superintendent;
         b.   Damaging roots of a public tree by compacting or placing fill
within the critical root zone of a tree;
         c.   Engaging in any pruning activity on public trees not in
accordance with ANSI A300, including, but not limited to: topping, heading,
rounding or shearing unless otherwise approved by the Parks Superintendent.
   B.   Compensatory Payments.
      1.   In the event any person removes, destroys or damages any public tree
except as otherwise required by law, that person shall be required to replace
such tree with a tree of equivalent dollar value on public property, unless
otherwise determined by the Parks Superintendent. The value of a tree shall be
determined by the Parks Superintendent in accordance with accepted plant
appraisal methods as set forth in the most recent edition of the Guide for
Plant Appraisal, published by the International Society of Arboriculture or the
same as amended from time to time.
      2.   If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of the tree removed
or if the replacement tree is of lesser value, the person causing the tree to
be removed shall make a compensatory payment to the City of North Salt Lake
equal to the difference in value between the tree removed and any replacement
tree.
      3.   Any public tree that is determined by the Parks Superintendent to be
damaged, but not sufficiently to justify its removal, shall be considered to be
devalued. The amount of devaluation shall be paid to the City by the person
causing the damage.
      4.   Compensatory payments shall be paid into a fund established for that
purpose and restricted to use for community forestry programs. (Ord. 2019-11,
9-17-2019)
7-9-12: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or who fails to
comply with a lawful order of the Parks Superintendent may be subject to the
assessment of civil penalties for each violation in accordance with Title 12,
Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Program.
   B.   In addition to any civil penalties and restitution for actual damages
that may be imposed, the City may pursue criminal penalties in accordance with
State Law. (Ord. 2019-11, 9-17-2019)
CHAPTER 10
CONSTRUCTION AND LANDSCAPING STANDARDS FOR PROPERTIES DEDICATED TO CITY
SECTION:
7-10-1: Applicability
7-10-2: Conformance Required
7-10-3: Standards Specified
7-10-1: APPLICABILITY:
In order to be accepted by the city and thereafter maintained at city expense,
all parks, trails or other properties dedicated to the city in a subdivision
recording, or which are otherwise donated to the city by any other means, or
intended to be dedicated or donated to the city, shall meet the construction
and landscaping standards established in this chapter. (Ord. 09-12, 9-22-2009)
7-10-2: CONFORMANCE REQUIRED:
The construction and landscaping work performed shall conform to the
requirements, regulations, design standards and construction and landscaping
specifications established by Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscape
Standards. (Ord. 09-12, 9-22-2009; amd. Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
7-10-3: STANDARDS SPECIFIED:
   A.   Contractor, Landscaper Approved By City: The construction and
landscaping work shall be done by, and can only be done by, licensed
contractors and landscapers approved by the city manager or designee.
   B.   Standards: The standard to be applied by the city manager or designee
shall be the following:
      1.   The bidder shall:
         a.   Have submitted a bid in compliance with the invitation to bid and
within the requirements of the plans and specifications for the project;
         b.   Demonstrate that it has the financial strength to do the project;
         c.   Be appropriately licensed to do the job;
         d.   Be insurable and have the ability to acquire required bonding and
insurance;
         e.   Have the requisite ability, expertise, equipment, personnel,
capacity and skill to do the required work, both in quality and quantity, and
in a timely manner;
         f.   Have a satisfactory record of past performance in similar
projects; and
         g.   Meet such other criteria as may reasonably be required under the
circumstances of the project and the history and qualifications of the bidder.
      2.   Inability, refusal or delay by the bidder in providing proof of
these criteria may, at the discretion of the city manager or designee,
disqualify a bidder from consideration. (Ord. 09-12, 9-22-2009)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER USE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Administration
8-1-2: Applications
8-1-3: Fees, Rates And Charges
8-1-4: Prohibitions And Regulations
8-1-5: Scarcity Of Water
8-1-6: Waste Of Water; Outside Watering
8-1-7: Water Meters
8-1-8: Installations
8-1-9: Extensions Of Water Mains
8-1-10: Moving Or Replacement Of Water Lines
8-1-11: Discontinuance Of Service
8-1-12: Fire Hydrants
8-1-13: Access By City
8-1-14: Nonliability For Damages
8-1-15: Service Outside City
8-1-16: Secondary Water Availability/Connection Required
8-1-17: Use Of Culinary Water
8-1-18: Penalties For Violation
8-1-1: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Department Created: The water department of the city is hereby created.
It shall administer the operation and maintenance of the water system of the
city. (1989 Code § 14-110)
   B.   Public Works Director: The public works director shall be the
administrator of the water department and shall be responsible for its
function. (1989 Code § 14-111; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Duties Of Water Department: The Public Works Director, or designee,
shall supervise the city water system pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter and pursuant to resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the
governing body prescribing the powers and duties and directing the manner and
frequency with which reports shall be made relating to the water system. All of
the functions and activities of the department shall be carried on under the
direction of the director or designee. (1989 Code § 14-112; amd. 2012 Code;
Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
8-1-2: APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Water Connection: Any person, other than a subdivider or developer
seeking multiple connections, who desires or is required to secure a new
connection to the city water system, shall file with the water department for
each such connection a written and signed connection application. (1989 Code §
14-113)
   B.   Water Service: Any person who desires or is required to secure water
service when such service is available from the city water system, shall file
with the water department a written application and agreement for the service.
(1989 Code § 14-115; amd. 2012 Code)
8-1-3: FEES, RATES AND CHARGES:
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 2025-
14, passed 7-15-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below
when the ordinance is codified.
   A.   Rates And Connection Fees: The rates, penalty fee for delinquency in
payment, connection fee, reservoir fee, inspection fee and other charges
incidental to connection and services from the city water system shall be in
such amounts as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution. The
governing body may promulgate rules for levying, billing, guaranteeing and
collecting charges for water services and all other rules necessary for the
management and control of the water system. Rates for services furnished shall
be uniform with respect to each class or classes of service established or that
may hereafter be established. (1989 Code § 14-117)
   B.   Delinquency; Discontinuance Of Service:
      1.   The City shall provide a utility bill containing the utility service
charges assessed to each customer once a month. The utility bill may be sent
electronically, or by mail.
      2.   The utility bill shall specify the amount charged for utility
service, the available methods of payment, and the date payment is due.
      3.   Utility bills shall be delivered by the twentieth of each month for
services provided during the previous month. The due date for the utility bill
shall be the last day of the same month as the utility bill is delivered.
      4.   Delinquent Notification Procedure:
         a.   If utility bills are not paid by the fifteenth of the following
month, a notice of "Past Due" amount will appear on the customer's next utility
bill.
         b.   If the past due amount remains unpaid thirty (30) days after the
original due date within ten (10) days an automated voice message call will be
sent to the telephone number the customer has provided as their primary
contact.
         c.   If the past due amount remains unpaid sixty (60) days after the
original due date within ten (10) days the City will attempt a direct call (not
automated) to the telephone number the customer has provided as their primary
contact.
         d.   If the bill is not paid within twenty four (24) hours of the
direct call the City may disconnect the delinquent customer from water
services.
         e.   Shut-offs for non-payment may be done not sooner than a
delinquency of at least sixty five (65) days or when two (2) monthly payment
due dates have passed without payment.
         f.   After water service is disconnected, the City will only reconnect
the delinquent customer when the total charges are paid in full or other
arrangements are made with approval of the Finance Director or City Treasurer.
      5.   The City is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the payment
of all delinquent water charges by an action of law in the name of the City.
(1989 Code § 14-121; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2021-07, 8-17-2021; Ord. 2022-03, 6-
7-2022; Ord. 2023-14, 11-7-2023)
8-1-4: PROHIBITIONS AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   Use Without Payment: It shall be unlawful to utilize the city water or
sewer system without paying therefor, as herein provided, or, without
authority, to open any fire hydrant, stopcock, valve or other fixtures attached
to the system of water supply unless it is done pursuant to proper application,
agreement or resolution. It shall be unlawful to injure, deface or impair any
part or appurtenance of the water or sewer system, or to cast anything into any
reservoir or tank belonging to the water system. (1989 Code § 14-120)
   B.   Turning On Water After Being Turned Off: It shall be unlawful for any
person, after the water has been turned off from the premises for nonpayment of
water charges or other violation of the ordinances, rules, regulations or
resolutions pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or allow the water to be
turned on or used without authority from the city. (1989 Code § 14-122)
   C.   Separate Connections: It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more families
or service users, with the exception of approved accessory dwelling units
contained on the same single property, to be supplied from the same service
pipe, connection or water meter, unless special permission for such combination
usage has been granted by the governing body and the premises served is owned
by the same owner. In all such cases, a failure on the part of any one of the
users to comply with this subsection shall warrant a withholding of a supply of
water through the service connections until compliance or payment has been
made, and in any event, the property owner shall be primarily liable to the
city for all water services utilized on all such premises. Nothing herein shall
be deemed to preclude the power of the city to require separate pipes,
connections or meters at a subsequent time. (1989 Code § 14-123)
   D.   Unauthorized Users: It shall be unlawful for any water service user to
permit any person from other premises or any unauthorized person to use or
obtain water services regularly from the users premises or water facility,
either outside or inside the premises. (1989 Code § 14-124)
   E.   Period For Visitors: Individuals visiting the premises of any
authorized user in a recreational vehicle, not including a mobile home, and
continuing to live therein during the period of visitation, may receive water
service from service pipes or facilities of the host during the visitation
period, which shall not exceed one month. Continued use thereafter shall be
deemed unauthorized and violative of the provisions of this chapter relating to
separate connections and unauthorized use. (1989 Code § 14-125)
   F.   Pipes Kept In Good Repair: All users of water services shall keep their
service pipes and connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected
from frost at their own expense. No person, except under the direction of the
public works department, shall be allowed to dig into the street for the
purpose of laying, removing or repairing any service pipe. (1989 Code § 14-126)
   G.   Quality Of Service Pipe:
      1.   All service and other pipe used in conjunction with the water
services of the city shall be of such material, quality and specifications as
the governing body may by resolution provide, and shall be installed at such
distances belowground as may be specified by regulations relating to the water
department. All work, alterations or extensions affecting water pipes shall be
subject to the acceptance of the city, and no connections with any water mains
shall be made without first obtaining a permit.
      2.   No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water pipes across lots or
buildings to adjoining premises without permission from the city and subject to
such requirements relating to controls as may be imposed. (1989 Code § 14-127)
   H.   Faulty Equipment: It shall be unlawful for any water user to:
      1.   Waste water;
      2.   Allow water to be wasted by stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or
pipes, or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow;
      3.   Run water wastefully from hydrants, faucets or stops, or through
basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus; or
      4.   Use water for purposes other than for those which applied, or to use
water in the violation of the rules and regulations for controlling the water
supply. (1989 Code § 14-128)
   I.   Sprinkling Vehicles: Vehicles for sprinkling shall be regulated and
controlled by the water department. (1989 Code § 14-129)
   J.   Water Not Supplied For Motors, Syphons, Etc.: No water shall be
supplied from the pipes of the city water system for the purpose of driving
motor, syphon turbine, or other wheels, or any hydraulic engines, or elevators,
or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind whatsoever, nor shall any
license be granted or issued for any such purpose. (1989 Code § 14-132)
   K.   Building And Plumbing Code Requirements: Permission to connect with the
city water system shall not be given unless the plumbing in the house or
building to be connected meets the provisions of the international codes
adopted by the city. (1989 Code § 14-140; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-
2022)
8-1-5: SCARCITY OF WATER:
In time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in the judgment of the mayor
and the governing body be necessary, the mayor shall by proclamation limit the
use of water to such extent as may be necessary. It shall be unlawful for any
person, their family, servants or agents, to violate any proclamation made by
the mayor pursuant to this section. (1989 Code § 14-134; amd. Ord. 2022-03, 6-
7-2022)
8-1-6: WASTE OF WATER; OUTSIDE WATERING:
   A.   Prohibited: Users of water from the city water system shall not permit
water to continue to run wastefully and without due efforts to conserve water.
If a user of municipal water engages in practices which result in the needless
waste of water and continues so to do after reasonable notice to discontinue
wastefulness has been given, the city may refer the matter to code enforcement
for additional civil action in accordance with Title 12, Administrative Code
Enforcement Hearing Program or to the governing body for termination of
connection.
   B.   Termination; Hearing: The governing body may thereupon consider
terminating the right of the individual to use culinary water. If it elects to
consider the matter of termination, it shall give notice to the water user of
the intention to terminate the water connection at least five (5) days prior to
the meeting of the governing body at which termination of water service is to
be considered. The notice shall inform the water user of the time and place of
the meeting and of the charges which designated to the consideration of the
termination. (1989 Code § 14-135)
   C.   Appearance; Representation: A water user whose right to utilize city
water is being reviewed shall have opportunity to appear, with or without
counsel, and present reasons why the water service should not be discontinued.
   D.   Determination: After due hearing, the governing body may arrive at a
determination. If the determination is to discontinue the wasteful water user's
service connection, it shall provide notice of the decision and of the period
during which the service will remain discontinued. (1989 Code § 14-135)
   E.   Prohibited Hours And Dates: Watering outside with city water is
prohibited between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. Use of sprinkling systems from October 15 through April 15 is prohibited,
or other dates, dependent upon the water availability that year and
proclamation by the Mayor.
   F.   Exceptions: The public works director, with reasonable discretion, is
authorized to permit water use in contravention of these provisions. A written
application stating the reasons for a requested exception shall be submitted to
the public works director. A record shall be kept of any such exceptions
granted and any permission granted by the public works director shall be issued
in writing.
   G.   Violations; Warning, User Fee; Penalty For Violation: Anyone using
water in violation of these provisions shall, upon first violation per year, be
warned in writing by the public works director or designee against further
illegal use, and upon second violation shall be assessed a water user fee in
such amount as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution. Such fee
shall become part of the water bill of that person or of the property whereon
such use occurred.
   H.   Right Of Appeal: There shall be a right of appeal of any such
assessment to the city council, which appeal must be made in writing within
thirty (30) days of the assessment.
   I.   Penalty: Anyone using water in violation of these provisions shall be
guilty of an infraction and subject to criminal penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 or civil penalty as provided in Title 12, Administrative Code Enforcement
Hearing Program. (Ord. 01-04, 4-17-2001; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-
2022)
8-1-7: WATER METERS:
   A.   Number Determined: Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this
section, all structures, dwelling units, establishments and persons using water
from the city water system must have such number of water meters connected to
their water system as are necessary to adequately measure use and determine
water charges to the respective users.
   B.   Furnished By City: Meters will be furnished by the city upon
application for a connection, and upon payment of such connection fees and
other costs as may be established by the governing body by resolution.
   C.   Property Of City: Meters shall be deemed to be and remain the property
of the city.
   D.   Disputes As To Number Required: Whenever a dispute between the city and
the property owner arises as to the appropriate number of meters to be
installed on any premises, the matter shall be heard and determined by the
governing body after due notice in writing to the parties involved.
   E.   Readings: The city shall cause meter readings to be taken regularly and
shall advise the utilities clerk thereof for the purpose of recording the
necessary billings for water service.
   F.   Inspections, Tampering, Adjustments: Meters may be checked, inspected
or adjusted at the discretion of the city, and they shall not be adjusted or
tampered with by the customer. Meter boxes shall not be opened for the purpose
of turning on or off the water except by an authorized representative of the
city, unless special permission is given by the city through its
representatives to the customer to do so.
   G.   Testing: If a customer submits a written request to test the water
meter, the city may, if under the circumstances it deems it advisable and in
its discretion, order a test of the meter measuring the water delivered to such
customer. If such request is made within twelve (12) months after the date of
the last previous test, the customer may be required to pay the cost of such
test. If the meter is found in such test to record from ninety seven percent
(97%) to one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy under methods of testing
satisfactory to the governing body, the meter shall be deemed to accurately
measure the use of water.
   H.   Meter Failure: If the municipality's meters fail to register at any
time, the water delivered during the period of failure shall be estimated on
the basis of previous consumption during a period which is not questioned. In
the event a meter is found to be recording less than ninety seven percent (97%)
or more than one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy, the city shall make
such adjustments in the customer's previous bills as are just and fair under
the circumstances.
   I.   Liability For Damages: Any damage or injury to the lines, meters or
other materials of the city on or near the customer's premises caused by any
act or neglect of the customer shall, in the discretion of the city, be
repaired by and at the expense of the customer, and the customer shall pay all
costs and expenses, including a reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or
accrue to the city through its efforts to repair the damage to the lines,
meters or to other equipment of the department or collect such costs from the
customer. (1989 Code § 14-136; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
8-1-8: INSTALLATIONS:
   A.   Permit For Installation: It shall be unlawful for any person to lay,
repair, alter or connect any water line to the city culinary water system
without first having received a construction permit from the city. A state
contractor's license for this specific purpose is required. (1989 Code § 14-
137)
   B.   Application For Installation Permit:
      1.   Applications for permits to make water connections or other
alteration or for laying or repairing lines connected directly or indirectly to
the city water system must be made in writing by a licensed plumber, authorized
agent, or by the owner of the premises, who shall describe the nature or the
work to be done for which the application is made. The application shall be
granted if:
         a.   The connection, repair, alteration or installation will cause no
damage to the street in which the water main is laid, or that it will not be
prejudicial to the interests of persons whose property has been or may
thereafter be connected to the water main.
         b.   The connection conforms to the ordinances, regulations,
specifications and standards of materials required by the city.
      2.   All connections, alterations or installations shall be to the line
and grade designated in the adopted city standards and specifications.
      3.   Fees for permits or for inspection services shall be in such amounts
as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution. (1989 Code § 14-138)
   C.   Regulations And Requirements:
      1.   Water lines shall be of design and materials as approved by the city
engineer, and shall meet AWWA standards.
      2.   All water mains shall be eight inches (8") minimum size, unless
otherwise specified by the city engineer.
      3.   At the developer's cost, a set of mylar construction drawings (1
inch equals 20 feet, or as approved by the city engineer) will be created for
each water line project and submitted to the city as part of the approval
process.
      4.   Fire hydrant and PRV (pressure reducing valve) locations and
elevations are to be verified and certified by the developer's licensed
surveyor prior to installation of curb and gutter and after approval of the
city engineer.
      5.   Written inspection forms shall be made available from the city for
review by the developer and contractor. The inspection forms shall be completed
and signed by city personnel or the city's authorized agent prior to any
payment made by the developer for work on the project. No reduction in the
surety, escrow, or bond shall be made without prior approval of the city
engineer, public works director or designee.
      6.   The developer shall in no way change or alter construction drawings
or make on site decisions affecting the scope or specifics of any contract for
water lines without consultation and approval by the city engineer, public
works director or designee. (Ord. 04-2, 4-20-2004; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2022-
03, 6-7-2022)
8-1-9: EXTENSIONS OF WATER MAINS:
   A.   Application: Any person, including any subdivider, who is required to
have the water mains extended within the city, may make application to the city
for such. The request shall contain a description of such proposed extension,
accompanied by a map showing the location of the proposed extension. The city
may grant or deny the petition as in its discretion deems best for the welfare
of existing water users in the city. (1989 Code § 14-143)
   B.   Cost Of Extensions Determined: Upon the receipt of such request and map
and before the petition is granted, the city engineer shall provide a cost
estimate for purpose of bonding for the project. (1989 Code § 14-144)
   C.   Amount Of Bond Deposited With The City: The applicant shall provide to
the city a surety, escrow, or bond in the amount of one hundred percent (100%)
of the estimated costs for the project, of which the city will retain ten
percent (10%) for a one (1) year warranty period. (1989 Code § 14-145)
   D.   Ownership Of Extension: Any extension shall be deemed the property of
the city. (1989 Code § 14-147; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
8-1-10: MOVING OR REPLACEMENT OF WATER LINES:
If the city, in its sole discretion, determines that any water line of the city
must be moved or replaced, the city, or developer connecting to the moved water
line, shall bear that portion of the cost of the move or replacement which
applies to main lines up to the property line of the customer. The cost of
reconnecting such new line or lines from the house of the customer to the
property line or meter box, where applicable, shall be borne by the customer.
(1989 Code § 14-139; amd. Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
8-1-11: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Any customer desiring to discontinue service shall notify the city in writing
of such fact at least ten (10) days before the date when such service shall be
discontinued. On giving the written notice, the customer shall not be
responsible for water bills incurred after the date specified in the notice.
Any credit balance in favor of the customer as a result of an advance payment
of bills or a deposit will be refunded upon discontinuance of service. (1989
Code § 14-141)
8-1-12: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Water for fire hydrants will be furnished free of charge by the city.
Installation and repairs on hydrants shall be at the expense of the city and
shall be made under the direction of the city. All customers shall grant the
city, upon demand, a right of way or easement to install and maintain such
hydrants on their premises if the city concludes that hydrants shall be so
installed for the protection of the residents of the city. (1989 Code § 14-142)
8-1-13: ACCESS BY CITY:
The City shall, at all ordinary and reasonable hours, have free access to any
place supplied with water services from the city system for the purpose of
examining the apparatus and ascertaining the amount of water service being used
and the manner of its use. (1989 Code § 14-130; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2022-03,
6-7-2022)
8-1-14: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The city shall not be liable for any damage to a water service user by reason
of stoppage or interruption of the water supply service caused by fires,
scarcity of water, accidents to the water system or its mains, or which occurs
as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any other
unavoidable cause. This section shall not be construed to extend the liability
of the city beyond that provided in the state governmental immunity act. (1989
Code § 14-131)
8-1-15: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
   A.   Petition For Service: Any person located outside the city limits who
desires to be supplied with water service from the city water system and is
willing to pay in advance the whole expense of extending the water main beyond
its present location, may make application to the governing body by petition
containing:
      1.   A description of the proposed extension; and
      2.   A map showing the location thereof; and
      3.   An offer to pay the whole expense incurred by the city in providing
such extension and to advance such expenses as shall be verified to by the city
engineer. The governing body and the person or persons seeking such extension
may enter into an agreement providing in detail the terms under which the
extension may be utilized by others in the future and the terms under which all
or any portion of the cost of installing such extension may be refunded. No
such refund agreement will be for a period of more than ten (10) years, nor
will interest charges accrue; and
      4.   An acknowledgment that the city, in granting the petition, need
supply only such water to the petitioner which the governing body deems beyond
the requirements of water users within the city limits, and that such extension
shall be the property of and subject to the control of the city. (1989 Code §
14-151)
   B.   Extensions May Be Master Metered: When an extension supplying more than
one house or user outside the city limits is connected to city water mains, the
city may require a master meter to be installed near the point where the
connection is to be made to the city main. This installation will be at the
expense of the persons served by such extension according to the regular rates
for meter installation. Responsible parties must agree to pay all bills for
water served through the meter at the applicable water rates. (1989 Code § 14-
153)
   C.   Cost Of Extensions Determined: Upon receipt of such petition and map
and before the petition is granted, the governing body shall determine what
portion, if any, of the extension of the city water mains to the city limits
the city shall construct, and shall obtain from the city a verified statement
showing the whole cost and expense of making the extension. Such costs and
expenses shall include administrative and supervisory expenditures of the city
water department, which shall in no event be deemed to be less than ten percent
(10%) of the cost of materials and labor. The city maintains the option of
charging a front foot cost of the improvements, and contracting work out by
competitive bid. (1989 Code § 14-154; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
8-1-16: SECONDARY WATER AVAILABILITY/CONNECTION REQUIRED:
   A.   The record owners, or their duly authorized agents, of all residential
sites and all commercial sites located within the City of North Salt Lake that
require outside watering of lawns or plants whose properties lie adjacent to a
secondary water system main line shall connect their properties to the system
and pay the applicable fees and charges.
   B.   When a City-owned secondary water system is constructed within an
existing neighborhood, all property owners shall connect their property to the
secondary water system within sixty (60) days of receiving notice from the
City. In the event the deadline is after October 15, the deadline shall be
extended to April 1 of the following year. Prior to connection the property
owners or designee shall obtain an Excavation/Encroachment Permit from the City
   C.   Vacant property shall not be required to be connected to the secondary
water system until such property is developed. At the time of development,
connection to the secondary water system shall be made prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. Application for temporary occupancy may be approved
by the City and shall include suitable guarantee to provide adequate assurance
of connection, including all applicable fees and costs.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property served
by the secondary water system, or any user thereof, to permit any person from
other premises, or any unauthorized persons, to use or obtain water regularly
from the premises or secondary water fixtures. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
8-1-17: USE OF CULINARY WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to use culinary water for
irrigation of lawns or plants if the property is connected to a secondary water
system that uses non-culinary water as a water source or the owner is required
to connect to a secondary water system that uses non-culinary water as a water
source pursuant to this Title and has not done so.
For the purpose of this section the term "irrigation of lawns or plants" shall
not include incidental watering of plants and shrubs, while being established,
and when secondary water is not available, nor the application of household
grey water. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
8-1-18: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or who fails to
comply with a lawful order of the City of North Salt Lake may be subject to the
assessment of civil penalties for each violation in accordance with Title 12,
Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Program.
   B.   In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, the City may
pursue criminal penalties (class C misdemeanor) in accordance with State Law.
(Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
CHAPTER 2
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION
SECTION:
8-2-1: Title, Applicability, Authority
8-2-2: Purpose
8-2-3: Definitions
8-2-4: Protection Zones Established
8-2-5: Uses Within Zones
8-2-6: Exclusions And Exemptions
8-2-7: Enforcement
8-2-8: Administration
8-2-9: Liability
8-2-10: Violations; Penalty
8-2-11: Appeals
8-2-1: TITLE, APPLICABILITY, AUTHORITY:
   A.   Title: This chapter shall be known as the DRINKING WATER SOURCE
PROTECTION ORDINANCE. The provisions of this chapter shall be effective within
the municipal boundaries of the city.
   B.   Applicability: It shall be the responsibility of any person owning real
property or operating a business within the jurisdiction of the city to conform
and comply with the applicable provisions contained in this chapter. Ignorance
of this provision shall not excuse any violations of this chapter. (Ord. 99-16,
12-7-1999)
   C.   Authority: The city has authority to adopt this chapter in order to
facilitate compliance with the drinking water source protection regulations
promulgated pursuant to Utah administrative code section R309-113, and pursuant
to authority set forth in the municipal land use, development and management
act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-102, as amended, and other applicable
statutory and common laws of the United States. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999; amd.
2012 Code)
8-2-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Generally: The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the provision of a
safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of
drinking water source protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells
which are the supply sources for the city water system, and by the designation
and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within
such zones. Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of this chapter apply to
new development or the handling, movement and storage of potentially hazardous
materials.
   B.   Protection; Nonliability Of City: The degree of protection afforded by
this chapter is considered adequate for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not ensure that public drinking water sources will not be subject to accidental
or intentional contamination, nor does it create liability on the part of the
city, or any officer or employee thereof, for any damages to the public water
supplies arising out of reliance on this chapter, or any administrative order
lawfully made hereunder.
   C.   Compliance With Other Applicable Laws: A notice to cease or an
exemption issued under this chapter shall not relieve the owner of the
obligation to comply with any other federal, state, regional or local laws or
regulations, rules, ordinances, laws or requirements, nor shall any such notice
or exemption relieve any owner of any liability for violations of such
regulations, rules, ordinances, laws or requirements. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999)
8-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given in this section:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (Or BMP): A practice or combination of practices
determined to be the most effective practicable means of preventing or reducing
the amount of pollution to a level compatible with water, soil and air quality
goals (including technological, economic and institutional considerations).
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of North Salt Lake City, Utah.
CODE: The North Salt Lake City code, as amended.
CODE INSPECTOR: Any authorized officer, employee or agent of the city whose
duty it is to assure code compliance.
CONTINUOUS TRANSIT: The nonstop movement of a mobile vehicle, except for stops
required by traffic laws.
DWSP: Drinking water source protection.
DEPARTMENT: The North Salt Lake City public works department.
DESIGN STANDARD: A control which is implemented by a potential contamination
source to prevent discharges to the groundwater. Spill protection is an example
of a design standard.
DISCHARGE: Means, but is not limited to, spilling, leaking, seeping, pouring,
injecting, emitting, emptying, disposing, releasing or dumping regulated
substances to the soil, air, groundwaters or surface waters of the city.
"Discharge" does not include the use of a regulated substance in accordance
with the appropriate use intended or specified by the manufacturer of the
substances; provided, that such use is not prohibited by federal, state or
local laws or regulations. "Discharge" also does not include discharges
specifically authorized by federal or state permits.
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION REVIEW COMMITTEE: That certain committee
comprised of the city manager, city engineer, public works director and such
other officers or employees of the department as the city council may
designate.
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONE: An area within which certain practices
are mandated to protect groundwater flowing to public drinking water wells.
EPA: The United States environmental protection agency.
GROUNDWATER: Any water which may be drawn from the ground.
GROUNDWATER DIVIDE: The subsurface boundary at which groundwater flow occurs in
opposite directions, usually occurring at the high and low points of surface
topography. Groundwater flows away from this line at all times.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any "hazardous waste", as defined by the EPA.
LAND MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES: Zoning and nonzoning controls which include, but
are not limited to, the following: zoning and subdivision ordinances, site plan
reviews, design and operating standards, source prohibitions, purchase of
property and development rights, public education programs, groundwater
monitoring, household hazardous waste collection programs, water conservation
programs, memoranda of understanding, and written contracts and agreements.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, joint
venture, governmental entity or other legal entity, and shall include the
plural as well as the singular.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT: Fuel (gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene and mixtures of these
products), lubricating oils, motor oils (new and used), hydraulic fluids and
other similar petroleum based products.
POLLUTION SOURCE: Point source discharges of contaminants to groundwater or
potential discharges of the liquid forms of "extremely hazardous substances",
which are stored in excess of "applicable threshold planning quantities", as
specified in the superfund amendment and reauthorization act, title III.
Examples of possible pollution sources include, but are not limited to, the
following: storage facilities that store the liquid forms of extremely
hazardous substances, septic tanks, drain fields, class V underground injection
wells, landfills, open dumps, landfilling of sludge and septage, manure piles,
salt piles, pit privies, and animal feeding operations with more than ten (10)
animal units. The following pollution sources are defined as:
   A.   Animal Feeding Operation: A lot or facility where the following
conditions are met: animals have been or will be stabled or confined and fed or
maintained for a total of forty five (45) days or more in any twelve (12) month
period, and crops, vegetation forage growth, or postharvest residues are not
sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility.
Two (2) or more animal feeding operations under common ownership are considered
to be a single feeding operation if they adjoin each other, if they use a
common area, or if they use a common system for the disposal of wastes;
   B.   Animal Unit: A unit of measurement for any animal feeding operation
calculated by adding the following numbers: the number of slaughter and feeder
cattle multiplied by 1.0, plus the number of mature dairy cattle multiplied by
1.4, plus the number of swine weighing over fifty five (55) pounds multiplied
by 0.4, plus the number of sheep multiplied by 0.1, plus the number of horses
multiplied by 2.0; and
   C.   Extremely Hazardous Substances: Those substances which are identified
in section 302(EHS) column of the title III list of lists - consolidated list
of chemicals subject to reporting under the superfund amendment and
reauthorization act, title III (EP 560/4-91-011).
POTENTIAL CONTAMINATION SOURCE (Or PCS): Any facility or site which employs an
activity or procedure which may potentially contaminate ground water. A
pollution source is also a "potential contamination source".
PROTECTION ZONE: The delineation zones of the drinking water source protection
zones, as set forth in section
8-2-4 of this chapter.
REGULATED SUBSTANCES: Substances (including degradation and interaction
products) which because of quantity, concentration, physical, chemical
(including ignitability, corrosivity, reactiveness and toxicity), or infectious
characteristics, radiomutagenicity, carcinogenicity, teratogenicity,
bioaccumulative effect, persistence (nondegradability) in nature, or any other
characteristics relevant to a particular material that may cause significant
harm to human health or the environment (including surface and groundwater,
plants and animals).
REGULATORY AGENCY: Any governmental agency with jurisdiction over "hazardous
waste", as defined herein.
SARA TITLE III: The superfund amendment and reauthorization act, title III, 40
CFR 300-302.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible
wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover
thereon.
SEPTIC TANK/DRAIN FIELD SYSTEMS: A system which is comprised of a septic tank
and a drain field which accepts domestic wastewater from buildings or
facilities for subsurface treatment and disposal. By their design, septic tank/
drain field system discharges cannot be controlled with design standards.
WELL: Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug, jetted
or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation is for the
location, acquisition, development or artificial recharge of water.
WELLHEAD: The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals,
valves and other attachments. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999; amd. 2012 Code)
8-2-4: PROTECTION ZONES ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established use districts to be known as zones one, two, three
and four of the drinking water source protection area, identified and described
as follows:
   A.   Zone One: Zone one is the area within a one hundred foot (100') radius
from the wellhead.
   B.   Zone Two: Zone two is the area within a two hundred fifty (250) day
groundwater time of travel to the wellhead, the boundary of the aquifer which
supplies water to the groundwater source, to the groundwater divide, whichever
is closer.
   C.   Zone Three: Zone three, the waiver criteria zone, is the area within a
three (3) year groundwater time of travel to the wellhead or margin of the
collection area, the boundary of the aquifer which supplies water to the
groundwater source or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer.
   D.   Zone Four: Zone four is the area within a fifteen (15) year groundwater
time of travel to the wellhead, the boundary of the aquifer which supplies
water to the groundwater source or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer.
(Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999)
8-2-5: USES WITHIN ZONES:
   A.   Unlawful Discharges: No person shall discharge, or permit the
discharge, of any regulated substances or petroleum products, whether treated
or untreated, to soils, air, groundwater or surface water in any protection
zone, that may have a deleterious effect upon groundwater within the city,
unless the discharge is in compliance with all applicable federal, state and
local laws and regulations.
   B.   Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted within drinking
water source protection zones:
      1.   Any use permitted within existing agricultural, single-family
residential, multi-family residential and commercial districts so long as the
uses conform to the rules and regulations of the regulatory agencies.
      2.   Any other open land use where any building located on the property
is incidental and accessory to the primary land use.
   C.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses or conditions shall be and are
hereby prohibited within drinking water sources protection zones, whether or
not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as part of a use
permitted under subsection B of this section:
      1.   Zone one: The location of any uncontrolled, "potential contamination
source", as defined in section
8-2-3 of this chapter.
      2.   Zone two: The location of a pollution source, unless its
contaminated discharges can be controlled with design standards.
      3.   Zones three and four: The location of a potential contamination
source unless it can be controlled through land management strategies.
   D.   Reporting Of Spills: Any spill of a regulated substance in excess of
the nonaggregate quantity thresholds established by the list of hazardous waste
(40 CFR part 261, subpart D), 40 CFR appendix VIII - hazardous constituents and
EPA designation reportable quantities and notification requirements for
hazardous substances under CERCLA, 40 CFR 302, effective July 3, 1986, shall be
reported by telephone to the city within one hour of the discovery of the
spill. Cleanup shall commence immediately upon discovery of the spill. A full
written report shall be submitted to the city within fifteen (15) days of
discovery of the spill.
   E.   Best Management Practices: Under the provisions of this chapter, any
potential contamination sources within the city boundaries shall incorporate
and utilize best management practices in their operations. BMPs that reduce the
potential for spills and leaks at a site to occur and enter the groundwater
shall be construed within the context of this chapter to include, but not be
limited to, structural and nonstructural practices, conservation practices and
operation and maintenance procedures as specified by the state department of
environmental quality, division of safe drinking water, and the EPA. (Ord. 99-
16, 12-7-1999)
8-2-6: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Exclusions: The following substances are not subject to the provisions
of this chapter; provided, that these substances are handled, stored and
disposed of in a manner that does not result in an unauthorized discharge or
cause contamination of the groundwater:
      1.   Required substances stored at residences that do not exceed ten (10)
pounds or five (5) gallons and used for personal, family or household purposes;
      2.   Commercial products limited to use at the site solely for office or
janitorial purposes when stored in total quantities of less than twenty (20)
pounds or ten (10) gallons;
      3.   Prepackaged consumer products available through retail sale for
personal, family or household use, that are properly stored;
      4.   Water based latex paint;
      5.   Fertilizers and treated seed;
      6.   Pesticide products and materials intended for use in weed abatement,
pest control, erosion control, soil amendment or similar applications when
applied in accordance with manufacturer's instructions, label directions and
nationally recognized standards;
      7.   Compressed gases; and
      8.   Substances or mixtures which may pose a hazard but are labeled
pursuant to the federal food, drug and cosmetic act.
   B.   Exemptions: The following are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
      1.   Continuous Transit: The transportation of any regulated substance
through any drinking water source protection zone shall be allowed; provided,
that the transporting vehicle is in continuous transit;
      2.   Vehicular And Lawn Maintenance Fuel And Lubricant Use: The use of
any petroleum products solely as an operation fuel in the vehicle or lawn
maintenance fuel tank or as a lubricant in such a vehicle shall be exempt from
the provisions of this chapter. These spent products shall be properly disposed
of in compliance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
   C.   Nonapplicability Of Exclusions And Exemptions: The exclusions set forth
in subsection A of this section and the exemptions set forth in subsection B of
this section shall not apply to zone one. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999)
8-2-7: ENFORCEMENT:
The department is hereby granted the right to enforce the provisions of this
chapter on behalf of the city. The code inspector has the right to conduct
inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The
code inspector shall inform the department and other city officials and
entities, as deemed appropriate, of the results of the inspection and whether
violations were noted. The code inspector shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter without regard to whether the wells within the city boundaries are
owned by the city. Noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter is a
violation of this chapter. In the event any person is found to be in
noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter, penalties (i.e., citations
of noncompliance, orders to cease operations or administrative penalties) may
be assessed. This chapter regulates businesses within the drinking water source
protection zones within the city. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999)
8-2-8: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Zoning Ordinance Applicable: Except as otherwise provided, the policies
and procedures for administration of any protection zone established under this
chapter, including, without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses,
exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the
existing land use ordinance for the city. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999; amd. 2012
Code)
   B.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and other restrictions, including
land use codes or development regulations conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the most stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   C.   Disputes: Disputes arising from the delineation of drinking water
source protection zones shall be directed to the drinking water source review
committee to review specific detailed delineation maps showing the boundaries.
The boundaries shall be defined, for ease of implementation of this chapter, at
least once every five (5) years, or more frequently if determined appropriate
by the city, to determine its applicability. The city may incorporate changes
as deemed appropriate.
   D.   Review: The city and the drinking water source review committee, in
consultation with all water utilities whose wells or springs lie within the
city boundaries, shall review the provisions of this chapter at least once
every five (5) years, or more frequently if determined appropriate by the city,
to determine its applicability, and may incorporate changes as deemed
appropriate. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999)
8-2-9: LIABILITY:
Any person subject to regulation under this chapter shall be liable with
respect to regulated substances emanating on or from the person's property for
all cost of removal or remedial action incurred by the city or the department
and for damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources,
including the reasonable cost of assessing such injury, destruction or loss
from the release or threatened release of a "regulated substance", as defined
in section
8-2-3 of this chapter. Such removal or remedial action by the city or the
department may include, but is not limited to, the prevention of further
contamination of groundwater, monitoring, containment and cleanup or disposal
of regulated substances resulting from spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting or dumping of any regulated substance or material which creates, or is
expected to create, an emergency or hazardous situation. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-
1999)
8-2-10: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
   A.   Violations: Whenever it is determined that there is a violation of this
chapter: (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999; amd. 2012 Code)
      1.   Any person found to be in violation of any provisions of this
chapter will be served with a written notice stating the nature of the
violation and provided a reasonable time frame for compliance. The department
will deliver notice to the violator. The notice of violation shall:
         a.   Be in writing;
         b.   Be dated and signed by the code inspector that made the
inspection or determined the violation;
         c.   Specify the violation or violations;
         d.   Provide a specific date when the violations will be corrected;
and
         e.   State that if the violation is not corrected by a specific date,
a hearing may be requested before the department.
      2.   If the violation does not pose an immediate threat to public health,
then a written warning of violation may be issued within thirty (30) days. The
violator has the opportunity to show a good faith effort to correct an
unintentional violation within a reasonable amount of time.
      3.   In the event of a discharge of a regulated substance, if the
department deems the activity to pose a real and present danger of
contaminating surface water or groundwater which would normally enter the
public water supply, the department has the authority under this chapter to
cause the immediate cessation of said activity or use of such regulated
substance, require administrative controls to mitigate said danger or initiate
other pollution control and abatement activities which it deems necessary in
its discretion.
      4.   A facility is in violation of this chapter if use of regulated
substances in a drinking water source protection zone exceeds twenty (20)
gallons or one hundred twenty (120) pounds at any time. The total use of
regulated substances may not exceed fifty (50) gallons or four hundred (400)
pounds in any twelve (12) month period.
      5.   A cease and desist order shall be issued by the department if the
violator is found not to employ BMPs and there is an immediate threat to public
health and safety, or if the violation is not corrected within the time frame
specified in a written warning previously issued to the violator. In the event
the violator fails to comply with a cease and desist order within the specified
time period, the department has the authority to initiate proceedings for
issuance of penalties and other relief as necessary. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999)
   B.   Misdemeanor Penalty: Violations of the provisions of this chapter
constitute a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999; amd. 2012 Code)
8-2-11: APPEALS:
Persons cited under the enforcement provisions of subsection
8-2-10A of this chapter, shall be afforded a process for appealing the ruling
of the department. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999)
   A.   Time Limits Specified:
      1.   If the appeal pertains to the written warning of violation
requesting the violator to correct an unintentional violation in a reasonable
amount of time, the appellant may submit to the department a written statement
demonstrating compliance or explaining a process for coming into compliance.
This written response shall be required no later than thirty (30) days from the
date of issuance of the warning. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999; amd. 2012 Code)
      2.   If the appeal pertains to a cease and desist order issued by the
department, the appellant may submit a written appeal response no later than
ten (10) days from the issuance of the order.
   B.   Content Of Appeal: The written appeal shall contain:
      1.   Documentation of compliance; or
      2.   A response to the specific violations cited in the cease and desist
order and the remedial actions planned to bring the facility into compliance
and a reasonable schedule for compliance.
   C.   Review And Response; Hearing: Upon receipt of the written appeal, the
department shall be required to review the appeal within ten (10) days of its
receipt and respond to the appellant. If the department determines that the
written response from the appellant is adequate and noncompliance issues are
addressed, the appellant will be notified by mail and no further action is
required. If the department determines that the appeals response is inadequate,
the appellant may request a hearing before the department. This hearing shall
be held within thirty (30) days of receiving the cease and desist order and
shall remain in effect until the hearing is conducted. (Ord. 99-16, 12-7-1999)
CHAPTER 3
IRRIGATION WATER AND NATURAL WATERCOURSES
SECTION:
8-3-1: Prohibited Uses Of Nonpotable Or Irrigation Water
8-3-2: Distribution Of Nonpotable Water
8-3-3: Permit Required
8-3-4: Application For Permit
8-3-5: Issuance Of Permit
8-3-6: Enforcement
8-3-1: PROHIBITED USES OF NONPOTABLE OR IRRIGATION WATER:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to:
   A.   Use or cause to be used any untreated or nonpotable water from a
pressure irrigation system for other than irrigation purposes;
   B.   Interconnect or cause to be interconnected the potable and nonpotable
portions, distribution systems or service lines of dual water supplies or
extensions;
   C.   Install or cause to be installed in the same trench or trenches the
distribution or service lines of potable and nonpotable water;
   D.   Connect or cause to be connected a service line to any distribution
system or main line carrying nonpotable water without authority of the
district, municipality, company or person having jurisdiction of the nonpotable
water supply;
   E.   Extend or cause to be extended into any building a nonpotable water
supply system or service line;
   F.   Connect or cause to be connected to any fire hydrant, a nonpotable
water supply system or service line;
   G.   Expose or cause to be exposed any portion of a nonpotable water supply
system or its extensions or service lines without identifying the same by
distinctive coloring or other suitable means sufficient to distinguish the same
from potable water supply systems, extensions or service lines. All pressure
irrigation systems and nonpotable water systems within one hundred feet (100')
of a proposed subdivision or habitable building shall be identified and
otherwise color coded as to pipe and valve color to meet state standards and
regulations;
   H.   Contaminate or cause to be contaminated any source of supply,
distribution system, or service line furnishing or carrying nonpotable water or
potable water. (1989 Code § 14-301)
8-3-2: DISTRIBUTION OF NONPOTABLE WATER:
All hydrants and sprinkling system control valves for the distribution of
nonpotable water shall be operated by a removable key, unless such valves are
of the quick coupling type, and all such keys and coupling valves shall be
removed when said hydrant or sprinkling system is not in use. (1989 Code § 14-
302)
8-3-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, replace or maintain any
building, fence, landscaping, dam, wall or other structure on or in any
watercourse or drainway within the limits of the city, or to fill, narrow or
dump materials into or obstruct such watercourses without first having obtained
a permit from the building inspector or other person designated by the city
council. (1989 Code § 14-303)
8-3-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Any person desiring a permit for any purpose, as provided in section
8-3-3 of this chapter, shall file an application therefor in writing pursuant
to the building code. (1989 Code § 14-304; amd. 2012 Code)
8-3-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
If the building inspector is satisfied that the installation or work described
in the application for permit will not result in an interference with the flow
of water in a watercourse or drainway and will not reduce its capacity to
conduct wastewater, runoff water, floodwater or to otherwise continue its
previous functions, and that the applicant has otherwise conformed to the
requirements of this chapter, he shall issue a permit therefor to the
applicant. (1989 Code § 14-305)
8-3-6: ENFORCEMENT:
Any installation or work done pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to the supervision, control, fee, enforcement and other applicable
provisions of the building code. (1989 Code § 14-304)
CHAPTER 4
BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Purposes
8-4-2: Definitions
8-4-3: Responsibility For Control
8-4-4: Requirements
8-4-5: Discontinuance Of Service For Violations
8-4-1: PURPOSES:
The purposes of this chapter are to:
   A.   Protect the safe drinking water supply of the city from the possibility
of contamination or pollution by requiring compliance with state and local
plumbing codes, health regulations, OSHA and other applicable industry
standards for water system safety within the consumer's internal distribution
system or private water system. Compliance with these minimum safety codes will
be considered reasonable vigilance for prevention of contaminants or pollutants
which could backflow into the public drinking water systems;
   B.   Promote reasonable elimination or control of cross connections in the
plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems of the consumer, as required by
state and local plumbing codes, health regulations, OSHA and other applicable
industry standards to assure water system safety; and
   C.   Provide for the administration of a continuing program of backflow
prevention which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination
or pollution of all drinking water systems. (Ord. 91-1, 1-15-1991)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: Accepted by the Utah department of environmental
quality, division of drinking water, as meeting an applicable specification or
as suitable for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other
than the purveyor's public water supply, will be considered as an auxiliary
water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's
public potable water supply or any natural source, such as a well, spring,
river, stream, harbor, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids". These
waters may be contaminated or polluted, or they may be objectionable and
constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not
have authority for sanitary control.
BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under
pressure into the feeding distribution pipes of a potable water supply system
from any source other than the intended source.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source,
other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the
potable water supply system.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow. Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained
within the Utah plumbing code and the cross connection control program for
Utah.
CONTAMINATION: A degradation of the quality of the potable water supply by
sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures
which may allow nonpotable water or industrial fluids or other material of
questionable quality to come in contact with potable water inside a
distribution system. This may include any temporary connections, such as swing
connections, removable sections, four (4) way plug valves, spools, dummy
sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices or sliding multiport tubes or
other plumbing arrangements.
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved backflow
assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is
physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or
control any actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water
system, or the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the
service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system
where there are actual or potential cross connections which cannot be
effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross connection
(isolation).
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system and a
nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly
installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
WATER PURVEYOR: The person designated to be in charge of the water department
of the city, vested with the authority and responsibility for the
implementation of an effective cross connection control program and the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 91-1, 1-15-1991; amd. 2012
Code)
8-4-3: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONTROL:
   A.   Duties:
      1.   The city shall use its best efforts to safeguard the drinking water
distribution system from reasonably foreseeable conditions leading to the
possible contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to the
backflow of contaminants or pollutants into the drinking water supply.
      2.   Drinking water system surveys or inspections of the consumer's water
distribution system shall be conducted or caused to be conducted by individuals
deemed qualified by and representing the city. Survey records shall indicate
compliance with the aforementioned health and safety standards. All such
records will be maintained by the city.
      3.   The city shall notify in writing to all consumers the need for the
periodic system survey to ensure compliance with existing applicable minimum
health and safety standards.
      4.   Selection of an approved backflow prevention assembly for
containment control required at the service entrance shall be determined from
the results of the system survey.
   B.   Consumer: It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to:
      1.   Comply with this chapter as a term and condition of supply, and
consumer's acceptance of service is admission of notice.
      2.   Purchase, install and test the assemblies required to be tested
under the Utah public drinking water regulations and maintain any backflow
prevention device/assembly required to comply with this chapter.
   C.   Plumbing Official:
      1.   The plumbing official's responsibility to enforce the applicable
sections of the plumbing code begins at the point of service (downstream or
consumer side of the meter) and continues throughout the developed length of
the consumer's water system.
      2.   The plumbing official will review all plans to ensure that
unprotected cross connections are not an integral part of the consumer's water
system. If a cross connection cannot be eliminated, it must be protected by the
installation of an air gap or an approved backflow prevention device/assembly,
in accordance with the Utah plumbing code.
      3.   Water vacating the drinking water supply must do so via an approved
air gap or an approved mechanical backflow prevention assembly, properly
installed and in accordance with the Utah plumbing code.
   D.   Certified Backflow Assembly Technician, Surveyor Or Repair Person:
      1.   Whether employed by the consumer or a utility to survey, test,
repair or maintain backflow prevention assemblies, the certified backflow
technicians, surveyors or repair persons shall:
         a.   Ensure acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for
testing, repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies;
         b.   Make reports of such testing and/or repair to the consumer, water
purveyor and the division of drinking water on forms approved for such use by
the division, and within the time frames prescribed by the division. The report
shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used;
         c.   Ensure replacement parts are equal in quality to parts originally
supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being repaired;
         d.   Retain the design, material or operational characteristics of the
assembly during testing, repair or maintenance;
         e.   Perform all tests of the mechanical devices/assemblies and be
responsible for the competence and accuracy of all tests and reports;
         f.   Ensure his license is current, the testing equipment being used
is acceptable to the state, and is in proper operating condition; and
         g.   Be equipped with, and be competent to use, all necessary tools,
gauges and other equipment necessary to properly test and maintain backflow
prevention assemblies.
      2.   The certified technician conducting the test must tag each double
check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow assembly and
high hazard air gap, showing the serial number, date tested and by whom. The
technician's license number must also be on this tag.
      3.   In the case of a consumer requiring a commercially available
technician, any certified technician is authorized to make the test and report
the results of that test to the consumer, water purveyor and the division of
drinking water. If such a commercially tested assembly is in need of repair, a
licensed plumber shall make the actual repair. (Ord. 91-1, 1-15-1991; amd. 2012
Code)
8-4-4: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Protection Required:
      1.   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the public water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as
required by state laws, regulations, codes and this chapter. Service of water
to a consumer found to be in violation of this chapter shall be discontinued by
the water department after due process of written notification of violation and
an appropriate time suspended for voluntary compliance, if:
         a.   A backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter for
control of backflow and cross connections is not installed, tested and
maintained;
         b.   It is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed
or bypassed;
         c.   An unprotected cross connection exists on the premises; or
         d.   The periodic system survey has not been conducted.
      2.   Service shall not be restored until such conditions or defects are
corrected.
   B.   Inspections: The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all
reasonable times to authorized representatives of the water purveyor to
determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards,
including violation of this chapter, exist and for audit of the results of the
required survey (subsection
8-4-3A2 of this chapter).
   C.   Existence Of Hazard: Whenever the public water purveyor deems a service
connection's water usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water supply,
an approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at the consumer's
expense on the service line of the identified consumer's water system, at or
near the property line, or immediately inside the building being served; but,
in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line.
   D.   Type Of Assembly Required: The type of protective assembly required
under subsection C of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which
exists at the point of cross connection (whether direct or indirect) applicable
to local and state requirements or resulting from the required survey.
   E.   Presently Installed Systems: Any presently installed backflow
prevention assembly which does not meet the requirements of this section but
was approved for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and
which has been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and
maintenance requirements under subsection F of this section, be excluded from
the requirements of these rules so long as the water purveyor is assured that
they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. Whenever the existing
assembly is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum
maintenance, or when the water purveyor finds that the operation or maintenance
of this assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by
an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the local and state
requirements.
   F.   Yearly Tests And Inspections: It shall be the responsibility of the
consumer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to
have certified surveys/inspections and operational tests made at least once per
year at the consumer's expense for those assemblies required to be tested under
the state public drinking water regulations. In those instances where the
public water purveyor deems the hazard to be great, he may require certified
surveys/inspections and tests at a more frequent interval. It shall be the duty
of the public water purveyor to see that these tests are made according to the
standards set forth by the department of environmental quality, division of
drinking water.
   G.   Testing Upon Initial Installation: Any backflow prevention assembly
shall be tested within ten (10) working days of initial installation.
   H.   Installations Creating Safety Hazard: No backflow prevention assembly
shall be installed so as to create a safety hazard. Example: Installed over an
electrical panel, steam pipes, boilers, pits or above ceiling level. (Ord. 91-
1, 1-15-1991; amd. 2012 Code)
8-4-5: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR VIOLATIONS:
If violations of this chapter exist or if there has not been any corrective
action taken by the consumer within ten (10) days of the written notification
of deficiencies noted within the survey, then the water department shall deny
or immediately discontinue service to the premises by shutting off the water
until the customer has corrected the condition in conformance with the state
and city statutes relating to plumbing, safe drinking water supplies and the
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 91-1, 1-15-1991; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 5
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 1
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 2025-
11, passed 6-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
SECTION:
8-5-1: Purpose And Objectives
8-5-2: Definitions
8-5-3: Storm Drainage Utility
8-5-4: Permitted Discharges
8-5-5: Rates And Charges
8-5-6: Billing And Collection
8-5-7: Appeal Of Charges
8-5-8: Prohibitions
8-5-9: Illicit Discharges
8-5-10: Construction Stormwater Discharge Permit Required
8-5-11: Application For Permit
8-5-12: Fees For Permit
8-5-13: Contents Of Permit; Duration, Extensions
8-5-14: Transfer Or Assignment Of Permit Not Permitted
8-5-15: Waiver Of Permit Requirement
8-5-16: Review And Approval Of Permit
8-5-17: Management Concept Plan Required
8-5-18: Field Inspections
8-5-19: As Built Plans
8-5-20: Postconstruction Requirements
8-5-21: Basic Stormwater Management Design Criteria
8-5-22: Enforcement; Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  10-7-7L of this code for provisions relative to subdivisions.
8-5-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
city and its inhabitants by improving the city storm sewer system, managing and
controlling stormwater runoff, protecting property, preventing polluted water
from entering the city stormwater system and other receiving waters to the
maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. The objectives
of this chapter are to:
   A.   Provide and maintain an adequate municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) for handling stormwater runoff.
   B.   Provide fair, equitable and nondiscriminatory rates for using the storm
drainage system, which rates will generate sufficient revenues for operating,
improving and maintaining the storm drainage utility adequately. Rates shall be
applied consistently for like classes of customers.
   C.   Establish a policy that rates set will consider:
      1.   Intensity of development of land parcels;
      2.   Types of development on land parcels;
      3.   Cost of maintaining, operating, repairing and improving the system;
      4.   Quantity and quality of the runoff generated;
      5.   Public health, safety and welfare; and
      6.   Any other factors that should be considered.
   D.   Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
   E.   Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
   F.   Guide, regulate and control the design, construction, use and
maintenance of any development or other activity that results in the movement
of earth on land within the city.
   G.   Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater
runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality.
   H.   Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and
to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no
threat to public safety.
   I.   Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord.
2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words shall
mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: Employees or designees of the director of the
municipal agency designated to enforce this chapter.
BERM: An earthen mound used to direct the flow of runoff around or through a
structure.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Includes schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, design standards, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly
or indirectly into the waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, educational activities, and practices to
control plant site runoff spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or
drainage from raw material storage.
CITY: North Salt Lake City, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: North Salt Lake City council.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer or his/her authorized representatives.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to UPDES construction permits. These
include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of greater than or
equal to one acre, or construction projects less than one acre being part of a
common plan of development or sale which is greater than or equal to one acre.
Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating and demolition.
CONVEYANCE SYSTEM: Any channel or pipe for collecting and directing the
stormwater.
COUNTY: Davis County.
CULVERT: A covered channel or large diameter pipe that directs water flow below
the ground surface.
CUSTOMER OR PERSON: Any individual, public or private corporation and its
officers, partnership, association, firm, trustee, executor of an estate, the
state or its departments, institutions, bureaus or agencies, county, city,
political subdivision, or any other governmental or legal entity recognized by
law.
DEGRADATION:
   A.   Biological Or Chemical: The breakdown of chemical compounds into
simpler substances, usually less harmful than the original compound, as with
the degradation of a persistent pesticide.
   B.   Geological: Wearing down by erosion.
   C.   Water: The lowering of the water quality of a watercourse by an
increase in the amount of pollutant.
DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel whose surface has been altered by grading, filling
or construction of any improvement.
DIKE: An embankment to confine or control water, often built along the banks of
a river to prevent overflow of lowlands; a levee.
DISCHARGE: The release of stormwater or other substance from a conveyance
system or storage container.
DRAINAGE: Refers to the collection, conveyance, containment and/or discharge of
surface and storm water runoff.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): An ERU is equal to three thousand nine
hundred (3,900) square feet of impervious surface area. This is based on a
single-family residential parcel, which has an average of three thousand nine
hundred (3,900) square feet of impervious surface.
EROSION: The wearing away of land surface by wind or water. Erosion occurs
naturally from weather or runoff but can be intensified by land clearing
practices related to farming, residential or industrial development, road
building or timber cutting.
FILL: A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
FIRST FLUSH: The delivery of a disproportionately large load of pollutants
during the early part of storms due to the rapid runoff of accumulated
pollutants.
GENERAL PERMIT: A permit issued under the UPDES program to cover a class or
category of stormwater discharges.
GRADING: The cutting and/or filling of the land surface to a desired slope or
elevation.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Byproducts of society that can pose a substantial or potential
hazard to human health or the environment when improperly managed. Possesses at
least one of four (4) characteristics (flammable, corrosivity, reactivity or
toxicity), or appears on special EPA lists.
HEAVY METALS: Metals of high specific gravity, present in municipal and
industrial wastes, that pose long term environmental hazards. Such metals
include cadmium, chromium, cobalt, copper, lead, mercury, nickel and zinc.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm
drain system, except discharges from emergency firefighting activities and
other discharges exempted in this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any physical connection to a publicly maintained storm
drain system allowing discharge of nonstormwater which has not been permitted
by the public entity responsible for the operation and maintenance of the
system.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A hard surface which prevents or retards the infiltration
of water. Some examples of impervious surfaces are rooftops, concrete or
asphalt paving, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, and
gravel that has been subject to surface traffic, compacted native surfaces, and
earthen materials, and oiled, macadam or other surfaces which impede the
natural infiltration of stormwater.
INDIVIDUAL PERMIT: A permit issued under the UPDES program for a specific
facility, whereby the unique characteristics of that facility may be addressed
through the imposition of special conditions or requirements.
INFILTRATION: The downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil.
The infiltration capacity is expressed in terms of inches/hour.
INGRESS/EGRESS: The points of access to and from a property.
INLET: An entrance into a ditch, storm sewer or other waterway.
MITIGATION: Stormwater control facilities located on a parcel, which either
hold runoff for a short period of time before releasing it to the storm
drainage system, or hold water until it evaporates or infiltrates into the
ground.
MULCH: A natural or artificial layer of plant residue or other materials
covering the land surface which conserves moisture, holds soil in place, aids
in establishing plant cover and minimizes temperature fluctuations.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A municipally owned and operated
stormwater collection system that may consist of any or all of the following:
curb and gutter, drainage swales, piping, ditches, canals, detention basins,
inlet boxes, or any other system used to convey stormwater that discharges into
canals, ditches, streams, rivers or lakes not owned and operated by that
municipality.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The provisions of the
federal clean water act establishing specific permit requirements for the
control of stormwater discharges. It is the environmental protection agency's
program to control the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
NONPOINT SOURCE: Pollution caused by diffuse sources (not a single location
such as a pipe) such as agricultural or urban runoff.
OFF SITE: Any area lying upstream of the site that drains onto the site and any
area lying downstream of the site to which the site drains.
ON SITE: The entire property that includes the proposed development.
OUTFALL: The point, location or structure where wastewater or drainage
discharges from a sewer pipe, ditch or other conveyance to a receiving body of
water.
PARCEL: The smallest, separately segregated unit of land having an owner. A
parcel has boundaries and surface area, and is documented with a property
number by the county.
PLAT: A map or representation of a subdivision showing the division of a tract
or parcel of land into lots, blocks, streets or other divisions and
dedications.
POINT SOURCE: Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but
not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete
fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or
vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
POLLUTANT: Generally, any substance introduced into the environment that
adversely affects the usefulness of a resource. "Pollutants" may include, but
are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive
fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish,
garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so
that the same may cause or contribute to pollution; sediment, floatables;
pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: City public works director or his/her authorized
representatives.
RECEIVING WATERS: Bodies of water or surface water systems receiving water from
upstream constructed (or natural) systems.
RETENTION: The holding of runoff in a basin without release except by means of
evaporation, infiltration or emergency bypass.
RIPARIAN: A relatively narrow strip of land that borders a stream or river.
RIPRAP: A combination of large stone, cobbles and boulders used to line
channels, stabilize banks, reduce runoff velocities or filter out sediment.
RUNOFF: That part of precipitation, snowmelt or irrigation water that runs off
the land into streams or other surface water.
RUNON: Stormwater surface flow or other surface flow which enters property
other than that where it originated.
SEDIMENTATION: The process of depositing soil particles, clays, sands or other
sediments that were picked up by runoff.
SHEET FLOW: Runoff which flows over the ground surface as a thin, even layer,
not concentrated in a channel.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PARCEL: Any parcel of land containing a single-family
dwelling unit.
SOURCE CONTROL: A practice or structural measure to prevent pollutants from
entering stormwater runoff or other environmental media.
STABILIZATION: The proper placing, grading and/or covering of soil, rock or
earth to ensure its resistance to erosion, sliding or other movement.
STORM DRAIN: A slotted opening leading to an underground pipe or open ditch for
carrying surface runoff.
STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES: Any facility, improvement, development or property
made for controlling stormwater quantity and quality.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All manmade storm drainage facilities and conveyances,
and natural stormwater drainage channels owned or maintained by the city that
store, control, treat and/or convey stormwater.
STORM DRAINAGE UTILITY OR UTILITY: The utility created by this chapter, which
operates, maintains, regulates and improves storm drainage facilities and
programs within North Salt Lake City.
STORMWATER: Water produced by storms, surface drainage, snow and ice melt, and
other water handled by the storm drainage system. It excludes infiltration.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM: A document which describes the best management
practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify
sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or
reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems and/or
receiving waters.
SWALE: An elongated depression in the land surface that is at least seasonally
wet, is usually heavily vegetated and is normally without flowing water. Swales
direct stormwater flows into primarily drainage channels and allow some of the
stormwater to infiltrate into the ground surface.
TREATMENT CONTROL BMP: A BMP that is intended to remove pollutants from
stormwater.
UNDEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has not been altered by grading, filling or
construction.
UTAH POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (UPDES): The program created when
the U.S. EPA NPDES program granted primacy to the state of Utah. It is the
UPDES which authorizes municipal stormwater discharges under the general permit
for discharges from small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) to the
waters of the state of Utah.
WATERS OF THE STATE: Surface waters and groundwaters within the boundaries of
the state of Utah and subject to its jurisdiction.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: Surface watercourses and water bodies as defined
in 40 CFR section 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels
and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways
may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at
and during all times and seasons.
WETLANDS: An area that is regularly saturated by surface water or groundwater
and subsequently characterized by a prevalence of vegetation that is adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions. Examples include swamps, bogs, marshes
and estuaries. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-3: STORM DRAINAGE UTILITY:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created and established a North Salt Lake City
storm drainage utility, which shall operate under the direction of the city
engineer. All storm drainage facilities owned by the city constitute the
physical assets of the North Salt Lake City storm drain utility.
   B.   Responsibility For Administration: The city engineer shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or
duties imposed upon the city may be delegated by the city engineer to persons
or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city.
   C.   Ultimate Responsibility: The standards set forth herein and promulgated
pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not
intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure compliance with
federal or state regulations, or that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
   D.   Operation Of Utility Facilities And Assets: The utility shall operate,
maintain and improve all existing city storm drainage facilities used for the
conveyance of stormwaters, through, under or over lands or watercourses,
beginning at a point where the stormwaters first enter the storm drainage
system of the city and ending in each instance at a point where the stormwaters
exit from the system. However, the utility does not include government owned
streets or those facilities operated and maintained by or for the county or the
state. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-4: PERMITTED DISCHARGES:
The only substance dischargeable into the city storm drainage system is
stormwater, surface drainage, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated groundwater,
roof runoff, cooling water or nonpolluted water. Such water may be discharged
only into storm drains which have adequate capacity for the accommodation of
such water. Such discharged water shall comply with the city stormwater quality
standards. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-5: RATES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Service Fees Imposed: The city will, by resolution of the city council,
impose storm drainage fee rates and charges on each parcel of real property
within the city, except governmentally owned streets. The charges shall fund
the administration, planning design, construction, water quality programming,
operation, maintenance and repair of existing and future stormwater facilities.
   B.   Method Of Determining Contribution Of Stormwater:
      1.   Contributions of stormwater from nonresidential parcels and
residential parcels larger than duplexes have been ascertained by evaluating
land surface and measuring the amount of impervious surface.
      2.   Contributions of stormwater from residential parcels up to and
including duplexes have been ascertained by sampling the amount of residential
impervious areas.
   C.   Classifications: Storm drainage service fees shall be assessed on each
parcel of real property within the city (including city owned properties),
except government owned streets and city stormwater facilities. Service fees
shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be
differentiated according to the following classifications:
      Residential parcels: Single-family residential and duplex parcels shall
constitute one ERU per month.
      Undeveloped parcels: Undeveloped parcels shall have no charges assessed.
      Other parcels: Charges for all other parcels shall be computed by
multiplying the total ERUs for a parcel by the monthly rate. Total ERUs are
calculated by dividing total square feet of impervious surface by three
thousand nine hundred (3,900) (1 ERU), rounded to the nearest whole number.
      Credit for on parcel mitigation: Nonresidential parcels with mitigating
stormwater facilities, e.g., approved on site detention/retention of
stormwater, approved discharge of stormwater through a sewer connection or
other approved and complete on site detention methods that meet the city design
and maintenance standards may be eligible for a service fee credit. The
parcel's owner or agent must make application for this credit to the city
engineer. The amount of credit is based on the following formula:
         P = 50 + 50 (Qr/Qp)
      Formula symbols have the following meaning:
      P = Percentage of storm drainage fees to be applied to the parcel
      50 = Percentage representing utility's fixed operation and maintenance
costs
      50 = Percentage representing costs for utility's capital improvement
program
      Qr = Restricted stormwater discharge from a parcel
      Qp = Peak stormwater discharge from the same parcel that would result if
the mitigating facilities were not in place.
   The city engineer may, if requested, provide a complete on site mitigation
evaluation at the expense of the parcel owner or authorized agent.
   Credit for regional stormwater mitigation: Nonresidential parcels with
mitigating stormwater facilities that serve the city regional stormwater needs
as prescribed by the stormwater master plan and utilizing methods that meet the
city design and maintenance standards, may be eligible for a service fee
credit. The credit may be granted if property owners have not already been
compensated for or agreed to construct the facilities as part of the
development process. The parcel owner or agent must make application for this
credit to the city engineer.
   If a request for mitigation credit is granted, the credit shall be applied
to all charges from the time of the appealed billing, and will be reflected on
the next billing thirty (30) days after appeal is granted.
   Low income relief: A single-family residential parcel owner who qualifies
for the city low income relief, as determined by resolution of the city council
and set forth in the fee schedule, may also be eligible for a reduction in the
service charge for their parcel. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-6: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
   A.   Utility Enterprise Fund: This section creates the storm drainage
utility fund. All revenues received from storm drainage user fees shall be
placed in the enterprise fund as a designated fund, to be left separate and
apart from all other city funds. The collection, accounting and expenditure of
all stormwater utility funds shall be in accordance with the state uniform
fiscal procedures act.
   B.   Billing: The city shall bill property owners for storm drainage utility
services. Billing amounts shall be included as a separate line item on utility
bills. A billing will also be sent to owners of parcels within the city who are
not city utility customers.
   C.   Collection: Partial payments on a combined utility bill shall be
applied consistent with the billing procedures established by the city. Fees
and charges shall be considered delinquent if not paid as determined by the
procedures established by the city and will be a debt to the city, which shall
be subject to recovery in a civil action. Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated
section 10-8-38, the city may cause the water service to the property to be
shut off for failure to pay for the storm drainage service furnished, as set
forth on the billing. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-7: APPEAL OF CHARGES:
   A.   Appeal To City Engineer: Any nonresidential customer who disagrees with
the storm drainage user fee for his or her parcel may apply to the city
engineer for a user fee adjustment. The adjustment request must state the
grounds for adjustment and must be filed in writing with the city engineer no
later than thirty (30) days after receipt of billing. The city engineer shall
review the request and basis for user charges to determine whether an error was
made in the calculation or application of the fee. The city engineer's decision
shall be final, unless appealed.
   B.   Further Appeal To City Manager: An appeal of a city engineer's decision
may be brought before the city manager within thirty (30) days after the date
of the city engineer's decision. The decision of the city manager is final and
conclusive. If an appeal of charges is successful, credit will be applied to
all charges from the time of the appealed billing, and will be reflected on a
future billing after the appeal is granted. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-8: PROHIBITIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Track mud or sediment onto public streets by construction or delivery
vehicles. Provisions shall be made at all construction sites to clean the
vehicles before vehicles leave the site.
   B.   Wash out concrete trucks at all sites other than preapproved designated
areas. Dumping of excess concrete shall not be allowed.
   C.   Stockpile construction or yard improvement materials or debris in the
street or in the gutter. This includes, but is not limited to, ramps being
constructed for temporary access across the existing curb and gutter;
stockpiling of topsoil or other fill material; stockpiling of sand, gravel,
landscape rock, bark, mulch or any other material that may be considered a
source of pollution in the stormwater system. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-9: ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged into the
municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not
limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
stormwater.
   B.   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any discharge to the storm
drain system is prohibited, except as described as follows:
      1.   Water line flushing or other potable water sources;
      2.   Diverted stream flows;
      3.   Rising groundwater;
      4.   Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains;
      5.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
      6.   Foundation or footing drains;
      7.   Crawl space pumps;
      8.   Air conditioning condensation;
      9.   Springs;
      10.   Individual residential washing of vehicles;
      11.   Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
      12.   Swimming pools (if dechlorinated - less than 1 ppm chlorine);
      13.   Emergency firefighting activities;
      14.   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety;
      15.   Residual street wash water;
      16.   Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges;
      17.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the
test.
   C.   The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under a UPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the federal environmental
protection agency or Utah department of environmental quality; provided, that
the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit,
waiver or order and other applicable laws and regulations; and provided, that
written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.
   D.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
   E.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, connections of
sanitary sewer lines to the MS4. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016; amd. Ord. 2022-03,
6-7-2022)
8-5-10: CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   City Permit Required: Owners and operators of any construction site
within the jurisdictional limits of the city are required to obtain a
stormwater discharge permit from the city. Residential landscaping and
gardening activities are exempt from this requirement.
   B.   State Permit Required: Owners and operators of any construction site
within the jurisdictional limits of the city which disturbs one acre or more of
surface area, or is part of a common plan of development or sale that disturbs
one acre or more, are required to submit an SWPPP in accordance with the
general construction permit or the common plan permit, respectively, and obtain
an NOI from the Utah department of environmental quality.
   C.   Plan Approval: No person shall be granted a stormwater discharge permit
without the approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan by the city
public works director if required under the UPDES requirements. The SWPPP is
required to be in the current format as provided on the Utah department of
environmental quality's website.
   D.   Exempt Activities: No stormwater discharge permit is required for the
following activities:
      1.   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources.
      2.   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted main or accessory use. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-11: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Filing: Application for a construction stormwater discharge permit
shall be filed with the city engineer. Contractors are required to obtain a
permit prior to commencement of work. Each permit application shall bear the
name and address and contact information of the owner of the site, developer of
the site, contractor working at the site, and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee and a
site specific stormwater pollution prevention plan.
   B.   Bond Or Other Security Required: The applicant is required to file a
faithful performance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security in
an amount deemed sufficient by the engineering department to cover all costs of
implementation and maintenance of the approved erosion and sediment control
plan, including costs for improvements, landscaping and maintenance of
improvements for such period as specified by the city, and also to cover
engineering and inspections costs and the cost to repair improvements installed
on the site and damaged by uncontrolled erosion and sediment from the
construction site. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-12: FEES FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Required: The city shall charge and the permittee shall pay upon
issuance of the permit, fees for costs associated with the work performed under
the permit. Such costs could include costs for reviewing the project and
issuing the permit, inspections of the project, deterioration of existing
public improvements or diminution of the useful life of existing public
improvements, and other costs to the city associated with the work to be done
under the permit. All costs shall be assessed in a nondiscriminatory manner.
   B.   Reduction Or Waiver: The city engineer may reduce or waive permit fees
or penalties, or portion thereof, provided for in this chapter when he/she
determines that such permit fee or penalty:
      1.   Pertains to construction or rehabilitation of housing for persons
whose income is below the median income level for the city; or
      2.   Pertains to work by a contractor on city owned systems at the
request of the city.
   C.   Additional Charges: Additional charges to cover the reasonable cost and
expenses of any required engineering review, inspection and work site
restoration associated with each undertaking may be charged by the city to each
permittee, in addition to the permit fee.
   D.   Structure Established: The fee structure for review of any stormwater
discharge permit application shall be established by the city engineer. All of
the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to
support local plan review, inspection and program administration, and shall be
made prior to the issuance of any permit for the development. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-
16-2016)
8-5-13: CONTENTS OF PERMIT; DURATION, EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Starting, Estimated Completion Date: Each permit application shall
state the starting date and estimated completion date. Work shall be completed
within a reasonable period of time from the starting date or as determined by
the city engineer. Such determination shall be based upon factors reasonably
related to the work to be performed under the permit. Such factors may include,
in addition to other factors related to the work to be performed, the
following:
      1.   The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
      2.   Protecting existing public improvements impacted by the work;
      3.   The season of the year during which the work is to be performed, as
well as the current weather and its impact on public safety and the
environment.
The city engineer shall be notified by the permittee of commencement of the
work within twenty four (24) hours prior to commencing work. The permit shall
be valid for the time period specified in the permit.
   B.   Extension: If the work is not completed during such period, prior to
the expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to the city engineer for
an additional permit or an extension, which may be granted by the city engineer
for good cause shown.
   C.   Length Of Extension: The length of the extension requested by the
permittee shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer and will
require a written review and amendment to the stormwater pollution prevention
plan as required. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-14: TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT NOT PERMITTED:
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be
performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the work
to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the
permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under
the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this
chapter and under said permit. Subcontractors shall also be appropriately
licensed, insured and bonded. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-15: WAIVER OF PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
   A.   Request Filed: Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management
as required by this chapter unless a written request is filed to waive this
requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater pollution prevention plan
requirements shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval.
   B.   Conditions: The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be
waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant; provided,
that at least one of the following conditions applies:
      1.   It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter.
      2.   Alternative minimum requirements for on site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater pollution
prevention plan that has been approved by the public works department and the
implementation of the plan is required by local ordinance.
      3.   Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off site facility.
The off site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately
sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than
that which would be afforded by on site practices, and there is a legally
obligated entity responsible for long term operation and maintenance of the
stormwater practice.
      4.   The engineering department finds that meeting the minimum on site
management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical
characteristics of a site.
      5.   Nonstructural practices will be used on the site that reduce:
         a.   The generation of stormwater from the site;
         b.   The size and cost of stormwater storage; and
         c.   The pollutants generated at the site.
The amount of credit available for using such nonstructural practices shall be
determined by the public works department.
   C.   Prohibited Impacts To Downstream Waterways: In instances where one of
the conditions above applies, the city engineer may grant a waiver from strict
compliance with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable
mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a waiver, the
applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the
waiver will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways:
      1.   Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams and other
structures;
      2.   Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
      3.   Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation;
      4.   Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property.
   D.   Mitigation Measures: Furthermore, where compliance with minimum
requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy
the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by
the jurisdictional stormwater authority. Mitigation measures may include, but
are not limited to, the following:
      1.   The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of
an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands
should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent
buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat;
      2.   The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage
improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that
currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in
accordance with the purposes and standards of this chapter;
      3.   Monetary contributions (fee in lieu) to fund stormwater management
activities, such as research and studies (e.g., regional wetland delineation
studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macroinvertebrates,
stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species studies, hydrologic
studies, and monitoring of stormwater management practices).
   E.   Fee In Lieu Of Stormwater Management Practices: Where the public works
department waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management
requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate
stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the
applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the
public works department. When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required
stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in
accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and the stormwater
authority agree on a greater alternate contribution) established by the public
works department, and based on the cubic feet of storage required for
stormwater management of the development in question. All of the monetary
contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program
project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any
building permit for the development.
   F.   Dedication Of Land: In lieu of a monetary contribution, partially or
totally, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management
by entering into an agreement with the city engineer for the granting of an
easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the
construction of an off site stormwater management facility. The agreement shall
be entered into by the applicant and the city engineer prior to the recording
of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the
building permit. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-16: REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF PERMIT:
   A.   Review; Determination: The engineering department will review each
application to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
regulation. Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the
engineering department shall, in writing:
      1.   Approve the permit application;
      2.   Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions
as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation,
and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
      3.   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the reasons and
procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. (Ord. 2016-
12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-17: MANAGEMENT CONCEPT PLAN REQUIRED:
   A.   Information Required; Intent: A stormwater management concept plan
shall be required with all permit applications and will include sufficient
information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.), to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all
proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water
resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for
managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this
conceptual planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management
measures necessary for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for
management of stormwater runoff from future development. The stormwater
pollution prevention plan shall be prepared in accordance with the checklist
provided by the public works department.
   B.   Previously Developed Sites: For development or redevelopment occurring
on a previously developed site, an applicant shall be required to include
within the stormwater concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater
runoff discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this
chapter to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-18: FIELD INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Field inspections during preconstruction and construction shall be
conducted by the public works department or other designated agent as outlined
in the inspection checklist provided by the public works department.
   B.   Final approval inspections will be conducted by both the public works
department (for SWPPP completion and notice of termination for the stormwater
permit) and the engineering department (for final acceptance of stormwater
facilities).
   C.   Access onto private property is authorized for the city engineer, the
public works director, or other designated qualified personnel to inspect
construction stormwater BMPs on private properties that discharge to the city
stormwater system.
   D.   Access onto private properties that discharge to the city stormwater
system is authorized for the public works director to inspect existing
stormwater facilities to ensure proper function and maintenance on an annual
basis. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-19: AS BUILT PLANS:
All applicants are required to submit actual as built plans for any stormwater
management practices located on site after final construction is completed. The
plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management
facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection
by the public works department is required before the release of any
performance securities can occur. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-20: POSTCONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
Unless judged by the public works department to be exempt or granted a waiver,
the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management
at all sites:
   A.   All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to
control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified
design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater runoff. These practices
should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to
infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots
and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for
both water quality and quantity.
   B.   Stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not be allowed
to discharge into a jurisdictional wetland or local water body without adequate
treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on
wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the
public works department. In no case shall the impact on functional values be
any less than allowed by the army corps of engineers (ACE) or the department of
environmental quality (DEQ) responsible for natural resources.
   C.   Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained by promoting
infiltration through the use of structural and nonstructural methods. At a
minimum, annual recharge from the postdevelopment site shall mimic the annual
recharge from predevelopment site conditions.
   D.   Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher
potential pollutant loadings, as determined by the city engineer, may require
the use of specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices.
   E.   Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the public
works department to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater
design requirements. (Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
8-5-21: BASIC STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA:
   A.   Site Design Feasibility: Stormwater management practices for a site
shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors
that should be considered are:
      1.   Topography;
      2.   Drainage area;
      3.   Depth to water table;
      4.   Soil types;
      5.   Slope of the site;
      6.   Location of the site in relation to environmentally sensitive areas.
   B.   Conveyance Issues: All stormwater best management practices shall be
designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants
and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Maximizing of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points;
      2.   Protection of inlet and outfall structures;
      3.   Elimination of erosive flow velocities;
      4.   Providing underdrain systems, where applicable.
   C.   Landscaping Plans Required: All stormwater best management practices
must have a landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the
practice and how and who will manage and maintain this vegetation. This plan
must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or soil conservation
district.
   D.   Low Impact Development (LID) Requirements: For new development or
redevelopment projects that disturb greater than or equal to one acre,
including projects less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale, the evaluation of an LID approach is required to implement
BMPs that infiltrate, evapotranspire, or harvest and use stormwater from the
site to protect water quality (see section
10-20-3 of this code).
   E.   Maintenance Agreements: All stormwater treatment practices shall have
an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system
functions as designed.
      1.   This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements
required to access and inspect the stormwater treatment practices, and to
perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the
stormwater treatment practice. The agreement shall include provisions allowing
for access and inspections on a reasonable basis. In addition, a legally
binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance
of all stormwater treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any
permits for land disturbance activities.
      2.   If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of
the maintenance covenant, the public works department, after reasonable notice,
may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by
performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working
condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, the public works department shall
notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management
facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall
have seven (7) days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an
approved manner. After proper notice, the public works department may assess
the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and
the cost of the work may be placed on the utility bill and collected as
ordinary utility fees by the city. Failure to pay any portion of the fee may
result in termination of water service, power service, or both. (Ord. 2016-12,
8-16-2016)
8-5-22: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
   A.   Stop Work Order; Revocation Of Permit: In the event that any person
holding a building permit or site development permit pursuant to this chapter
violates the terms of the permit or implants site development in such a manner
as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons
residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be
materially detrimental to the public welfare, environment or injurious to
property or improvements in the neighborhood, the public works department may
suspend or revoke the site development permit and/or building permit.
   B.   Violation And Penalties: Whenever the public works department finds
that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of
this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written
notice to the responsible person or property owner. Such notice may require,
without limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      3.   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
      6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   C.   Misdemeanor: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code, and each day during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted, shall
constitute a separate offense.
   D.   Public Nuisance Declared: Any work done or condition created or
allowed, in violation of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, which may be abated by a civil legal action by the city attorney.
(Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016)
TITLE 9
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 1
CONSTRUCTION CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Building Official
9-1-2: Uniform Code Adopted
9-1-3: Retaining Walls
9-1-4: Fees And Bonds
9-1-5: Enforcement
9-1-6: Violations
9-1-7: Permits And Inspections
9-1-8: Enforcement; Penalty
9-1-9: Starting Work Without A Permit
9-1-1: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
   A.   Position Created: There is hereby created the position of building
official.
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   Stop Orders: The building official shall have the power to order
work stopped on all construction in the city when such work is being done in
violation of the subdivision or zoning ordinance. Work shall not be resumed
after the issuance of such order, except on the written permission of the
building official; provided, that if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be
followed by a written stop order. Such written stop order may be served by any
peace officer or authorized person.
      2.   Entry Upon Premises: The building official shall have the power to
enter into any building or the premises where the work of altering, repairing
or constructing any building or structure is underway, for the purpose of
making inspections at any reasonable hour, pursuant to any of the provisions of
this title and title 10 of this code.
      3.   Additional Duties, Generally: The building official shall, in
addition to all other duties imposed on him by the city policy and procedures
manual and adopted state and national codes:
         a.   Enforce the provisions of the building and related codes as
adopted by the city or the state, including federal and international codes.
         b.   Inspect any building, structure, ditch, sign, fence or object to
determine its safety and effect on the persons who are within the city. (Ord.
95-5, 3-21-1995; amd. 2012 Code)
9-1-2: UNIFORM CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Building Code: The City of North Salt Lake hereby adopts
those certain Construction Codes, as adopted by the State of Utah pursuant to
the State Construction Code Administration Act, including all Construction
Codes, which may be adopted by the State from year to year pursuant to the Act.
   B.   In the event the State of Utah adopts or enacts a more recent version
of any code referenced in this chapter or in Utah Code Annotated title 15A,
that by virtue of its adoption by the State would require an amendment to this
chapter, this chapter shall be deemed amended to adopt the newer version of the
code on the effective date thereof.
   C.   Revisions: The following sections of the international building code,
(said current edition as adopted by the State of Utah), are hereby revised and
incorporated herein:
      Section 101.1 Insert: City of North Salt Lake.
      Section 108.2 Insert: see City of North Salt Lake fee appendix.
      Section 1612.3 Insert: City of North Salt Lake.
      Section 1612.3 Insert: December 22, 1981. (Ord. 2010-09, 6-15-2010, eff.
7-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2013-15, 7-16-2013; Ord. 2020-13, 6-16-2020)
9-1-3: RETAINING WALLS:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   This section applies to all “retaining walls”, as defined in this
section.
   B.   Retaining Wall Defined: “Retaining wall” is defined as any structure
designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or other materials.
Examples include block walls, rockery walls, concrete walls and segmented
walls. A “retaining wall” is not considered a fence.
   C.   Permit Required:
      1.   The following permits shall be required for the construction of all
retaining walls within the city regardless of height or location:
         a.   Land Use Permit: All retaining walls less than four feet (4')
tall, measured from the top of the wall to the finished grade.
         b.   Building Permit: All retaining walls or retaining wall systems
which are greater than four feet (4'), measured from the top of the wall to the
finished grade, or walls of any height subject to a Geologic Hazards Review.
      2.   Geologic Hazards Review: All retaining walls shall be subject to a
Geologic Hazards Review, in accordance with Title 10, Chapter 12, Sensitive
Area District and Geologic Hazards, as follows:
         a.   Any lot or parcel located within the Sensitive Lands Overlay
Zone;
         b.   Any subdivision lot which has been designated as a Restricted Lot
on the recorded subdivision plat;
         c.   Any lot or parcel which has been deemed a restricted lot, as
defined in section
10-1-47; or
         d.   Any lot or parcel with an average slope of fifteen percent (15%)
or greater.
      3.   This requirement includes all cantilever concrete retaining walls,
as well as nonconventional wall systems, such as reinforced earth structures,
rockery walls, etc.
      4.   Wall systems four feet (4') tall or taller which are based on
organic material, such as treated lumber or railroad ties, are not allowed.
      5.   To obtain a building permit for a retaining wall, the following
shall be submitted to the city for review:
         a.   An engineered site plan and wall design stamped by a civil,
structural or geotechnical engineer registered and qualified to perform work in
the state. The design shall:
            (1)   Include a site plan showing:
               (A)   The boundary of the property, including any required
setbacks, easements, and building envelopes;
               (B)   The existing and proposed grading;
               (C)   Location of proposed retaining wall(s) noting the height
and elevation of the top and bottom of wall;
               (D)   The extent of cuts and/or fills that will be necessary to
construct the retaining wall; and
               (E)   Shading of all areas on the property with slopes thirty
percent (30%) or greater.
            (2)   Include sections and details to be utilized in construction
of the retaining wall, including a drainage system to relieve hydrostatic
pressure on the retaining wall.
            (3)   Be specific to the site and not a generic standard design.
         b.   If the retaining wall is to be a rock retaining wall, in addition
to the structural report, the contractor shall submit a geological report by a
certified geologist identifying the type of rock to be used as a rock that will
hold the slope and not deteriorate over time. Rock retained slopes may not be
constructed of conglomerate rock.
         c.   Additional requirements associated with retaining walls subject
to Geologic Hazards may be required as prescribed in Title 10, Chapter 12 on a
site specific basis.
   D.   Special Requirements for Rockery Walls:
      1.   Construction plans must show a detailed cross section showing the
minimum rock size, for each lift, a maximum wall height, backfill
specification, drainage, slope of adjacent ground, embedment into existing
soil, and batter.
      2.   Monitoring: All phases of rockery wall construction shall be
monitored by the geotechnical engineer employed by the owner/contractor to
verify that the nature and quality of the materials being used are appropriate
and that the construction is in accordance with the engineered design. The
geotechnical engineer shall verify to the city in writing that the materials
and construction of the rockery walls as-built is accordance with the
engineered design after construction is complete.
      3.   Fill Compaction: Where the rockery walls are constructed in front of
a fill, the fill shall be placed and compacted in a manner that will provide a
competent fill mass as noted in the drawings. All fills shall consist of
quality fill meeting the geotechnical engineers recommendations as noted on the
drawings or report.
      4.   Rock Selection: Rock shall be of a generally cubical, tabular, or
rectangular shape. Rounded rocks shall not be used and internal void spaces in
the facing shall be kept to a minimum. Prior to being placed, all rock shall be
inspected and approved by the geotechnical engineer. The rock source shall be
preapproved by the geotechnical engineer. Rocks shall be placed to decrease in
size with increasing wall height. Rocks shall be placed to bear on good flat-
to-flat surfaces. The long dimension of the rocks shall extend back toward the
cut/fill face. Rocks shall bear on at least two (2) or more other rocks.
      5.   Rock placement: Rock shall be placed as recommended by the
geotechnical engineer. A keyway (one (1) foot minimum) as recommended by the
geotechnical engineer shall be constructed into unyielding soil.
      6.   Steepness of walls: The steepness of the rockery wall shall be noted
on the drawings.
   E.   Height and Terracing:
      1.   For the purposes of this subsection, the height of a retaining wall
is measured as the total height of the wall from the top of the exposed face to
the finished grade.
      2.   A single retaining wall shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height.
      3.   Terracing of retaining walls is permitted where justified by
topographic conditions, but the combined height of all walls shall not exceed
sixteen feet (16').
         a.   In a terrace of retaining walls, there shall be a minimum
separation of one-half (½) the height of the taller wall as measured from the
back of the lower wall to the face of higher wall.
         b.   Walls with a separation of at least two (2) times the height of
the largest of two (2) walls from the face of the wall to the face of the wall
shall be considered as separate walls.
         c.   Terraced retaining walls shall be constructed out of one type of
material that is similar in appearance, color, and texture.
      4.   Retaining walls within the front yard public utility easement shall
be limited to a height of three (3) feet, except by conditional use permit.
      5.   Height Exception: The City Engineer may approve, in writing, an
exception to the maximum height of a retaining wall as deemed appropriate in
his or her sole discretion based upon the circumstances and conditions of the
proposed site and grading plan. Any retaining wall proposed in excess of eight
feet (8') or terraced walls in excess of sixteen feet (16') shall be supported
by a report prepared and signed by a professional engineering geologist and
geotechnical engineer attesting to the appropriateness, safety and stability of
the proposed retaining wall. Such documentation and report shall be prepared at
the applicant’s expense and shall address the safety and stability of the
proposed wall(s) and surrounding properties. Height exceptions will only be
considered for:
         a.   Walls installed and approved as a part of the overall subdivision
improvement plan necessary for the installation of critical infrastructure;
         b.   Where necessary to adequately address a geologic hazard; or
         c.   To repair, replace, or address a deficiency in an existing
retaining wall.
   F.   Setbacks:
      1.   The setback from a retaining wall to a building or structure shall
meet all setback requirements as outlined in the International Building Code
and International Residential Code.
      2.   The setback from a retaining wall to a building shall be equal to or
greater than the height of the retaining wall.
      3.   Retaining walls constructed in utility easements shall not be
constructed without prior written permission in a form acceptable to the city
from each affected utility. Notwithstanding any written permission, the city
reserves the right to deny a permit for a wall within, or over, a utility
easements.
   G.   Clearance from Utility Facilities:
      1.   No retaining wall may be located closer than five (5) feet:
         a.   Fire hydrants;
         b.   Water meter boxes;
         c.   Telecommunication pedestals; and
         d.   Street lights.
   H.   Inspections And Final Report:
      1.   Along with the wall design and site plan, the design engineer shall
submit an inspection frequency schedule for city approval.
      2.   The design engineer shall be responsible for all inspections needed
for final approval and acceptance of the retaining wall when construction is
complete. A final report from the engineer shall state that the retaining wall
was built according to the submitted design. The report shall include details
of the inspections of the wall in accordance with the approved inspection
frequency schedule. All pertinent compaction testing shall also be included
with the final report.
   I.   Maintenance: All retaining walls must be maintained in a structurally
safe and sound condition and in good repair.
   J.   Conflict: In cases of conflict between the provisions contained within
this title and adopted zoning regulations, building code, subdivision
ordinance, sensitive area and geologic hazards ordinances, or any other
ordinance of the City of North Salt Lake, the most restrictive provision shall
apply. (Ord. 2010-08, 6-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2020-13, 6-16-2020; Ord. 2023-06, 5-
2-2023)
9-1-4: FEES AND BONDS:
Permit, development, usage and other relative fees and bonds shall be in such
amounts as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule resolution. (2012 Code)
9-1-5: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform any act
prohibited by this chapter, or to fail or refuse to perform any act commanded
in this chapter, or to aid or abet therein, or to fail or refuse to comply with
any order issued by the building official, code enforcement official, or
agents, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. No permits shall be issued
to any applicant during the time the applicant fails to correct any defective
work or noncomplying installation of equipment after having been given written
notice by the building official, code enforcement official or agents of the
failure to make the corrections required by this chapter. (1989 Code § 9-534;
amd. Ord. 2020-13, 6-16-2020)
9-1-6: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner,
lessee, sublessee or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or
premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any of the provisions of the adopted building codes, or any orders issued by
the building official pursuant thereto. (1989 Code § 9-702; amd. Ord. 2020-13,
6-16-2020)
9-1-7: PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building
or structure, or cause or allow the same to be done, without first obtaining a
separate building permit for each such building or structure from the building
official in the manner and according to the applicable conditions prescribed in
the specific code, excluding minor maintenance. (1989 Code § 9; amd. Ord. 2020-
13, 6-16-2020)
9-1-8: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
This chapter shall be primarily enforced by the building official, with the
assistance of the code enforcement official. When probable cause exists to
believe a violation has been committed, the building official may issue a stop
work order on any construction project until the violation is eliminated or the
court finds that no violation exists. Persons violating this chapter
individually or through their employees are guilty of a civil violation,
subject to penalty as provided in Title 12 of this code. (Ord. 94-8, 10-18-
1994; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2020-13, 6-16-2020)
9-1-9: STARTING WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT:
Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is started or proceeds
prior to obtaining the permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled,
provided that such doubled fee shall not be less than $100.00. Payment of a
doubled fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the
requirements of this Code in the execution of the work nor from any other
penalties prescribed herein. (Ord. 2020-13, 6-16-2020)
CHAPTER 2
CONSTRUCTION SITE CLEANLINESS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Requirements
9-2-1: REQUIREMENTS:
The general contractor or owner/builder, if there is no general contractor, of
every residential or commercial building construction site, shall comply with
the following:
   A.   Commercial Trash Bin Required; Exceptions:
      1.   Maintain a commercial trash bin of suitable size and design on the
premises of each building lot, and not on a street, sidewalk or other public
property, from the first day through the last day of construction, which shall
be used for refuse on the site, and which shall be emptied when full.
      2.   Exceptions to the requirement of a commercial trash bin may be
granted in writing by the building official upon a showing that such facilities
are otherwise reasonably accessible.
   B.   Cleanliness Of Construction Site: Keep the construction site in a
condition of cleanliness and healthfulness by:
      1.   Preventing the accumulation of garbage or refuse, including boards,
bricks, stones, etc., into disorderly stacks or piles;
      2.   Maintaining the premises in such a manner that mice, rats, rodents
or other animals do not inhabit the premises;
      3.   Preventing garbage, refuse, dirt, rocks or building materials from
encroaching onto sidewalks, streets, public property, or the private property
of neighbors without the written consent of the owner; and
      4.   Preventing the blowing of paper or other items onto neighboring
properties. (Ord. 94-8, 10-18-1994; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Established
9-3-1: ESTABLISHED:
In order to interpret the provisions of the adopted building codes and to hear
appeals provided for hereunder, there is hereby established the building board
of appeals, consisting of five (5) members, who shall not be employees or
elected officials of the city. The building official shall be an ex officio
member of and shall act as secretary to the board. The building board of
appeals may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business.
Its decisions and findings shall be in writing, copies of which shall go to the
appellant and to the building official. Appeals to the board shall be processed
in accordance with the provisions contained in section 1201 of the housing
code. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted by the board shall be
delivered to the building official, who shall make them available to the
public. (1989 Code § 9-701)
CHAPTER 4
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-4-1: Electrical Code Adopted
9-4-2: Inspections; Enforcement
9-4-3: Permit Required; Exception
9-4-4: Fee For Permit
9-4-5: Electrical Disturbances
9-4-1: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
That certain document, being marked and designated as the NFPA 70 national
electrical code, (said current edition as adopted by the State of Utah), as
published by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc., is hereby adopted
as the North Salt Lake electrical code. (Ord. 2012-14, 8-21-2012; amd. Ord.
2020-13, 6-16-2020)
9-4-2: INSPECTIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
The building official shall perform all functions of electrical inspection and
shall, among other things, inspect and supervise the construction, installation
and repairs of all electric light and power wiring, fixtures, appliances or
apparatus installed within the limits of the city, and shall require compliance
with the provisions of the electrical code. The building official shall require
the correction of the defects as he deems dangerous to life or property. Those
same enforcement standards established by the international building code shall
be followed by the building official for all electrical work. (1989 Code § 9-
541; amd. 2012 Code)
9-4-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
No alterations or additions shall be made in existing wiring, nor shall any
wiring or any apparatus which generates, transmits, transforms or utilizes any
electricity be installed without first obtaining a permit therefor, except
minor repair work such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses,
changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints and repairing drop
cords. This section shall not apply to installations in powerhouses and
substations belonging to electric light companies. No permit shall be issued to
any applicant for a permit during the time that he shall fail to correct any
defective electrical installation after he has been duly notified to correct
such defective work by the building official. (1989 Code § 9-542; amd. 2012
Code)
9-4-4: FEE FOR PERMIT:
The electrical permit fees applicable in the city for use under the national
electrical code shall be in such amounts as specified in the comprehensive fee
schedule resolution. (1989 Code § 9-543; amd. 2012 Code)
9-4-5: ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCES:
   A.   Nuisance Declared: Electrical installations for signs, equipment, radio
transmission equipment or other facilities that create electrical disturbances
that cause interference with normal radio or television reception beyond the
immediate vicinity of such electrical installations are hereby declared to be a
nuisance. The owners or operations thereof shall so install and maintain such
installations as to avoid or eliminate such interference, using all known means
and devices for such purpose, such as proper grounding, connections,
condensers, resistors and live chokes.
   B.   Abatement: The building official shall withhold or withdraw approval of
any electrical installation causing the above disturbance, and is hereby
authorized to take all necessary steps for the abatement of such conditions.
(1989 Code § 9-544)
CHAPTER 5
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
9-5-1: Plumbing Code Adopted
9-5-1: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Plumbing Code: That certain document, which are on file
in the office of the building official, being marked and designated as the
international plumbing code, (said current edition as adopted by the State of
Utah), as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted
as the plumbing code for the city for regulating and governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing
systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said plumbing code on file in the office of
the city are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections of the international plumbing code,
are hereby revised and incorporated herein:
      Section 101.1 Insert: city of North Salt Lake.
      Section 106.6.2 Insert: see City of North Salt Lake fee appendix.
      Section 106.6.3 Insert: 80% and 80%.
      Section 108.4 Insert: civil penalty; fine not to exceed $1,000.00.
      Section 108.5 Insert: not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00.
      Section 305.4.1 Insert: 30 inches.
      Section 903.1 Insert: 6 inches.
(Ord. 2010-10, 6-15-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2013-15, 7-16-
2013; Ord. 2020-13, 6-16-2020)
CHAPTER 6
FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
9-6-1: Fuel Gas Code Adopted
9-6-1: FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Fuel Gas Code: That certain document, on file in the
office of the building official, being marked and designated as the
international fuel gas code, (said current edition as adopted by the State of
Utah), including appendices A through D, as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code for the city for
regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas fired appliances as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said fuel gas code on file in the office of the
building official are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections of the international fuel gas code,
(said current edition as adopted by the State of Utah), are hereby revised and
incorporated herein:
      Section 101.1 Insert: city of North Salt Lake.
      Section 106.6.2 Insert: see City of North Salt Lake fee appendix.
      Section 106.6.3 Insert: 80% and 80%.
      Section 108.4 Insert: civil penalty; fine not to exceed $1,000.00.
      Section 108.5 Insert: not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00.
(Ord. 2010-11, 6-15-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2013-15, 7-16-
2013; Ord. 2020-13, 6-16-2020)
CHAPTER 7
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-7-1: Mechanical Code Adopted
9-7-1: MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Mechanical Code: That certain document, on file in the
office of the building official, being marked and designated as the
international mechanical code, (said current edition as adopted by the State of
Utah), as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted
as the mechanical code for the city for regulating and governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
mechanical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said mechanical code on file in
the office of the building official are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this
section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections of the international mechanical code,
(said current edition as adopted by the State of Utah), are hereby revised and
incorporated herein:
      Section 101.1 Insert: city of North Salt Lake.
      Section 106.5.2 Insert: see North Salt Lake fee appendix.
      Section 106.5.3 Insert: 80% and 80%.
      Section 108.4 Insert: civil penalty; fine not to exceed $1,000.00.
      Section 108.5 Insert: not less than $100.00 or more than $1,000.00.
(Ord. 2010-12, 6-15-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2013-15, 7-16-
2013; Ord. 2020-13, 6-16-2020)
CHAPTER 8
FIRE CODE AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-8-1: Fire Code Adopted
9-8-2: Administration And Enforcement
9-8-3: Regulations And Prohibitions
9-8-4: Liquefied Petroleum Gas Storage
9-8-5: Residential Automatic Fire Sprinkler System Requirements
9-8-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   International Fire Code: For the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and explosion,
the City of North Salt Lake hereby adopts the currently adopted Utah State Fire
Code, including all of the provisions of Utah Code, Title 15A, Chapter 5, Parts
1-3 and Appendices A, B, C and D of the currently adopted edition of the
International Fire Code. The fire code is hereby incorporated as if set out at
length herein, and from the effective date hereof, the provisions thereof shall
be controlling within the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   Copy On File: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-711, as
amended, a copy of the code has been filed for use and examination by the
public in the office of the city recorder prior to the adoption date hereof.
   C.   Amendments:
      Section 110.4 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as
follows:
      110.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 07-15, 6-5-2007; amd. Ord
2020-07, 2-4-2020)
9-8-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Fire Authority: The city is a participant member of the South Davis
Metro Fire Service Area (the fire authority), a separate legal entity duly
organized and created under the laws of the state by interlocal cooperation
agreement entered into by participating entities of the fire authority. The
fire authority shall provide all fire, emergency medical, and other emergency
first responder services for the city in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the interlocal cooperation agreement entered into by the
participating entities, as amended (the interlocal agreement).
   B.   Delegation Of Authority: The city hereby delegates all power and
responsibility for fire suppression, prevention, investigation, enforcement,
emergency medical, and other emergency and first responder services within the
jurisdiction of the city to the agency and hereby recognizes the fire authority
as the governmental and political subdivision for such purposes consistent and
in accordance with the interlocal agreement and the fire code.
   C.   Fire Code Official: The fire authority shall serve as the fire code
official for the city, as more particularly described in section 104 of the
fire code.
   D.   Fire Board Of Appeals: The fire board of appeals as created and
maintained by the fire authority shall hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the fire authority's fire code official
relative to the application and interpretation of the fire code within the
jurisdiction of the city.
   E.   Appeals: Any person adversely affected by an order, decision or
determination made by the fire code official in the application and
interpretation of the fire code within the jurisdiction of the city may appeal
such order, decision or determination to the fire authority's fire board of
appeals in accordance with the fire authority's rules and regulations regarding
the same and in accordance with applicable provisions of the fire code. (Ord.
05-2, 2-1-2005; amd. Ord. 2020-07, 2-4-2020)
9-8-3: REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Interference With Firefighter In Discharge Of Duties: Every person at
the scene of any fire who disobeys the lawful orders of any public officer or
firefighter, or offers any resistance to or interference with the efforts of
any firefighter, or company of firefighters to extinguish the same, or engages
in any disorderly conduct calculated to prevent the same from being
extinguished, or who forbids, prevents or dissuades others from assisting to
extinguish the same, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 10-134; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Unlawful Interference With Apparatus, Water, Etc.: Any person who shall
willfully injure, deface or destroy any engine, hose or other fire apparatus
belonging to the city or Fire Authority, or who shall willfully break or injure
any water pipe, or interfere with the water or its source of supply, shall be
deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (1989 Code § 10-135; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Persons Present At Fire Subject To Orders: Every person eighteen (18)
years or older present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer
in command and shall render assistance in the manner directed by the officer in
command. (1989 Code § 10-138)
   D.   False Alarm: It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in or report
to the South Davis Metro Fire Service Area a false alarm or report of a fire or
to tamper or remove any part of the fire alarm system as provided in Utah Code
Annotated section 76-9-105. (1989 Code § 10-139; amd. 2012 Code; amd. Ord.
2020-07, 2-4-2020)
9-8-4: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS STORAGE:
   A.   The storage of liquefied petroleum gases regulated by the International
Fire Code, as adopted by the city, shall be prohibited and unlawful except in
those zoning use districts established under title 10 of this code, the land
use management act, which specifically authorizes such use. Such districts
authorizing such storage as a permitted use and their boundaries constitute the
limits referred to in the international fire code, as adopted. Where zoning
allows such uses by right, the use shall conform to the technical requirements
of said international fire code.
   B.   A violation of any provision of this section shall be a class B
misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-10, 7-6-1999; amd. 2012 Code; amd. Ord. 2020-07,
2-4-2020)
9-8-5: RESIDENTIAL AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Residential Automatic Fire Sprinkler Ordinance: As described in Utah
Code Title 15A-5-203, the city adopts by ordinance the requirements of an
automatic residential fire sprinkler system if any of the following conditions
exist:
      1.   The structure:
         a.   is located in an urban-wildland interface area as provided in the
Utah Wildland Urban Interface Code adopted as a construction code under the
State Construction Code; and
         b.   does not meet the requirements described in Utah Code, Subsection
65A-8-203(4)(a) and Utah Administrative Code, R652-122-1300, Minimum Standards
for County Wildfire Fire Ordinance;
      2.   the structure is in an area where a public water distribution system
with fire hydrants does not exist as required in Utah Administrative Code,
R309-550-5, Water Main Design;
      3.   the only fire apparatus access road has a grade greater than 10% for
more than 500 continual feet;
      4.   the total floor area of all floor levels within the exterior walls
of the dwelling unit exceeds 10,000 square feet; or
      5.   the total floor area of all floor levels within the exterior walls
of the dwelling unit is double the average of the total floor area of all floor
levels of unsprinkled homes in the subdivision that are no larger than 10,000
square feet.
      6.   Exception: A single family dwelling does not require a fire
sprinkler system if the dwelling:
         a.   is located outside the wildland urban interface;
         b.   is built in a one-lot subdivision; and
         c.   has 50 feet of defensible space on all sides that limits the
propensity of fire spreading from the dwelling to another property. (Ord. 2020-
07, 2-4-2020)
CHAPTER 9
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
9-9-1: Residential Code Adopted
9-9-1: RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   Residential Code For One- And Two-Family Dwellings And Townhouses: That
certain document, on file in the office of the building official, being marked
and designated as the international residential code, (said current edition as
adopted by the State of Utah), including appendix chapter E, manufactured
housing, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby
adopted as the international residential code of the city for regulating and
governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-
family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more
than three (3) stories in height with separate means of egress as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said residential code on file in the office of the
building official, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections of the international residential
code, (said current edition as adopted by the State of Utah), are hereby
revised and incorporated herein:
   Section 101.1 Insert: city of North Salt Lake.
   Table R301.2(1) Insert: Table R301.2(1) climatic and geographic design
criteria:
Ground snow load:                  MT (or USU Study)
Wind speed:                        110 mph (3-sec gust)
Seismic design category:           D1
Weathering:                        Severe
Frost line depth:                  30"
Termite:                           Slight to moderate
Winter design temp:                24.5°
Ice barrier underlayment required: Yes
Flood hazards:                     1981
Air freezing index:                842
Mean annual temp:                  51.2
 
   Section R324 Insert: R324 automatic fire sprinkler system
   R324.1 When Required: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout every dwelling as required by 9-8-5 of this code. (Ord. 2010-13, 6-
15-2010, eff. 7-1-2010; amd. Ord. 2013-15, 7-16-2013; Ord. 2020-13, 6-16-2020)
CHAPTER 10
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
9-10-1: Fences And Access
9-10-1: FENCES AND ACCESS:
In order to minimize accidents, the following requirements pertaining to
fencing around swimming pools shall apply:
   A.   A fence or other barrier is required around a public pool or private
residential pool and must provide complete perimeter security of the facility.
It must be at least six feet (6') in height. There shall not be openings
through the fence or barrier, other than entry or exit access, which permit a
sphere greater than four inches (4") to pass through into the pool enclosure.
      1.   Indoor pools are exempt from the fencing requirements but must meet
the same standard as to controlling access. The walls of the building will
substitute for the required fence or barrier.
      2.   The building official or community development director may grant
exceptions to the height requirements in consideration of architectural and
landscaping features equivalent to the required six feet (6') fencing height.
   B.   A fence or barrier that has an entrance to the facility must be
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching gate or door. Self-latching
mechanisms must be at least fifty four inches (54") above the ground and must
be provided with hardware for locking the gate or door when the facility is not
in use. Gates and doors with self-locking mechanisms are exempt from the height
requirement. (Ord. 06-9, 7-11-2006; amd. Ord. 2020-13, 6-16-2020)
CHAPTER 11
IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
9-11-1: Findings And Purpose
9-11-2: Definitions
9-11-3: Calculation And Administration
9-11-4: Service Areas
9-11-5: Timing Of Payment Of Fees
9-11-6: Use Of Fees
9-11-7: Adjustments And Credits
9-11-8: Accounting, Expenditure And Refund
9-11-9: Impact Fee Challenges And Appeals
9-11-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
   A.   The City Council of the City of North Salt Lake hereby declares that
the City will impose impact fees on development activity in accordance with the
provisions of the Utah Impact Fees Act and the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   The City Council finds and determines that there is a need for certain
public facilities to serve new development activity within the City which
facilities have not been constructed and must be constructed in conformance
with the Impact Fees Act of the State of Utah to protect public health, safety
and welfare. The public facilities are needed for the following categories of
improvements:
      1.   Water system improvements;
      2.   Transportation system improvements;
      3.   Storm drainage system improvements;
      4.   Police facilities; and
      5.   Parks and recreation facilities.
   C.   The City may collect impact fees on behalf of other governmental
entities that provide services within the City.
   D.   Continuing growth within the City requires the imposition and
collection of impact fees to assure that the costs associated with the impact
of new growth are equitably assessed. (Ord. 2023-10, 8-15-2023)
9-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise stated, the terms used in this chapter shall have the same
meaning as set forth in the Impact Fees Act, Utah Code Annotated sections 11-
36a-101, et seq. (Ord. 2023-10, 8-15-2023)
9-11-3: CALCULATION AND ADMINISTRATION:
Impact fees imposed by the City shall be calculated, adopted, and administrated
in accordance with the Impact Fees Act. (Ord. 2023-10, 8-15-2023)
9-11-4: SERVICE AREAS:
The City Council may adopt separate service areas for any category of impact
fee where it determines that the adoption of such service areas is necessary to
equitably allocate the cost of public facilities to serve new growth. (Ord.
2023-10, 8-15-2023)
9-11-5: TIMING OF PAYMENT OF FEES:
Impact fees for the declared categories of public improvements shall be
collected at those times as may be set forth in the rules, regulations or
resolutions of the City. (Ord. 2023-10, 8-15-2023)
9-11-6: USE OF FEES:
Collected impact fees shall be used solely to:
   A.   Pay for described system improvements to be constructed by the City or
caused to be constructed by the City;
   B.   For reimbursing the City for the development's share of those system
improvements already constructed by the District;
   C.   For reimbursing developers who have constructed system improvements
where such facilities were beyond the project improvements needed for the
developer's project(s); and
   D.   For debt service incurred for system improvements. (Ord. 2023-10, 8-15-
2023)
9-11-7: ADJUSTMENTS AND CREDITS:
The City may, upon proper showing, adjust the impact fee at the time the fee is
charged to:
   A.   Respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases;
   B.   Ensure that impact fees are imposed fairly;
   C.   Allow credits pursuant to this chapter;
   D.   Adjust the amount of the fee based upon studies and data submitted by
the developer which are approved by the City after review of the same;
   E.   Allow credits as approved by the City for dedication of land,
improvement to, or new construction of public facilities providing service to
the City at large, provided such facilities are identified in the Impact Fee
Facilities Plan for the appropriate category of improvement and are required by
the City as a condition of approving the development activity, however, no
credit shall be given for project improvements as defined by the Impact Fees
Act. (Ord. 2023-10, 8-15- 2023)
9-11-8: ACCOUNTING, EXPENDITURE AND REFUND:
The City shall account for, expend and refund impact fees in accordance with
the provisions of the Impact Fees Act. (Ord. 2023-10, 8-15-2023)
9-11-9: IMPACT FEE CHALLENGES AND APPEALS:
Any challenge to the fees imposed by the City shall comply with the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated sections 11-36a-701, et seq., as amended. Administrative
appeals of the impact fees imposed by the City shall follow the procedures of
this section.
   A.   Within thirty (30) days after paying an impact fee, any person or
entity who has paid the fee and wishes to challenge the fee shall file a
written appeal with the City by delivering a copy of such appeal to the City
Recorder and the Community Development Director, setting forth, in detail, all
grounds for the appeal and all facts relied upon by the appealing party with
respect to the fees appealed.
   B.   Upon receipt of the appeal, the City shall schedule a hearing on the
appeal before the City Council at which time the appeal will be heard. The City
Council shall thereafter render its decision on the appeal within thirty (30)
days of the filing of the appeal. An applicant may request that the City
appoint a hearing officer to hear an appeal of an impact fee. The City shall
appoint a hearing officer qualified to hear an appeal of an impact fee and the
applicant shall bear the cost associated with the appointment and work of the
hearing officer. (Ord. 2023-10, 8-15-2023)
TITLE 10
LAND USE ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Effect Of Chapter
10-1-4: Interpretation
10-1-5: Conflict
10-1-6: Effect On Previous Ordinances And Maps
10-1-7: Licensing
10-1-8: Severability
10-1-9: Legal Remedies For Violation
10-1-10: Appeals
10-1-11: Enforcement
10-1-12: Zoning Administrator Authority And Duties (Rep. by Ord. 2012-07, 4-30-
2012)
10-1-13: Building Permits; Site Plan Required
10-1-14: Building, Use And Occupancy Permits Required To Comply With This Title
10-1-15: Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks, Street Paving, Etc.; Conditions Of Building
Permit Approval
10-1-16: Inspection And Approval Required Prior To Occupancy
10-1-17:Substandard Lots At Time Of Code Passage
10-1-18: Nonconforming Lots Prohibited After Adoption Of Code
10-1-19: Lot Standards And Street Frontage
10-1-20: Every Dwelling To Be On A Lot; Exceptions
10-1-21: Lots And Dwellings Frontage On Private Streets; Special Provisions
10-1-22: Yard Space For One Building Only
10-1-23: Yards To Be Unobstructed; Exceptions
10-1-24: Maximum Building Height And Exceptions To Height Limitations
10-1-25: Additional Height Allowed
10-1-26: Water And Sewerage Requirements
10-1-27: Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
10-1-28: Fences May Be Required
10-1-29: Fence Standards
10-1-30: Sale Or Lease Of Required Space
10-1-31: Construction Subject To Geologic Or Flood Hazards
10-1-32: Property Divided By Zoning District Boundaries
10-1-33: Utility Extensions Authorized Only To Permitted Structures And
Buildings
10-1-34: Utilities Responsible For Excavations
10-1-35: Property Owned By Other Government Units; Effect Of Land Use And
Development Ordinances
10-1-36: Effect Of General Plan On Front Yard Requirements
10-1-37: Maintenance, Condition And Appearance Of Properties
10-1-38: Building Design Standards; Nonresidential
10-1-39: Definitions
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as title 10, or the LAND USE ORDINANCES OF NORTH SALT
LAKE CITY, and may be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-
1993; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
This title is adopted to provide for the health, safety and welfare, and
promote the prosperity, improve the morals, peace and good order, comfort,
convenience and aesthetics of the City and its present and future inhabitants
and businesses, to protect the tax base, secure economy in governmental
expenditures, to foster the State agricultural and other industries, to protect
both urban and nonurban development, to protect and ensure access to sunlight
for solar energy devices, to provide fundamental fairness in land use
regulation, and to protect property values. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-
1993; amd. 2012 Code)
10-1-3: EFFECT OF CHAPTER:
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as
the case may be, the district regulations and all other regulations appearing
elsewhere in this Code. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-1-4: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Code, the requirements
contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the purposes
set forth. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-1-5: CONFLICT:
   A.   This code shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of
covenants, agreements or other ordinances or laws, but shall prevail
notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive.
   B.   Whenever other restrictions or provisions are adopted under state law,
the most restrictive requirement shall govern. However, the city may not impose
stricter requirements than are required in Utah Code Annotated sections 10-9a-
305, 10-9a-514, 10-9a-516 and 10-9a-520. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993;
amd. 2012 Code)
10-1-6: EFFECT ON PREVIOUS ORDINANCES AND MAPS:
The existing ordinances covering zoning, in their entirety, and including the
maps heretofore adopted and made a part of said ordinances, are hereby
superseded and amended to read as set forth herein; provided, however, that
this title, including the attached map or maps, shall be deemed a continuation
of previous codes and not a new enactment, insofar as the substance of
revisions or previous codes is included in this title, whether in the same or
in different language; and this title shall be so interpreted upon all
questions of construction relating to tenure of officers and boards established
by previous codes, to questions of conforming or nonconforming uses and
buildings and structures, and to questions as to the dates upon which such
uses, buildings or structures became conforming or nonconforming. (Ord. 93-5,
7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-1-7: LICENSING:
All departments, officials and public employees of the city which are vested
with duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the
provisions of this title and shall issue no permit or license for uses,
buildings or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions
of this title and any such permit or license, if issued in conflict with the
provisions of this title, shall be null and void. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-
15-1993)
10-1-8: SEVERABILITY:
Should any chapter, section, clause or provision of this title be declared by
the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this title
as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
(Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-1-9: LEGAL REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION:
   A.   Misdemeanor: Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal,
agent or employee, who violates or causes the violation of any of the
provisions of this title, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor as allowed
by state code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   Other Permitted Action: In addition, the following may institute
injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate action or proceeding
to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or maintenance or use:
      1.   The city by action of the city council; or
      2.   Any owner of real estate within the zoning district in which an
alleged violation of this title has occurred; or the owner of real estate
across a zoning district line and abutting or facing the real estate where the
alleged violation has occurred. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-1-10: APPEALS:
   A.   Administrative Remedies Exhausted: No person may challenge in district
court the city land use decision made under this chapter or under the
regulation made under authority of this chapter or this title, until they have
exhausted their administrative remedies.
   B.   Petition For Review; Time Limit To File: Any person adversely affected
by any decision made in the exercise of the provisions of this chapter may file
a petition for review of the decision with the district court within thirty
(30) days after the local decision is rendered, and written notice to the
applicant, or designated representative. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-1-11: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Authority: The city or any owner of real estate within the city in
which violations of this chapter or ordinances enacted under the authority of
this chapter occur or are about to occur may, in addition to other remedies
provided by law, institute:
      1.   a. Injunctions, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate
actions; or
         b.   Proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the unlawful
building, use or act.
      2.   The city need only establish the violation to obtain the injunction.
   B.   Withhold Building Permit: The city may enforce this title by
withholding building permits.
      1.   It is unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter or change the
use of any building or other structure within the city without approval of a
building permit.
      2.   The city may not issue a building permit unless plans of and for the
proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use fully
conform to all regulations then in effect. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-
1993)
10-1-12: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR AUTHORITY AND DUTIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2012-07, 4-30-2012)
10-1-13: BUILDING PERMITS; SITE PLAN REQUIRED:
An application for a building or use permit shall be made to the building
official and shall include a site plan and such other information as may be
required by ordinance in the city. (See latest edition of the international
building code, as adopted.) (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012
Code)
10-1-14: BUILDING, USE AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS REQUIRED TO COMPLY WITH THIS
TITLE:
   A.   Permits Required: No building or structure shall be constructed,
reconstructed, altered or moved, and no land shall be used, except after the
issuance of a building, use and occupancy permit for the same by the building
official.
   B.   Issuance Of Permits In Violation Prohibited: Building, use and
occupancy permits shall not be granted for the construction or alteration of
any building or structure, for the moving or removal of a building onto or from
a lot, or for the use or occupancy of a building or land, if such structure,
construction, alteration, moving, use or occupancy would be in violation of any
of the provisions of this title. Permits issued in violation of any provision
of this title, whether intentional or otherwise, shall be null and void.
   C.   Improvements Completed Prior To Occupancy Permit: An occupancy permit
shall not be issued until the zoning administrator and building official shall
have filed on record a report finding that the structures and intended uses are
in compliance with the provisions of this title and specifically as to location
and completion of both off site (curb, gutter, sidewalk, paving, utilities,
fences, ditches, etc.), and on site (buildings, etc.) improvements. (Ord. 93-5,
7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-1-15: CURBS, GUTTERS, SIDEWALKS, STREET PAVING, ETC.; CONDITIONS OF BUILDING
PERMIT APPROVAL:
The installation of curb, gutter, sidewalks, street paving, drainage culverts,
and covered or fenced irrigation ditches of a type approved by the city council
shall be required on any existing or proposed street adjoining a lot on which a
building is to be established. Such curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving, drainage
culverts, and safety features for irrigation ditches and canals, etc., are
required as a condition of building permit approval, when the city adopts a
policy that such street is to be improved according to a given plan adopted by
the city. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-1-16: INSPECTION AND APPROVAL REQUIRED PRIOR TO OCCUPANCY:
Buildings and structures requiring a building permit pursuant to the provisions
of this title shall not be occupied nor put into use until the building
official has inspected such building or structure, finds compliance with this
title and the building code of the city, and gives a written certificate of
occupancy and use to the owner or his agent to occupy or use the building or
structure in the manner approved by the issuance of a valid building permit.
(Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-1-17: SUBSTANDARD LOTS AT TIME OF CODE PASSAGE:
Any lot legally held in separate ownership at the time of adoption of this
title, which lot is below the requirements for lot area or lot width or
frontage for the district in which it is located and on which lot a dwelling
would be permitted if the lot met the area requirements of this title, may be
used for a single-family dwelling if such a lot is located in a residential
district. The width of each of the side yards for such a dwelling may be
reduced to a width which is not less than the same percentage of the lot width
as the required side yard would be of the required lot width; provided, that in
no case shall the smaller of the two (2) yards be less than five feet (5'), nor
shall the total width of the two (2) yards be less than thirteen feet (13');
provided, however, that when this title replaces a previously adopted zoning
ordinance, if a lot was legally created under the provisions of that ordinance,
it shall be classified as a legal nonconforming lot under this title. (Ord. 93-
5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-18: NONCONFORMING LOTS PROHIBITED AFTER ADOPTION OF CODE:
After adoption of this title, no lot having less than the minimum width, depth
and area required in the district in which it is located may be created, nor
shall building permits be issued for construction on such nonconforming lots
created subsequent to adoption of this title. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-
1993; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-19: LOT STANDARDS AND STREET FRONTAGE:
Except for planned unit developments, condominiums and as otherwise provided in
this title, every lot presently existing or hereafter created shall have such
area, width and depth as required by this title for the district in which such
lot is located and shall have frontage upon a public street or upon a private
street or right-of- way approved by the Planning Commission, before a building
permit may be issued; provided, that no lot containing five (5) acres or less
shall be created which is more than three (3) times as long as it is wide.
(Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-20: EVERY DWELLING TO BE ON A LOT; EXCEPTIONS:
Every dwelling structure shall be located and maintained on a separate lot
having no less than the minimum area, width, depth and frontage required by
this title for the district in which the dwelling structure is located, except
that farm or ranch dwellings, group dwellings, condominiums, and other multi-
structure dwelling complexes under single ownership and management, which are
permitted by this title and have approval from the Planning Commission, may
occupy a single lot. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-06,
4-1-2025)
10-1-21: LOTS AND DWELLINGS FRONTAGE ON PRIVATE STREETS; SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
Lots with frontage only on private streets shall be allowed by conditional use
permit procedure only, and shall be subject to all applicable requirements of
this title. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-22: YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY:
No required yard or other open space around an existing building or which is
hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this title shall be considered as providing a yard or open space
for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an
adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon
a building is to be erected or established. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-
1993; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-23: YARDS TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED; EXCEPTIONS:
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for
permitted accessory buildings in a rear yard, the ordinary architectural
projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, flues, and
other ornamental features which project into a yard not more than two and one-
half feet (21/2'), and open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside
stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers projecting into a yard not
more than five feet (5'). (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; Ord. 2025-06,
4-1-2025)
10-1-24: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT AND EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
The maximum height of a building shall be measured at the foundation with the
highest point of final finished grade elevation to the highest point of the
building roof or coping. (See figure 1 of this section.) Buildings constructed
on hillsides may have a maximum of one basement story exposed on the lowest
point of elevation of finished grade. The maximum height of the building from
the lowest point of elevation at the foundation, including the basement story,
shall include an additional ten feet (10') for the basement level.
Penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the
building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, flagpoles,
chimneys, smokestacks, water tanks, wireless, radio or television masts,
theater lofts, silos, energy generation and conservation apparatus, or similar
unoccupied features, may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed.
Nonetheless, no space above the height limit shall be allowed for purposes of
providing additional floor space, nor shall such increased height be in
violation of any other ordinances or regulations of the City.
   FIGURE 1
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2041.gif]
(Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-25: ADDITIONAL HEIGHT ALLOWED:
Public buildings and utility buildings, when authorized in a district, may be
erected to a height greater than the district height limit by conditional use
permit. (Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-26: WATER AND SEWERAGE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Water: A culinary water supply, which shall be approved by the City
Engineer and State Board of Health, shall be available to each lot in the
subdivision and shall be provided in conformance with the standards and rules
and regulations of the City. Where an approved public water supply is
available, the subdivider shall install water mains and service lines or
laterals from such mains to each lot within the subdivision, prior to the
installation of road base, surfacing, curbs, gutters and sidewalks.
   B.   Sewer: All sewer lines shall be connected to South Davis Sewer
Improvement District. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code;
Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-27: CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS:
For the purpose of providing adequate vision of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, a clear view area shall be maintained at the intersection of every
street, whether public or private, and at the intersection of every driveway
with a public or private street. The clear view provisions are considered life
safety standards and shall supersede any conflicting provisions of this title.
No provision of this section shall be construed to allow the continuance of any
nonconforming tree, shrub, plant or plant growth, fence, wall, other screening
material, or other obstruction which interferes with the safety of pedestrians
or vehicle traffic.
   A.   The clear view area for a street intersection shall be determined by
measuring forty feet (40') from the point of intersection of street curb lines,
and then connecting the termini of those lines forming a triangle that
encompasses a portion of the street right-of-way and the adjoining lot. Within
that clear view area, the following shall apply:
      1.   Solid fences, walls, sight obscuring vegetation and/or other sight
obscuring devices shall not exceed two feet (2') in height above the level of
the curb.
      2.   Chainlink fences or fences which are seventy five percent (75%) or
more open shall not exceed four feet (4') in height above the level of the
curb.
      3.   Tree trunks shall not be located within the clear view triangle,
however, tree canopies may extend into the clear view area if they are trimmed
at least seven feet (7') above the ground level.
      4.   No sign shall be allowed in the clear view triangle unless it is
specifically permitted by this title and it is determined by the City Engineer
that it is not a safety hazard. (Ord. 07-13, 6-5-2007)
      5.   No obstruction of any sort shall be allowed which interferes with
the safety of pedestrians or traffic unless it is specifically permitted by
this title and it is determined by the City Engineer that it is not a safety
hazard. (Ord. 07-13, 6-5-2007; amd. 2012 Code)
   B.   The clear view area for the intersection of a driveway and a street
shall be determined by first establishing the point of intersection of the
driveway edge and the street property line, then measuring ten feet (10') along
the property line away from the driveway, and ten feet (10') along the edge of
the driveway in toward the property. A line is then drawn from the termini of
the two (2) lines, forming a triangle. Within this area, a chainlink fence or a
fence seventy five percent (75%) or more open shall be a maximum of four feet
(4') in height, and any wall or other type of fence or sight obscuring growth
shall be a maximum of three feet (3') in height. (Ord. 07-13, 6-5-2007; amd.
Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-28: FENCES MAY BE REQUIRED:
When approved by the City Council, the Planning Commission may require the
erection of fences as a prerequisite to approval of any project or to the
granting of any building permit where, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, this is necessary to protect life and property, or to prevent
conflict of uses. Such fences shall be of a type and size necessary, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, to accomplish the above stated purpose.
(Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-29: FENCE STANDARDS:
No person shall construct, erect, install, place, or replace any fence in the
City not in compliance with the terms and conditions of this title and the
International Residential Code. Fences lawfully existing or permitted prior to
the effective date hereof (March 6, 2018), shall not be enlarged, extended or
replaced, except in strict compliance with all the requirements of this title.
   A.   Residential Zoning Districts:
      1.   Permitting:
         a.   Fence Permit: A fence six feet (6') in height or less shall be
required to obtain a land use permit to ensure the placement and materials are
in conformance with applicable codes.
         b.   Existing Fences: For existing fences a building permit is not
required for painting, maintenance or repair. The property owner shall be
responsible for the following:
            (1)   Installing the fence within the boundaries of the owner’s
property and in compliance with this section, including proper materials,
height, setback and clear view areas; and
            (2)   Complying with any subdivision covenants or restrictions,
deed restrictions and utility easement restrictions.
         c.   Fences Requiring A Building Permit: A fence greater than six feet
(6') in height requires a building permit which shall be obtained prior to
construction, erection, installation, or placement. A building permit shall be
valid only for the term of issuance, unless suspended or revoked.
         d.   Permit Application: For any fence which requires a building
permit, the following shall be filed with the City:
            (1)   A completed City building permit application form;
            (2)   A drawing, site plan or plat map displaying property
boundaries, the location of the buildings and structures on the property, the
proposed location of the fence, height of the fence, fencing materials and its
distance from existing structures on the property;
            (3)   Engineering calculations including wind and snow loads;
            (4)   The written consent of the property owner(s) where the fence
will be installed; and
            (5)   Any other information required by the City to assist in the
review of the application.
         e.   Permit Fee: A permit fee shall be remitted upon issuance of the
building permit, the amount of which shall be established by the City building
official in accordance with the adopted City fee schedule.
         f.   Application Review And Permit Issuance: The Community Development
Department shall review, approve and issue the building permit provided that
the application is in compliance with this Code.
         g.   Completion Of Installation: A fence authorized by a building
permit shall be fully installed in accordance with this title within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the date of permit issuance.
            (1)   A permit shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after the
date of issuance, after which no work requiring such a permit shall be
commenced, resumed or undertaken until an extension is granted or a new permit
is issued.
            (2)   The applicant may file a written request for an extension of
the building permit prior to expiration, stating the reason for the request. If
good cause is shown, an additional one hundred eighty (180) days may be granted
by the Community Development Director to complete the fence installation.
      2.   General Requirements:
         a.   Obstruction Of Ingress/Egress Area Of A Dwelling: A wall or fence
may not be installed in any yard that will shield any window or opening in a
habitable space of a dwelling. A minimum distance of three feet (3') shall be
maintained between any fence and any such window or opening in a dwelling.
         b.   Height Measurement: Fence height shall be measured from the
finished grade to the highest point of the fence. “Finished grade” means the
average finished grade of the property nearest the fence.
            (1)   Berms or other means to raise the elevation of the ground
upon which a fence is proposed to be located shall be included in the
measurement of fence height.
            (2)   Fence height determinations shall be made by the Community
and Economic Development Director, or designee.
         c.   Grade Differential: If a grade differential exists along a
property line separating two (2) lots as a result of a retaining wall or
topographic feature, a fence, hedge, wall or other permitted screening device
may be erected to the maximum height permitted on either side of the property
line.
         d.   Vacant Lots: Fencing standards shall apply to a vacant or
undeveloped lot in the same manner as a developed lot.
         e.   Front Yard Regulations: Fences installed in a front yard shall
comply with all of the following requirements:
            (1)   A fence seventy five percent (75%) or more open is allowed up
to four feet (4') in height within the front yard setback. The front yard
setback is that area including side yards, between the front yard setback line
and the front property line;
            (2)   A fence which is not seventy five percent (75%) or more open
is allowed up to three feet (3') in height;
            (3)   No person shall locate a fence exceeding four feet (4') in
height between the principal structure and the front property line; and
            (4)   Fences which exceed three feet (3') in height shall not
encroach within clear view areas as regulated in section
10-1-27 of this chapter.
         f.   Rear/Side Yard Regulations: Fences in rear and side yards shall
meet all of the following requirements:
            (1)   Fences up to six feet (6') in height are permitted in side or
rear yards and shall not extend beyond the front yard setback line.
            (2)   If a higher fence is necessary to prevent wildlife from
entering a property, the maximum height of the fence located within the rear
and side yards may be increased to eight feet (8') subject to the provisions of
subsection A2h(1) of this section. Such fences shall only be allowed in side
and rear yards behind the front building line of the principal structure.
Fences above six feet (6') in height are not permitted in the minimum rear yard
setback on a double frontage lot.
            (3)   Fences which exceed three feet (3') in height shall not
encroach within clear view areas as regulated in section
10-1-37 of this chapter.
            (4)   A fence abutting the interstate freeway system may be erected
to a height not exceeding eight feet (8') on the property line adjacent to the
freeway right-of-way.
            (5)   No fence shall be permitted in excess of six feet (6') in a
street side yard on a corner lot.
         g.   Corner Side Yard: Fences on corner lots shall meet all of the
following requirements:
            (1)   Decorative wrought iron fencing or fencing that is similar in
appearance and which is at least seventy five percent (75%) or more open may be
installed up to six feet (6') in height, one foot (1') behind sidewalk; and
shall not extend into the front yard setback.
            (2)   Solid fences shall be permitted up to six feet (6') in height
and shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') behind the sidewalk or side
street property line, whichever is greater; and may not extend into the front
yard setback. (See figure 1 of this section.)
            (3)   Solid fences shall not encroach into any ten foot (10') clear
view triangle for adjacent property owner driveway. (See figure 1 of this
section.)
            (4)   Where corner lots are adjacent to each other with rear yards
abutting, a six foot (6') solid fence is permitted, set back five feet (5')
from the street side yard lot line. (See figure 1 of this section.)
            (5)   Where a corner lot rear property lot abuts a side yard of a
neighboring property line, solid fences shall be set back from the sidewalk or
street side property line to the minimum front setback of the adjacent lot.
(See figure 1 of this section.)
   FIGURE 1
   SOLID FENCES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2101.png]
 
         h.   Materials: All fences shall meet all of the following
requirements:
            (1)   Fences greater than six feet (6') in height but not exceeding
eight feet (8') in height shall be seventy five percent (75%) or more open
above six feet (6') in height and constructed of materials that complement the
six foot (6') fence. Chainlink fences above six feet (6') in height are only
permitted on lots greater than or equal to three-fourths (3/4) of an acre or as
permitted in subsection A2l of this section.
            (2)   No fence shall be constructed of used or discarded materials
in disrepair, including, but not limited to, pallets, tree trunks, trash,
tires, junk, or other similar items. Materials not specifically manufactured
for fencing shall not be used for, or in the construction of a fence.
         i.   Maintenance:
            (1)   Fences shall be maintained in a manner to prevent rust,
corrosion and deterioration, not to become a public or private nuisance, and
not to be dilapidated or a danger to adjoining property owners or the public.
            (2)   Fences shall not create an appearance of patchwork, which is
indicative of a state of disrepair.
            (3)   Every fence installed shall be maintained in such a way that
it will remain plumb and in good repair.
         j.   Existing Fences:
            (1)   Any fence existing as of the effective date hereof, shall not
be enlarged, extended or replaced, except in strict compliance with all the
requirements of this title.
            (2)   A noncomplying wall, fence, landscaping element or related
site feature shall be considered a noncomplying site element and shall not be
reconstructed, except as permitted under the procedures of noncomplying sites
as set forth in this title.
         k.   Prohibited Fences: No person shall install:
            (1)   A fence which creates a hazard to users of the street,
sidewalk or to nearby property; or
            (2)   An incomplete fence, consisting only of posts and supporting
members.
         l.   Special Fences: Fences and/or enclosures for specific uses
(whether public or private) including swimming pools, sports courts, or gardens
shall meet all of the following requirements:
            (1)   If up to ten feet (10') in height, it shall not be sight
obscuring and shall be at least five feet (5') away from the property line;
            (2)   Shall be in side and rear yards located behind the front
building line of the principal structure. All corner lots shall have one street
side yard and one front yard;
            (3)   Permitted if greater than ten feet (10') in height and/or
closer than five feet (5') to a property line with a conditional use permit or,
if the fence is part of a new project, through a site plan review approval;
            (4)   Chainlink is an acceptable material for special fences; and
            (5)   No fence shall be permitted in excess of six feet (6') in a
street side yard on a corner lot.
      3.   Appeals:
            a.   Appeals: An aggrieved person adversely affected by the denial
of a permit or decision, determination or interpretation under this subsection
A may appeal such denial, decision, determination or interpretation within ten
(10) days to the City’s Hearing Officer.
   B.   Subdivisions, Planned Unit Developments, Or Multifamily Developments:
      1.   Reverse frontage lots:
         a.   A wall or fence of six feet (6') shall be required along the rear
lot line of a reverse frontage lot.
         b.   Perimeter walls or fences required in conjunction with a
subdivision plat or planned unit development approval, walls or fences along
the rear lot line of reverse frontage lots may have a maximum height of eight
feet (8') with specific approval of the Planning Commission and shall have a
minimum five foot (5') landscape buffer between the wall and the sidewalk, or
curb, whichever distance is greater.
      2.   New residential developments adjacent to an existing non- compatible
or not similar use: Any walls or fences where required along the development
perimeters shall be constructed of masonry, tilt up concrete panels, decorative
wrought iron or similar decorative metal fencing, composite fencing, or other
decorative material approved by the Planning Commission with the exception of
vinyl and chain link fencing which is prohibited.
   C.   General Commercial And Industrial Developments: The following shall
apply to any lot or parcel, except where legally existing prior to the
effective date of these regulations:
      1.   A wall or fence shall be a maximum of six feet (6') in height, with
the exception that any wall or solid fence located within twenty feet (20') of
a public street shall be a maximum of three feet (3') in height. Any fence
seventy five percent (75%) or more open, located within twenty feet (20') of a
public street, shall be a maximum of four feet (4') in height.
      2.   Center Street, Redwood Road, Cutler Drive or 1100 North: Chain link
fencing shall be permitted only on side and rear property lines which are not
adjacent to residential land uses or zone districts. Such use of chain link
fencing shall not extend beyond the front facade of the building. Chain link
fencing shall not be permitted on a side street property line.
      3.   All gates for vehicular access to areas used for parking or storage
shall slide sideways or swing inward. Gates along front or street side property
lines shall not be constructed of chain link fencing.
      4.   Any outdoor storage area shall be in conformance to section
10-19-3(E).
      5.   Any roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from the
public view by a parapet wall or similar device that is no lower in height than
six inches (6") below the height of the mechanical equipment on the exposed
side or sides. No chainlink fencing, with or without slats, shall be allowed as
a screening device for roof mounted mechanical equipment.
      6.   A solid screening device or wall of masonry, composite, or similar
material shall be constructed along property lines which are located within
twenty feet (20') of a single-family residential development or zone. Such wall
shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height, except that the first twenty
feet (20') in from the street property line shall be stepped down to three feet
(3') in height.
   D.   Barbed Wire And Electrical Fence Restrictions:
      1.   Barbed Wire: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause
to be erected or to maintain any barbed wire fence or any fence topped with
barbed wire or any similar device in any residential zone. In any commercial or
manufacturing zone, where permitted under section
10-11-3 of this title, barbed wire may be attached to the top of a fence or
similar structure at a height not less than six feet (6') above the ground in
height. In such cases, no more than three (3) strands of barbed wire, strung
tightly and not coiled, shall be allowed and not be included in the overall
height requirement of the fence. Razor wire is strictly prohibited in any
application.
      2.   Electric Fences: It shall be unlawful for any person to install,
maintain, or operate an electric fence in violation of this section. Electric
fences are allowed as a permitted use in the M-D and M-G Districts only.
Electric fences abutting a residential use are prohibited. Electric fences in
the permitted zoning districts are allowed subject to the following
requirements:
         a.   Location Requirements: Electric fences shall only be allowed for
security of outdoor storage. Electric fences shall not be allowed in required
front yard setbacks.
         b.   Fence Height: Electric fences shall be a maximum height of ten
feet (10').
         c.   Perimeter Fence Or Wall: No electric fence shall be installed or
used unless it is fully enclosed by a nonelectrical fence or wall that is a
minimum of six feet (6') in height, not to exceed the height of the electric
fence. The nonelectrical fence shall be constructed of materials that
reasonably prevent a person from reaching through the outer fence to touch the
electric fence. There shall be at least one foot (1') of spacing between the
electric fence and the perimeter fence or wall. The area between the fences
shall be kept clear of landscaping, shrubbery, other fences, or material of any
kind.
         d.   Warning Signs: Electric fences shall be clearly identified with
warning signs that read: “Warning - Electric Fence” at intervals of not greater
than thirty feet (30').
         e.   Security Box: Electric fences shall have a small, wall mounted
safe or box that holds building keys for all emergency personnel. Access must
also be provided to emergency personnel for a remote shutdown and/or key switch
to disable the electric fence, as per sections 102.9, 104.9, and 506 of the
International Fire Code. The appropriate location of the key box and key switch
shall be designated by the Fire Marshal.
         f.   Electrification: The electrical charge produced by the fence upon
contact shall not exceed energizer characteristics set forth in paragraph
22.108 and depicted in figure 102 of International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC) standard no. 60335-2-76, as amended, or a similar standard if acceptable
to the City building official.
         g.   Installation: The installation and maintenance of the electric
fence shall be in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances,
including, but not limited to, the International Building Code, International
Electric Code, International Fire Code, etc., and manufacturer’s installation
instructions.
         h.   Inspection And Approval: Prior to installation of an electric
fence, a building permit must be issued by the City building official for the
fence. After nstallation of the electric fence, the City building official
shall be notified of its installation and shall conduct, or provide for a third
party designee to conduct, an inspection of the electric fence for compliance
with all applicable codes and ordinances.
         i.   Alarm System Requirements: Any alarm system installed with an
electric fence is subject to the requirements in title 5, chapter 6 of this
Code.
         j.   Failure to properly maintain electrical fencing or warning
signage shall constitute a violation of this section subject to civil penalty
and shall be enforced as provided in Title 12 Administrative Code Enforcement.
(Ord. 2018-02, 3-6-2018; amd. Ord. 2020-11, 4-7-2020; Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-30: SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE:
No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other
requirements of this title for a lot or building may be sold or leased away
from such lot or building. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord.
2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-31: CONSTRUCTION SUBJECT TO GEOLOGIC OR FLOOD HAZARDS:
Whenever development or construction is or may be subject to geologic or flood
hazards, the Planning Commission may require the applicant to submit a geologic
and soils survey report prepared by a qualified professional team; which such
report indicates a lot to be subject to unusual potential or actual geologic or
flood hazards, the applicant shall meet the special conditions required by the
Planning Commission to reduce or eliminate such hazard, or if such conditions
cannot be met or will not be met, the application for a building or conditional
use permit shall be denied. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord.
2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-32: PROPERTY DIVIDED BY ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where a zoning district boundary cuts through a lot existing at the time of
adoption of this title, the use regulations governing the portion of the lot
located within the more restrictive zone shall govern the use and development
of the entire lot, unless a variance has been granted by the Hearing Officer in
accordance with the limitations of section 10-2-2 of this title. Legally
existing nonconforming uses and buildings on the lot, and lots that can be
legally subdivided into two (2) or more legal conforming lots, are exempt.
(Ord. 2012-07, 4-30-2012; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-33: UTILITY EXTENSIONS AUTHORIZED ONLY TO PERMITTED STRUCTURES AND
BUILDINGS:
No sewer service line, water service line, electrical nor gas utility line
shall be installed by a public or private company to a building, structure or
use which does not comply with the provisions of this title or other local
regulations. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-34: UTILITIES RESPONSIBLE FOR EXCAVATIONS:
It is the intent of this title to hold franchised utilities responsible for all
excavations, backfilling and paving. To this end, all such work, whether done
by a private or public entity, shall be commenced only pursuant to the issuance
of a permit (see chapter 7 of this title). Cuts and fills shall be constructed
according to standards established by the City. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-
15-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-35: PROPERTY OWNED BY OTHER GOVERNMENT UNITS; EFFECT OF LAND USE AND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES:
   A.   Compliance Required: Each county, municipality, school district,
special district and political subdivision of the State shall conform to the
land use and development ordinances of any municipality when installing,
constructing, operating or otherwise using any area, land or building situated
within that municipality only in a manner or for a purpose that conforms to
that municipality’s ordinances. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
   B.   School Districts: A school district is subject to the City land use
regulations as required by State Statute, except the City may not: (Ord. 93-5,
7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
      1.   Impose requirements for landscaping, fencing, aesthetic
considerations, construction methods or materials, building codes, building use
for educational purposes, or the placement or use of temporary classroom
facilities on school property;
      2.   Require a school district to participate in the cost of any roadway
or sidewalk not reasonably necessary for the safety of schoolchildren and not
located on or contiguous to school property, unless the roadway or sidewalk is
required to connect an otherwise isolated school site to an existing roadway;
      3.   Require a school district to pay fees not authorized by state
statute;
      4.   Provide for inspection of school construction or assess a fee or
other charges for inspection, unless neither the school district nor the state
superintendent has provided for inspection by an inspector, other than the
project architect or contractor, who is qualified under criteria established by
the state superintendent with the approval of the state building board and
state fire marshal;
      5.   Require a school district to pay any impact fee for improvements not
reasonably related to the impact of the project upon the need which the
improvement is to address; or
      6.   Impose regulations upon the location of a project, except as
necessary to avoid unreasonable risks to health or safety. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-
1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-36: EFFECT OF GENERAL PLAN ON FRONT YARD REQUIREMENTS:
Wherever a lot is adjacent to a mapped street on the adopted general plan of
the city, there shall be a front yard provided which is measured from planned
edge of the future right of way. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd.
Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-37: MAINTENANCE, CONDITION AND APPEARANCE OF PROPERTIES:
   A.   Appearance And Condition Of Premises: The appearance and condition of
premises has a significant effect on property values. Accordingly, the
following regulations shall apply:
      1.   The outside surface of buildings shall be maintained in good
condition.
      2.   Any lot in any zone shall be improved and maintained as follows:
         a.   Landscaping shall be installed and properly maintained in a good
condition, free from weeds taller than six inches (6") and noxious plants,
refuse and debris in front and side yards, including the park strip. Landscape
design shall conform to Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscape
Standards.
         b.   Landscaping for single-family and two-family dwellings shall be
installed within twelve (12) months from the date of occupancy.
         c.   Landscaping for commercial, industrial, institutional, or multi-
family residential shall be completed prior to final occupancy.
         d.   When unique or unforeseen circumstances exist, the community and
economic development director may grant an extension of time for landscape
installation. Extensions will only be approved upon submission of an erosion
control plan, including soil stabilization, and shall be reviewed by the Storm
Water Inspector for compliance with Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
regulations.
      3.   Trash, weeds or other unsightly material shall not be allowed to
remain on any lot outside of approved containers in the City. Junk, debris,
trash, abandoned vehicles, or similar refuse material shall not be stored or
allowed to remain outdoors, unless otherwise allowed by city code.
      4.   View obscuring berms, fences, walls or hedges shall be installed by
the property owner to block the view from the public right of way, or from
neighboring properties, whenever uses of land are found by the Planning
Commission to be offensive, detracting, obnoxious, visually polluting or
otherwise visually devaluing to neighboring properties or the community.
   B.   Recreational Vehicle Storage:
      1.   Recreational vehicles which do not include facilities necessary to
be "mobile homes", as defined in section
10-1-39 of this code, shall not be used at any place within the corporate
boundaries of the City, at any time, for living quarters except in designated
camping areas or recreational vehicle parks.
      2.   Recreational vehicles which are unoccupied for living space may be
stored on an owner's private residential lot, provided the parking complies
with the regulation in section
10-6-6 of this title. Long term commercial storage of recreational vehicles,
maintenance operations, reconstruction or construction activities are permitted
within zoning districts allowing such uses.
   C.   Abandoned, Wrecked Or Inoperative Vehicles:
      1.   Definitions:
      ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle left unattended on any roadway or on
any public or private property in such an inoperative, dismantled, wrecked or
neglected condition that the owner’s intention to relinquish all further rights
or interests in it may be reasonably concluded. A reasonable conclusion that
any motor vehicle is abandoned includes, but is not limited to, consideration
of the amount of time the motor vehicle has been resting in the same place, the
state of the motor vehicle’s mechanical condition, the state of the motor
vehicle's registration and licensing information provided by the owner of the
motor vehicle and information provided by surrounding property owners.
      DISMANTLED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle partially or completely
disassembled.
      INOPERATIVE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle that cannot be moved under its own
power.
      UNREGISTERED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle not currently registered so as to
permit it to be lawfully operated upon a highway.
      VEHICLE PARTS: Any items that can be attached to or included as part of
or within any motor vehicle.
      WRECKED VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle damaged to the extent that it cannot
be lawfully operated upon a highway.
      2.   Unlawful Conduct: It shall be unlawful and is a public nuisance for
any owner or tenant to cause or permit any motor vehicle and/or vehicle part of
any kind which is inoperative, partially or completely dismantled, junked,
wrecked or abandoned to be parked, stored or remain on any property or premises
within the city for a period of time in excess of seven (7) days, unless placed
in an enclosed garage, concealed behind an opaque screening fence or in
connection with a lawfully situated and licensed business engaged in the repair
of motor vehicles. This provision applies whether the vehicle or part is
currently licensed or not.
      3.   Exception Permit:
         a.   A permit may be granted by the community and economic development
director for an exception to this subsection if the owner of an unregistered,
inoperative, dismantled, wrecked or abandoned motor vehicle and/or vehicle part
makes written application to the community and economic development director
providing:
            (1)   Proof that the applicant is the owner of the motor vehicle;
            (2)   Proof that the applicant is the owner of or has permission of
the owner of the property upon which the motor vehicle will be parked, stored
or remain;
            (3)   A description of the condition of the motor vehicle, i.e.,
that the motor vehicle is unregistered, inoperative, dismantled, wrecked or
abandoned;
            (4)   A description of the plan by which the condition of the motor
vehicle will be changed, i.e., the date upon which the vehicle will be
registered, repaired, removed from the property, etc.;
            (5)   The address at which the motor vehicle will be parked, stored
or remain while its condition is being changed;
            (6)   The location upon the property, at the specified address,
where the motor vehicle will be parked, stored or remain while its condition is
being changed;
            (7)   That a nuisance, health hazard or safety hazard will not be
created while the motor vehicle is parked, stored or retained; and
            (8)   Only one permit may be issued per twelve (12) month period
per property, and for a period not to exceed six (6) months. At the end of the
six (6) months, the vehicle shall either be repaired or lawfully registered or
removed from the property.
         b.   Any vehicle maintained on a property under an exception permit
shall be otherwise kept in compliance with all applicable laws, shall not be
parked or kept in the public right of way or on landscaped areas, shall not
constitute a hazard in any way, and shall not constitute a public nuisance. A
permit may be revoked by the community and economic development director for
failure to comply with these terms, and a permit may be denied for failure to
comply with these terms for earlier vehicles.
      4.   Penalty: Violators of this subsection may be prosecuted by criminal
prosecution. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection
shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense each day for such violation is permitted
to continue shall be constituted. Nothing herein shall prohibit the city from
taking such civil action as may be deemed appropriate to abate said nuisance.
(Ord. 2010-03, 3-16-2010; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022; Ord. 2024-01,
1-16-2024; Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-1-38: BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS; NONRESIDENTIAL:
This section provides design standards applicable to all nonresidential
buildings.
   A.   Building Massing, Form And Pedestrian Scale: Buildings shall relate to
each other in their massing and forms. Square "boxlike" structures with large,
blank, unarticulated wall surfaces are deemed to be unacceptable. Any facade(s)
visible from a public right-of-way, including pedestrian, transit, and bicycle
corridors, shall incorporate architectural features and treatments to diminish
the building mass. Architectural design shall anticipate the combination of the
following techniques or other appropriate techniques to be reviewed and
approved through the development review process. All facades visible from a
public right(s)-of-way, including pedestrian, transit, and bicycle corridors,
shall meet the following standards:
      1.   Horizontal Articulation: Each facade greater than one hundred feet
(100') in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate architectural
features such as wall plane projections, recesses, or other building material
treatments, colors and textures that visually interrupt the wall plane. No
uninterrupted length of a facade may exceed one hundred (100) horizontal feet;
      2.   Vertical Articulation: Each principal building greater than thirty
feet (30') in height shall have a change in cladding material or surface plane
or other building material treatments, colors and textures that visually
interrupt the wall plane. No single cladding material or surface plane (as
applicable) may extend for an uninterrupted vertical distance of more than
thirty feet (30');
      3.   Roof And Parapet Variation: Any facade visible from a public right-
of-way, including pedestrian, transit, and bicycle corridors, shall include a
parapet or other roof variation such as clerestories, dormers, gables, cupolas,
or other architectural roof projections that vary in height by at least two
feet (2') for each sixty (60) linear feet of facade length; and
FIGURE 1
CLERESTORY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2021.jpg]
FIGURE 2
CUPOLA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2023.jpg]
FIGURE 3
ROOF LINE VARIATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2025.jpg]
      4.   Primary Building Entrance: Any primary entrance shall be clearly
defined by either recessing the entrance or with a sheltering element such as
an awning, arcade, or portico to provide shelter from the sun and inclement
weather.
   B.   Materials Of Primary Structure: The following building design standards
shall apply to all nonresidential primary structures, regardless of zoning
district:
      1.   The outside surface of a nonresidential primary structure shall be
constructed of the highest quality materials and shall be factory finished,
stained, integrally colored, or otherwise suitably treated.
      2.   Metal siding, or materials which appear to be metal siding, are a
prohibited exterior finish material, except when used as an architectural
accent, not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the exterior surfacing material.
Exterior surface is measured per face of the building.
      3.   Architectural metal panels may be permitted with the following
restrictions:
         a.   Any structures using metal panels shall be designed to have an
exterior appearance of a non-metal building and shall appear to be constructed
of conventional materials such as stucco, stone, concrete, brick or wood.
Approved panel patterns shall have a flat finish which mimic the appearance of
concrete panels or embossed finish which mimics the appearance of stucco,
stone, brick, or wood.
         b.   A metal panel system shall include high quality finished profile
panels and concealed fastener systems, with a baked-on enamel painted to the
manufacturer's standards. Corrugated metal, plastic, or fiberglass panels are
prohibited.
         c.   Panel placement shall include a repeating pattern through a
change in plane, offset, and reveal, pilaster, projection, fenestration
patterns, or piers.
         d.   One-third (1/3) of an exterior wall, not including gable ends,
shall be finished with materials such as hardieplank or wood siding, stucco,
plaster, glass, stone, brick, or other decorative masonry, unless the Planning
Commission waives or reduces this requirement upon determination that panel
color, design, layout, pattern or texture will result in the appearance that
more than one (1) primary material was used on the wall in equivalent
proportion or greater.
         e.   Minimum width for any metal panel is thirty six inches (36").
      4.   The use of metal roofs and metal doors is permitted and shall
utilize contrasting or complementary colors when used in conjunction with
architectural metal panel systems.
      5.   Structures which are not visible from a public right-of- way,
including pedestrian, transit, and bicycle corridors, may be exempt from these
requirements upon written recommendation from the Development Review Committee
and approval by the Planning Commission.
      6.   Publicly owned or operated utility buildings may be exempted from
this requirement upon review of the Planning Commission and approval of the
City Council.
   C.   Materials Of Accessory Structure: The following building design
standards shall apply to all nonresidential accessory structures, regardless of
zoning district:
      1.   The outside surface of any nonresidential accessory structure shall
be constructed of the highest quality materials and shall be factory finished,
stained, integrally colored, or otherwise suitably treated.
      2.   Metal siding, or materials which appear to be metal siding, are
permitted for nonresidential accessory structures subject to the following
provisions:
         a.   A wainscot finish, a minimum of four feet (4') in height, shall
be provided on any facade visible from a public right- of-way, including
pedestrian, transit, and bicycle corridors.
         b.   The wainscot finish shall be of a material that is compatible
with the primary structure on site.
      3.   Metal roofs and metal doors are permitted on any nonresidential
accessory structure.
      4.   Publicly owned or operated utility buildings may be exempted from
this requirement upon review of the Planning Commission and approval of the
City Council.
   D.   Noncomplying Nonresidential Structure: Any nonresidential structure
that was lawfully approved prior to enactment of this section, and that does
not comply with the building design standards contained herein, shall be
considered a noncomplying structure. The following regulations shall apply to
all noncomplying nonresidential structures:
      1.   Any addition shall be made in full compliance with the provisions of
this section. Portions of the structure not affected by additions may remain
without any requirement to retrofit the existing surfacing.
      2.   Damaged or destroyed noncomplying structures may be restored in
accordance with section
10-5-4 of this title. (Ord. 2017-02, 1-3-2017)
10-1-39: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used
in the interpretation and construction of this title. Words used in the present
tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural,
and the plural the singular; the word “building” shall include the word
“structure”, the words “used” or “occupied” shall include arranged, designed,
constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used or
occupied; the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory, and the word “may”
is permissive; the word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual; the word
“lot” includes the words plot or parcel. An asterisk (*) at the definition
means that the word is defined in the State Code. Words used in this title, but
not defined herein, shall have the meaning as defined in any other ordinance
adopted by the City.
ABUTTING: Property that is adjacent or contiguous to another property including
property separated by an alley, a private right-of-way or a utility strip.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A subordinate building or structure, located
on the same lot with the main building, occupied by or devoted to an accessory
use. An accessory building or structure is clearly incidental to, and
customarily found in connection with the main building, is operated and
maintained for the benefit of the principal use, and is not a dwelling unit.
Detached garages, sheds, workshops, and barns are examples of accessory
buildings or structures.
ACCESSORY CARETAKER RESIDENCE: A dwelling unit located within or upon a non-
residential building or property that is occupied by a person or a single
family with at least one occupant who is employed by or who owns the primary
business located on that property and has on-site job responsibilities
associated with said business. All caretaker dwellings must be accessory to the
primary use of the property.
ACRE, NET: A measurement of the developable portion of an area, after excluding
the area required for public or private streets or access ways, adjacent park
strip(s), and sidewalk(s).
ACTIVE SOLAR SYSTEM: A system of equipment capable of collecting and converting
incident solar radiation into heat, mechanical or electrical energy, and
transferring these forms of energy by a separate apparatus to storage or to the
point of use. It includes water heating, space heating or cooling, electric
energy generating or mechanical energy generating and the architectural and
engineering design or system necessary to balance or optimize active
components.
AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY (AGRICULTURAL BUSINESS): The processing of raw food
products by packaging, treating and/or intensive feeding. “Agricultural
industry” includes, but is not limited to, animal feed yards, the raising of
furbearing animals, food packaging and/or processing plants, commercial poultry
or egg production, commercial greenhouses, and similar uses as determined by
the Planning Commission.
AGRICULTURAL USE: The use of a tract of land for growing crops in the open,
dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture, general farming uses and
necessary accessory uses, including the structures necessary for carrying out
farming operations.
AGRICULTURE: The production of food through the tilling of the soil, the
raising of crops, breeding and raising of domestic animals and fowl, except
household pets, and not including any agricultural industry or business.
AIRPORT: Any airport definitions and regulations which are adopted by North
Salt Lake City, except as airports are governed under the general use
regulations of this title.
ALCOHOL, BREWPUB: A restaurant type establishment that also has a beer brewery,
producing beer in batch sizes not less than seven (7) U.S. barrels (31
gallons), on the same property which produces only enough beer for sale and
consumption on site or for retail carryout sale in containers. At least fifty
percent (50%) of the beer sold shall be brewed on the premises. Revenue from
food sales shall constitute at least fifty percent (50%) of the total business
revenues, excluding retail carryout sales of beer.
ALLEY: A public accessway less than twenty six feet (26') in width, which is
designed to give secondary access to lots or abutting properties. An alley
shall not be considered a street for the purpose of this title.
ALLUVIAL SOILS: Areas subject to periodic flooding as defined in the soil
survey prepared by the soil conservation service which encompasses North Salt
Lake City.
AMBULANCE SERVICE: An emergency response facility housing ambulance services,
dispatching, staging, and maintenance.
AMUSEMENT PARK: Any place of organized amusement activity not conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building, whether a commercial or nonprofit
enterprise, except temporary celebrations sanctioned by the City Council by a
special permit.
ANIMAL CLINIC (Also Known As ANIMAL HOSPITAL): Any building or portion thereof
designed or used for the care or treatment of animals or fowl, and/or in which
veterinary service is provided or is available.
ANIMAL KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Land or buildings used in the keeping, care, or
boarding of more than three (3) dogs, cats, or other household pets as a
commercial endeavor.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A public or licensed private facility to temporarily detain
and/or dispose of stray dogs, cats and other animals.
ANIMAL, VETERINARY OFFICE: A place where animals or pets are given medical or
surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as
a kennel shall be limited to short term boarding and shall be only incidental
to such hospital use. Short term boarding facilities shall be completely
enclosed in a building.
ANTENNA: Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting disks, or similar devices
used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves external to or
attached to the exterior of any building.
ANTENNA, COMMUNICATION TOWER: See definition of antenna.
APPURTENANCES: Appendages and incidental details on buildings are to be
allowed, such as building projections or coverings for mechanical equipment.
ARCHITECTURAL METAL PANELS: A modular exterior cladding system comprised of
insulated or uninsulated prefinished metal panels and supporting framework
attached to the structural frame of a building.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION: Any building or structural projection which is not
intended for occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of
a building or structure, but not including signs.
ARCHITECTURALLY INCOMPATIBLE: Buildings or structures which are incongruous
with adjacent and nearby development due to dissimilarities in style,
materials, proportions, size, shape and/or other architectural or site design
features.
ART GALLERY: An establishment engaged in the sale, loan or display of
paintings, sculpture or other works of art. The term “art gallery” does not
include libraries or museums.
ASSISTED LIVING CENTER: A facility licensed by the State of Utah that provides
a combination of housing and personalized care designed to respond to the
individual needs of more than two (2) individuals who require help with the
activities of daily living, such as meal preparation, personal grooming,
housekeeping, healthcare or medication. Care is provided in a professionally
managed group living environment in a way that promotes maximum independence
and dignity of each resident.
AUDITORIUM: A multipurpose assembly facility that is designed to accommodate
conventions, live performances, trade shows, sports events and other such
events.
AUTOMATIC CAR WASH: A facility for automatic or self-service washing and
cleaning of automobiles and small trucks not exceeding three thousand (3,000)
gross vehicle weight (GVW).
AUTOMATIC TRUCK WASH: A facility for automatic self-service washing or cleaning
of trucks exceeding three thousand (3,000) gross vehicle weight (GVW).
AUTOMOBILE BODY AND FENDER SHOP: A facility for major automobile, truck, mobile
home, recreational coach or recreation vehicle repairs to body, frame or
fenders, and includes rebuilding.
AUTOMOBILE PAINT SHOP: A facility for painting of automobiles, trucks,
trailers, boats, or other travel or recreation vehicles or units.
AUTOMOBILE SELF-SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline or any other motor fuel
for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale and is dispensed to the
vehicle by the purchaser. The self- service station may be independent or in
conjunction with a retail store.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline or any other motor fuel or
lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to
the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles, and where
service performed may include tube and tire repair, battery charging, storage
of merchandise, and tune up of automobiles, but not including major auto
repair.
AUTOMOTIVE DETAIL AND TRIM SHOPS: An establishment that provides services
related to automotive detailing services or the sale and installation of
automotive accessories such as replacement glass, tinting, audio, upholstery,
or other miscellaneous vehicle trim and includes no outdoor storage of
materials, nor storage of vehicles awaiting service for a period greater than
48 hours.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AREA: An open area used for display, sale or rental of new or
used motor vehicles, mobile homes, recreational coaches, or recreation vehicles
in operable condition.
AUTOMOTIVE SALVAGE YARD (AUTOMOBILE WRECKING OR PROCESSING YARD): A lot or
portion thereof used for the storage, dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobiles, other vehicles, other machinery, or parts thereof.
AVERAGE SLOPE: An expression of rise or fall in elevation along a line
perpendicular to the contours of the land connecting the highest point of land
to the lowest point of land within a lot or building area. A vertical rise of
one hundred feet (100') between two (2) points one hundred feet (100') apart
measured on a horizontal plane is one hundred percent (100%) slope.
BAKERY: An establishment where the primary function is the baking of food
products for wholesale trade or directly to the consumer.
BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION: The excavation or recontouring of the site.
BIKE PATH (BIKE TRAIL, BIKE LANE): A right-of-way designed and constructed for
use by bicycles and not intended for use by pedestrians or motor vehicles of
any kind. A bike path may be located within or without a street right-of-way,
at grade, or at grade separated from vehicular traffic. Bike lanes may also be
included as a part of a street.
*BILLBOARD: A freestanding ground sign located on industrial, commercial or
residential property if the sign is designed or intended to direct attention to
a business, product or service that is not sold, offered or existing on the
property where the sign is located.
BLOCK: The land surrounded by streets or other rights-of-way, other than an
alley, or land which is designated as a block on any recorded subdivision plat.
BLOOD DONATION CENTER: A commercial establishment whose primary function is the
collection, storage and distribution of blood and blood products.
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling where, for compensation, meals are provided for at
least three (3) but not more than fifteen (15) persons.
BUBBLER: An irrigation head that delivers water to the root zone by "flooding"
the planted area, usually measured in gallons per minute. Bubblers exhibit a
trickle, umbrella or short stream pattern.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended to be used for the shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals or property.
BUILDING COVERAGE: That percentage of the lot covered by principal or accessory
buildings or structures.
BUILDING FORM AND MASSING: A combination of three-dimensional geometric solids
which makes up the exterior shape of a structure.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the highest point of elevation
of the finished grade surface at the foundation to the highest point of the
building roof or coping.
BUILDING MATERIALS DISTRIBUTION: A type of wholesale distributor supplying the
building materials industry, but excluding retail outlets conducted in a
warehouse format.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The person designated or appointed as the building official
for North Salt Lake City by the City Council.
BUILDING, PUBLIC: “Public building” means a building owned and operated, or
owned and intended to be operated by a public agency of the United States of
America or the State of Utah, or any of its subdivisions.
BUS LINE STATION/TERMINAL: Facility used for the temporary housing or parking
of buses, and the loading and unloading of passengers.
BUS LINE YARD AND REPAIR FACILITY: Facility for the storage and repair of
buses.
CAMPGROUND: A public area designated by a public agency for camping, or a
private area licensed by the City Council for camping.
CAMPING: A temporary establishment of living facilities, such as tents or
recreational coaches, as regulated by this title.
CAR WASH: Facility used for washing and cleaning of passenger vehicles,
recreational vehicles, or other light duty vehicles. A car wash may be an
accessory use to a gas station or convenience store or it may be a principal
use on the lot.
CARPORT: A private garage not completely enclosed by walls or floors. For the
purposes of this title, a carport shall be subject to all the regulations
prescribed for a private garage.
CARRIAGEWAY: A pedestrian walkway between the curb and sidewalk, constructed of
poured concrete, brick pavers or natural stone pavers.
CEMETERY: Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery
purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: An official authorization to occupy a structure as
issued by the North Salt Lake building official, or designee.
CHANGE OF USE: The replacement of an existing land use by a new land use, or a
change in the nature of an existing land use which does not increase the size,
occupancy, or site requirements. A change of ownership, tenancy, name or
management, or a change in product or service within the same use
classification where the previous nature of the use, line of business, or other
function is substantially unchanged is not a change of use.
CHECK CASHING/PAYDAY LOAN BUSINESS: A business that conducts transactions of
cashing a check for consideration or extending a deferred deposit loan and
shall include any other similar types of businesses licensed by the State
pursuant to the Check Cashing and Deferred Deposit Lending Registration Act
(Utah State Code 7-23). The term check cashing shall not include fully
automated stand alone services located inside of an existing building, so long
as the automated service incorporates no signage in the windows or outside of
the building.
CHECK VALVE: A device used in sprinkler heads or pipe to prevent water from
draining out of the pipe through gravity flow. Used to prevent pollution or
contamination or the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the
secondary irrigation system.
*CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER:
   A.   The Mayor in municipalities operating under all forms of municipal
government, except the Council-Manager form; or
   B.   The City Manager in municipalities operating under the Council-Manager
form of municipal government.
CHURCH: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, maintained
and controlled by a duly recognized religious organization where persons
regularly assemble for worship and religious instruction.
CITY COUNCIL: The elected Legislative Body of North Salt Lake City.
CLADDING MATERIAL: The application of one material over another to provide skin
or layer intended to control the infiltration of weather elements, or for
aesthetic purposes.
CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL: A building in which a group of dentists, physicians
or allied professionals in the healing arts are associated for the conduct of
their professions. The clinic may include a dental or medical laboratory and an
apothecary, but it shall not include inpatient care or operating rooms for
major surgery.
CLUB, PRIVATE: A social, recreational or athletic club or similar association
or corporation incorporated under the provisions of the Utah Nonprofit
Corporation and Cooperation Act for the above stated purposes, which maintains
or intends to maintain premises upon which alcoholic beverages are or will be
stored, consumed or sold, and which for that reason is required to be licensed
by the State.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is marked and/or used for commercial
purposes. This shall include, but not be limited to, the following: buses, dump
trucks, limousines, roll back tow trucks, stake body trucks, step vans, taxis,
tow trucks and tractor trailers.
COMMUNICATION TOWER: A tower structure used for transmitting a broadcast signal
or for receiving a broadcast signal (or other signal) for retransmission. A
communication tower does not include “ham” radio transmission antenna.
COMMUNITY GARDEN: An area of land managed and maintained by an identifiable
group of community members used to grow and harvest food crops and/or nonfood,
ornamental crops such as flowers, for personal or group use, consumption,
donation, or sale, or for educational purposes. Generally operated as not for
profit, limited sales and events may also occur on the site to fund the
gardening activities and other charitable purposes.
COMPATIBLE DESIGN: The visual relationship between adjacent and nearby
buildings and the immediate streetscape, in terms of a consistency of
materials, colors, building elements, building mass, and other constructed
elements of the urban environment, is such that abrupt or severe differences
are avoided.
COMPATIBLE LAND USE: A use of land and/or building(s) that, in terms of
development intensity, building coverage, design, bulk and occupancy, traffic
generation, parking requirements, access and circulation, site improvements,
site design, landscaping, storage needs, and public facilities and service
demands, is consistent with and similar to neighboring uses and does not
adversely affect the quality of life of persons in surrounding or nearby
buildings.
COMPATIBLE WITH RESIDENTIAL: Compatibility will be measured by whether or not
the proposed development adversely impacts the quality of life in the area.
Property values must be sustained or enhanced as opposed to diminishing values;
the effects of ultimate traffic on streets will be considered rather than
complaints that a new development will increase unwanted traffic; improvements
in the infrastructure will be considered as to how and who pays for them;
positive contributions to the financing of needed improvements will be weighed
against the assessment on existing residential developments; proximity of
possible impacts will be evaluated and indirectly impacted citizens will be
considered in the group of the general citizenry.
CONDITIONAL USE: A land use that, because of its unique characteristics or
potential impact on North Salt Lake City, surrounding neighbors or adjacent
land uses, may not be compatible in some areas or may be compatible only if
certain conditions are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental
impacts.
CONDOMINIUM: The ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit project, together
with an undivided interest in common in the common areas and facilities of the
property as provided by State law. A condominium development is comparable to a
subdivision in that each development is characterized by multiple individual
ownerships in a single development. In a condominium development, the multiple
individual ownerships are in structures, whereas in subdivisions such
ownerships are in land. For regulation purposes, the development of a
condominium project is treated by Utah State law and by this title as a
subdivision, and condominium developments must comply with the subdivision
regulations of this title.
CONTRACTOR SERVICES: Any person or business engaged in, or offering to engage
in, any construction trade for which licensure is required under the Utah
Construction Trades Licensing Act or any handyman services not required for
State licensure.
CONTRACTOR’S YARD/OFFICE: A use that provides construction businesses with a
base of operations that can include office space and indoor or outdoor storage
of construction equipment or materials used by the construction business. This
use excludes salvage or recycling operations.
CONVENIENCE RETAIL: An establishment which engages in the limited retail sale
of convenience food items and automobile fuel. Businesses within this
definition must conduct all sales and storage entirely within an enclosed
structure and must specialize in the sale of convenience food and automobile
fuel goods only. No fast food or sit down restaurants are included in the
definition of “convenience retail”.
CORRAL: A space, other than a building, less than one acre in area or less than
one hundred feet (100') in width, used for the confinement of animals or fowl.
*COUNTY: The unincorporated area of the County.
CREMATORIUM: As applied to funeral homes or mortuaries: A dedicated area within
a licensed funeral home or mortuary building, or an accessory building of a
licensed funeral home or mortuary, wherein human remains are cremated in a
cremation retort.
CROSSWALK OR WALKWAY: A right-of-way designed for use by pedestrians and not
intended for use by motor vehicles of any kind, a crosswalk or walkway or
pedestrianway may be located within or without a street right-of-way, at grade,
or grade separated from vehicular traffic.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street which is designed to remain permanently closed at one end,
with the closed end terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
CULINARY WATER FACILITIES: Water supply lines, pumps, springs, wells or any
other physical facilities necessary to provide a supply of culinary water to a
use in sufficient quantity and of approved quality to meet the standards of
this title.
DAIRY: A commercial establishment for the manufacture, processing or packaging
of dairy products and their sale. For purposes of this definition, the
production of milk on a farm for wholesale marketing off the premises shall not
classify the farm as a dairy.
DAYCARE CENTER, ADULT: A nonmedical facility for the daytime care of adults
who, due to advanced age, handicap or impairment, require assistance and/or
supervision during the day by staff.
DAYCARE CENTER, CHILD: See the definition for daycare center, commercial or
daycare center, residential.
DAYCARE CENTER, COMMERCIAL: A commercial establishment for the care of
children, for compensation, but not including a public school.
DAYCARE CENTER, RESIDENTIAL: A residential establishment for the care of
children, for compensation, but not including a public school. Such use shall
be defined as a home occupation.
DENSITY: A measure of the number of dwelling units per acre of area. It shall
be expressed dwelling units per acre (DU/acre). Unbuildable land (as defined by
the Planning Commission) is land with a slope greater than thirty percent
(30%), subject to inundation or other geological hazards.
DENSITY, GROSS: A measure of the number of dwelling units per acre of
developable, including any area designated as a public or private street or
access way, adjacent park strip(s), and sidewalk(s).
DENSITY, NET: A measure of the number of dwelling units per acre of developable
land, which shall not include any area designated as a public or private street
or access way, adjacent park strip(s), and sidewalk(s).
DEVELOPER: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who causes
land to be divided into a subdivision for himself/herself or others, a
developer.
DEVELOPMENT (LAND): The conversion or alteration of use or physical
characteristics of land; placing improvements on the land; or putting land to
intensive use, including a subdivision, PUD, mobile home park, recreation
vehicle park, shopping center, industrial park or excavation.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE: A committee of City staff or City consultants,
whose primary responsibility is to review all development requests, process all
development applications and make recommendations with respect to development
applications to the Planning Commission, City Council, applicants and Mayor.
The committee includes, but is not limited to, the City Manager, City Engineer,
Community and Economic Development Director, Public Works Director, City
Planner, City Fire Chief, City Building Official, City Police Chief, and any
other person or agent that the City Manager deems appropriate to function as a
member of the committee.
*DISABILITY:
   A.   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more
of a person’s major life activities, including a person having a record of such
an impairment or being regarded as having such an impairment.
   B.   “Disability” does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to,
any Federally controlled substance, as defined in section 102 of the Controlled
Substances Act, 21 USC 802.
DISTRICT (Also Known As ZONE OR ZONING DISTRICT): A portion of the territory of
North Salt Lake City established as a zoning district by this title, within
which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations
thereof apply under the provisions of this title.
DOMESTIC FARM ANIMALS: Any domesticated animal which has traditionally been
kept on a farm. Regulations for domestic farm animals are located in section
10-10-6 of this title.
DRIP EMITTER: Drip irrigation fittings that deliver water slowly at the root
zone of the plant, usually measured in gallons per hour.
DRIVEWAY: A private roadway, the use of which is limited to persons residing,
employed, or otherwise using or visiting the parcel on which the driveway is
located.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof designed or used as the principal
residence or sleeping place of one or more persons or families, but not
including a tent, a recreational coach, hotel, motel, hospital or nursing home.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A building containing multiple single family dwelling
units, sharing a common wall at the property line.
DWELLING, FOUR- FAMILY: A building containing only four (4) dwelling units.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building containing more than one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE- FAMILY: A building containing only one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, THREE- FAMILY: A building containing only three (3) dwelling units.
DWELLING, TWO- FAMILY: A building containing only two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment complex, hotel or
motel, providing complete, independent living facilities for a single person or
family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking
and sanitation.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY: A subordinate dwelling, which has its own eating,
sleeping, and sanitation facilities which is: 1) within or attached to a
single-family residential building, or 2) within a detached accessory structure
associated with a single-family dwelling.
EASEMENT: Any portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use by a
person or agency other than the legal owner of said property. The easement may
be for use on, under, or above said lot or lots.
*ELDERLY PERSON: A person who is sixty (60) years old or older, who desires or
needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable
of living independently.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT:
   A.   A report which describes, by means of written narrative as well as
maps, a geographical area in terms of existing:
      1.   Slope;
      2.   Soils;
      3.   Watercourses;
      4.   Water table;
      5.   Flood hazard areas;
      6.   Geologic hazards;
      7.   Vegetative types;
      8.   Wildlife;
      9.   Wildlife habitat; or
      10.   Essential urban services presently available.
   B.   The report includes a tabulation of proposed population density and the
numbers and types of proposed dwellings and other buildings and spaces to be
occupied at full development.
   C.   The report further describes by means of written narrative, as well as
maps, the impact of the proposed development on the following specific subject
areas once the anticipated population density is achieved within the area to be
developed:
      1.   Watercourses and flood hazards;
      2.   Natural vegetation;
      3.   Wildlife;
      4.   Erosion;
      5.   Topsoil loss;
      6.   Sedimentation of watercourses and reservoirs;
      7.   Slope stability;
      8.   Dust;
      9.   Fire potential;
      10.   Accumulation of solid or liquid wastes; or
      11.   The need and desire for urban services.
   D.   The report evaluates the potential area wide economic impact of the
development on both private and public economic sectors and the potential
impact on school, public utility and transportation systems.
   E.   The report recommends measures which, if undertaken, will mitigate or
obviate the adverse impacts resulting from construction of the proposed
development, and discusses the benefits to be gained from such development, and
what adverse impacts cannot be avoided and the extent of their detrimental
influence.
EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS STORAGE YARDS: Includes any use related to outdoor
storage of large construction equipment or machinery, company vehicles or large
quantities of other materials. Typical uses include contractor storage yards
and corporation yards.
EQUIPMENT RENTAL (INDOOR AND/OR OUTDOOR): A use involving the rental of
equipment including tools, lawn and garden equipment, party supplies and
similar goods and equipment, including storage and incidental maintenance. This
term excludes heavy construction vehicles and equipment.
EQUIPMENT RENTAL, SALES, AND SERVICE, HEAVY: A type of use involving the rental
of equipment, including heavy construction vehicles and equipment, in which all
operations are not contained within fully enclosed buildings.
ESSENTIAL FACILITY: Any facility which is common to the community and essential
for servicing the residents and businesses: utilities, radio and television
stations (transmitting only), cable TV, sanitation, health and public safety
facilities provided by a public utility or governmental agency for overhead,
surface or underground services, and such other necessary uses as may be
approved by the City Council by resolution, but excluding any building,
electrical substation, or transmission line of fifty (50) kV or greater
capacity.
EVAPO- TRANSPIRATION (ET): The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil
and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time, expressed
in inches per day, month or year.
EXCAVATION: Any disruption of the soil mantle or manmade surfacing of the same.
Excavations may be either in the nature of a process or a use. Excavations
undertaken for the purpose of preparing a site for an ultimate land use or for
repairing or constructing urban service facilities are processes; whereas
excavations such as gravel pits, quarries or mines are uses which require
specific use authorization in the zoning district where located, in addition to
a conditional use permit if such is required.
EXPLOSIVE MANUFACTURING AND STORAGE: The making and storage of explosive
devices, or explosive materials wholesale distributors.
FAMILY: One individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage
or adoption, living together in a single dwelling unit and maintaining a common
household. A family may include four (4), but not more than four (4),
nonrelated persons living with the residing family. The term “family” shall not
be construed to mean a group of nonrelated individuals, a fraternity, club or
institutional group.
FARMERS’ MARKET: An establishment for the sale of fresh produce and related
food items, which may have outdoor storage and sales. A farmers’ market may
provide space for one or more vendors.
FEE SCHEDULE: The North Salt Lake adopted list of fees and charges for services
which includes, but is not limited to, fees for land development activities.
FEED YARD: An agricultural industry in which animals or fowl are kept and
intensively fed in relatively restricted area, as contrasted with open
pasturage.
FENCE: A structure erected to establish property boundaries, buffer
incompatible land uses or provide privacy or security. A wall or similar
barrier shall be deemed a fence.
FENCE, ELECTRIC: A fence designed to protect a property or properties from
intrusion by means of conducting an electric current along one or more wires
thereof so that a person or animal touching any such wire or wires will receive
an electric shock.
FENCE, OPAQUE OR SOLID: A constructed solid or opaque barrier that blocks the
transmission of at least ninety five percent (95%) of light and visibility
through the fence, and is erected to screen areas from public streets and
abutting properties.
FINAL PLAT: A plat map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this
title, which is designed to be placed on record in the Office of the County
Recorder.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: A building, property or activity, the principal use or
purpose of which is the provision of financial services, including, but not
limited to, banks, facilities for automated teller machines (ATMs), credit
unions, savings and loan institutions, stock brokerages and mortgage companies.
“Financial institution” shall not include any use or other type of institution
which is otherwise listed in the table of permitted and conditional uses for
each category of zoning district or districts under this title.
FIREFIGHTING FACILITIES: Any water supply, water lines, fire hydrants and other
protective devices as may be required in accordance with the provisions of this
title.
FLAG LOT: A lot of irregular configuration in which an access strip (a strip of
land of a width less than the required lot width) connects the main body of the
lot to the street frontage.
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS OR GASES, HEATING FUEL DISTRIBUTION AND STORAGE: A type of
wholesale distributor engaged in supplying flammable liquids, gases and/or
heating fuel.
FLEA MARKET (INDOOR): A building devoted to the indoor sales of new and used
merchandise by independent vendors with individual stalls, tables, or other
spaces.
FLEA MARKET (OUTDOOR): An outdoor area devoted to the periodic outdoor sales of
new and used merchandise by independent vendors with individual stalls, tables,
or other spaces.
FLOOD CONTROL WORDS AND PHRASES: All flood controlled related terms as defined
in
11-2-1.
FLOOD HAZARD: A hazard to land or improvements due to inundation or overflow
after having sufficient velocity to transport or deposit debris, scour the
surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode the banks of watercourses.
FLOODPLAIN SOILS: Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the soil
survey prepared by the soil conservation service which encompasses North Salt
Lake City as being “on the floodplain” or subject to “flooding”.
FLOODPLAINS: Areas adjoining any streams, ponds or lakes which are subject to
“100-year recurrence interval floods” on maps prepared for the “national flood
insurance program”, or a study conducted by anyone else expert and experienced
in the preparation of hydrological studies and the determination of flood
lines.
FLOOR: See definition of story (floor).
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the areas of the several floors of the building or
structure, including areas used for human occupancy or required for the conduct
of the business or use, and basements, attics and penthouses, as measured from
the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, solar greenhouses
or other solar equipment appurtenant to a solar energy system, unenclosed
porches, attics not used for human occupancy, nor any floor space in an
accessory building or in the main building intended or designed for the parking
of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this title, or
any such floor space intended and designed for accessory heating and
ventilating equipment.
FOOD PROCESSING: Manufacturing establishment producing or processing food and
related products for consumption.
FUNERAL HOME OR MORTUARY: An establishment where the activities necessary for
the care and custody of the dead, including: refrigeration, embalming;
cremation; other necessary care; viewings; wakes; funerals; and other rites and
ceremonies consistent with the proper final disposition of the dead, are
conducted.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of
motor vehicles owned or used by the occupants of the building to which it is
accessory; provided, that a garage shall be considered part of the dwelling if
the garage and dwelling have a roof or wall in common.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage,
designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling, leasing,
renting or storing motor vehicles.
GAS STATION: A principal building site and structures for the sale and
dispensing of motor fuels or other petroleum products and accessory the sale of
convenience retail.
*GENERAL PLAN:
   A.   A document that North Salt Lake City adopts that sets forth general
guidelines for proposed future development of the land within North Salt Lake
City; and
   B.   Is commonly referred to as a “master plan” or “comprehensive plan”.
GEOLOGIC HAZARD:
   A.   A surface fault rupture;
   B.   Shallow groundwater;
   C.   Liquefaction;
   D.   A landslide;
   E.   A debris flow;
   F.   Unstable soil;
   G.   A rockfall; or
   H.   Any other geologic condition that presents a risk:
      1.   To life;
      2.   Of substantial loss of real property; or
      3.   Of substantial damage to real property.
GOLF COURSE: An area free of buildings, except for restrooms, pro shop,
clubhouse, a reception or concession area within a clubhouse, executive
offices, dressing rooms, equipment storage, golf related repair shop,
maintenance buildings or pavilions, and used primarily for golf. Golf carts and
other golf course related maintenance vehicles shall be permitted on a golf
course.
GOVERNING BODY: The City Council of North Salt Lake City.
GOVERNMENTAL FACILITY: Federal, State or local government facilities which
provide and support public governmental activities.
GRADE (LOT GRADE, FINISHED GRADE): The final grade or elevation of the building
site, slope or terrace, including the area five feet (5') from the foundation.
GRADING PLAN: The grading plan shows all finish grades, spot elevations as
necessary and existing and new contours with the developed landscape area.
GREENHOUSE: A temporary or permanent accessory structure typically made of, but
not limited to, glass, plastic, or fiberglass in which plants are cultivated.
GROUND COVER: Material planted in such a way as to form a continuous cover over
the ground that can be maintained at a height not more than twelve inches
(12").
GROUP HOMES: A home for certain handicapped or elderly persons as defined by
Utah State law as being permitted in residential areas of North Salt Lake City
by conditional use permit.
HARDSCAPE: Patios, decks and paths. Does not include driveways and sidewalks.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Solid waste or a combination of solid wastes which, because of
its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics
may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness or may
pose a substantial present or potential hazard if transported, disposed of, or
otherwise managed.
HEALTH AND FITNESS FACILITY: A business or membership organization providing
exercise facilities and/or nonmedical personal services to patrons, including,
but not limited to, gymnasiums (except facilities owned by a governmental
entity), private clubs (athletic, health, or recreational), reducing salons,
tanning salons, and weight control establishments.
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL: See definition of heavy manufacturing.
HEAVY MANUFACTURING: The assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods and
materials using processes that ordinarily have greater than average impacts on
the environment, or that ordinarily have significant impacts on the use and
enjoyment of adjacent property in terms of noise,smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or
health and safety hazards, or that otherwise do not constitute “light
manufacturing”. Heavy manufacturing generally includes processing and
fabrication of large or bulky products, products made from extracted or raw
materials, or products involving flammable or explosive materials and processes
which require extensive floor areas or land areas for the fabrication and/or
incidental storage of the products. The term “heavy manufacturing” shall
include land uses such as refineries and chemical manufacturing. The term
“heavy manufacturing” shallnot include any use which is otherwise listed
specifically in the table of permitted and conditional uses for the category of
zoning district or districts under this title.
HEAVY TRUCK: Any vehicle classified as “heavy” by the Federal Highway
Administration.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation of a person or family where they reside and
which occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
structure for dwelling and residential purposes, and does not change the
residential character of the dwelling or the neighborhood, and in connection
with which there is no display and/or stock of merchandise. A business license
is required for any home occupation.
HOSPITAL: An institution providing health services, primarily for inpatients,
and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral
part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff
offices.
HOTEL/MOTEL: An establishment providing, for a fee, sleeping accommodations and
customary lodging services, including maid service, the furnishing and upkeep
of furniture and bed linens, and telephone and desk service. Related ancillary
uses may include conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, reception centers,
and recreational facilities.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house and kept for
company or pleasure, such as dogs, cats and canaries, but not normally
dangerous animals. Purebred miniature Vietnamese potbelly pigs and other
similar purebred miniature pigs, not exceeding one hundred twenty five (125)
pounds and twenty two inches (22") in height at the shoulder, limited to no
more than two (2) miniature potbelly pigs per residence.
HUMAN SCALE: The proportional relationship of the physical environment to human
dimensions.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Impervious surfaces are those that do not absorb
precipitation (water) and thus cause ponding and/or runoff. All buildings,
parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, or any areas in concrete and
asphalt shall be considered impervious surfaces within this definition. In
addition, other areas determined by the City Engineer to be impervious within
the meaning of this definition will also be classed as impervious surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO: A measure of the intensity of land use. It is
determined by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces within the
site by the base site area.
IMPOUND LOT: A facility that provides temporary storage for vehicles that are
to be claimed by titleholders or their agents or where police or privately
impounded vehicles may be kept for legal evidence or other purposes, or while
awaiting repairs. Normally where damaged vehicles are taken after an accident.
IMPROVEMENTS: Work, objects, devices, facilities or utilities required to be
constructed or installed in a land development. Such improvements may include,
but are not limited to, street construction to required standards, water
facilities, sewer facilities, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, drainage
facilities, street trees, street signs, streetlights, traffic control or safety
devices, fire hydrants, survey monuments, and such other facilities or
construction required by this title, the subdivision regulations, or by the
Planning Commission and/or City Council for the necessary proper development of
the proposed land development.
IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT: An agreement between North Salt Lake City and a
developer, wherein the developer agrees to install improvements required by
this title, subdivision regulations, or by the Planning Commission and/or City
Council for the necessary proper development of the proposed land development.
INCINERATOR, MEDICAL WASTE/HAZARDOUS WASTE: A device using heat, for the
reduction of medical/hazardous waste materials, as defined by the State of Utah
Division of Solid and Hazardous Waste.
INDUSTRIAL ASSEMBLY: An industrial use engaged in the fabrication of finished
or partially finished products from component parts produced off site. Assembly
use shall not entail metal stamping, food processing, chemical processing or
painting other than painting that is accessory to the assembly use.
INFECTIOUS WASTE: Solid waste that contains or may reasonably be expected to
contain pathogens of sufficient virulence and quantity that exposure to the
waste by a susceptible host could result in an infectious disease.
INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PLAN: Comprehensive management for best assurance of
maintaining standards and conditions of approval is the intent in the
administration of a conditional use permit. Therefore, every assurance will be
required to maximize the meeting of the community's performance standards and
minimize the problems of their enforcement through approved comprehensive
management plans which have been prepared by the applicant and approved by the
City Administrative Land Use Authority.
INTERPRETATION: An administrative decision regarding the general provisions of
this title to specific cases. Interpretations shall not include administrative
decisions that will affect a permitted use, conditional use or nonconforming
use.
IRRIGATION PLAN: The irrigation plan shows the components of the irrigation
system with water meter size, backflow prevention (when outdoor irrigation is
supplied with culinary water), precipitation rates, flow rate and operating
pressure for each irrigation circuit, and identification of all irrigation
equipment.
JUNK: Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber
debris or other waste or salvage materials; dismantled, junked or wrecked
automobiles, or parts thereof; and old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous metal
materials.
JUNKYARD1: The use of any lot portion of a lot, or tract of land for the
storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap
material, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or
other vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof; provided, that this definition
shall be deemed not to include such uses which are clearly accessory and
incidental to any agricultural use permitted in the district.
LABORATORY, MEDICAL, DENTAL, OPTICAL: A laboratory processing on or off site
orders limited to medical testing and precision fabrication of dental or
optical articles worn by patients.
LABORATORY, TESTING: A land use engaged in determining the physical qualities
of construction, medical or manufactured materials.
LAND, AGRICULTURAL: Land used for bona fide agricultural purposes, or which is
projected for agricultural use by the master plan or the zoning ordinance
adopted by North Salt Lake City, but not including legally existing
nonconforming uses located in areas so projected.
LAND, COMMERCIAL: Land used for bona fide commercial purposes, or which is
projected for commercial use by the master plan or the zoning ordinance adopted
by North Salt Lake City, except legally existing nonconforming uses located in
areas designated commercial in such ordinance.
LAND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: Adopted construction standards, including, but not
limited to, drawings, tables, charts and references which have been adopted by
the City Council by resolution and which set standards for the construction of
improvements to land and which regulate said construction of improvements to
land.
LAND, INDUSTRIAL: Land used for bona fide industrial purposes, or which is
projected for industrial use by the general plan or the zoning ordinance
adopted by North Salt Lake City, except legally existing nonconforming uses
located in areas designated industrial in such ordinance.
LAND USE: The conduct of an activity, or the performance of a function or
operation, on a site or in a building or facility for the purpose for which the
land or building is occupied, or maintained, arranged, designed or intended.
LAND USE INTENSITY: The degree to which land is used by man ranging from no use
to unremitting, continual and concentrated use of the land. Land use intensity
is normally measured by:
   A.   Type of use (i.e., agricultural, residential, commercial or
industrial);
   B.   Period of use in average hours per day;
   C.   Numbers of humans, associated animals and machines which occupy the
land during the average hours of use; and
   D.   The percent of the land covered by manmade structures and impervious
surfaces.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A person who holds a certificate to practice landscape
architecture in the state of Utah. Only a landscape architect can legally
create commercial landscape plans.
LANDSCAPE DESIGNER: A person who may or may not hold professional certificates
for landscape design/architecture and cannot legally create commercial
landscape plans. Landscape designers focus on residential design and
horticultural needs of home landscapes.
LANDSCAPE EDUCATION PACKAGE: A package that is intended to inform and educate
water users in the City about water efficient landscapes. This package should
include a listing of water conserving plants, certified landscape designers,
landscape architects, certified irrigation designers, and certified irrigation
contractors. Information regarding the City's water rates, billing format for
water use and commitment to water conservation may also be included.
LANDSCAPE PLAN DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE: The preparation of a graphic and written
criteria, specifications, and detailed plans to arrange and modify the effects
of natural features such as plantings, ground and water forms, circulation,
walks and other features to comply with the provisions of this title. The
landscape plan documentation package shall include a project data sheet, a
planting plan, an irrigation plan, and a grading plan.
LANDSCAPE ZONE: A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar
water needs, areas with similar microclimate (i.e., slope, exposure, wind,
etc.) and soil conditions, and areas that will be similarly irrigated. A
landscape zone can be served by one irrigation valve, or a set of valves with
the same schedule.
LANDSCAPING (LANDSCAPED): Any combination of living plants, such as trees,
shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers, or grass; natural features such as rock,
stone, or bark chips; and structural features, including but not limited to,
fountains, reflecting pools, outdoor art work, screen walls, fences or benches.
LAUNDRY, COMMERCIAL: An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of
laundering, dry cleaning, or dyeing services other than retail services
establishments. Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper
services, and linen supply services.
LEGISLATIVE BODY: The City Council.
LIBRARY: A public, nonprofit facility in which literary, musical, artistic, or
reference materials such as, but not limited to, books, manuscripts, computers,
recordings, or films are kept for use by or loaning to patrons of the facility.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL: See definition of light manufacturing.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING: The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and
materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fumes,
odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot where
such assembly, fabrication or processing takes place or where such processes
are housed entirely within a building. Light manufacturing generally includes
processing and fabrication of finished products, predominantly from previously
prepared materials. The term “light manufacturing” shall not include any use
which is otherwise listed specifically in the table of permitted and
conditional uses for the category of zoning district or districts under this
title.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE: A use that provides personal vehicular transportation for a
fee, and operating by appointment only.
LOCALSCAPES®: A locally adaptable and environmentally sustainable urban
landscape style that requires less irrigation than traditional Utah landscapes
(see www.localscapes.com).
LODGING HOUSE: A dwelling with not more than ten (10) guestrooms where, for
compensation, lodging is provided for at least three (3) but not more than
fifteen (15) persons, but not including motels or hotels.
LOT: A parcel or unit of land abutting a public street or approved private
street, described by metes and bounds and held or intended to be held in
separate lease or ownership, or a parcel or unit of land shown as a lot or
parcel on a subdivision plat map, planned unit development plot map, or
condominium lot map, provided it is created pursuant to this title.
LOT AREA: The area contained within the property lines of the individual
parcels of land shown on a subdivision plat or required by this title,
excluding any area within an existing street right-of-way, or any area required
as open space under this title, and including the area of any easements.
LOT AREA, BUILDABLE: The buildable area of a lot shall be designated as
follows:
   1.   The portion of a lot remaining after required yards, utility easements,
scenic easements, or other rights of way have been provided;
   2.   The area designated as the buildable area or building envelope on an
approved subdivision plat which is less than thirty percent (30%) slope;
   3.   Any portion of the lot not defined as nonbuildable.
LOT AREA, NONBUILDABLE: The nonbuildable area of a lot shall be designated as
follows:
   1.   Any portion of a lot defined as nonbuildable under Title 10, Chapter
12;
   2.   Any portion of a lot defined as nonbuildable by an approved
geotechnical study;
   3.   Any portion of a lot with slopes which are thirty percent (30%) or
greater;
   4.   Any portion of a lot included within a defined building envelope on a
plat which have slopes which are thirty percent (30%) or greater; or
   5.   Any portion of a lot with known or reasonably known geologic hazards.
LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT, AVERAGE: The average lot area for all dwelling
units of a single type. Individual lots may be smaller or larger than the
average; provided, that the average size is maintained and that all other
standards of this title are met.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection
or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same
street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
LOT DEPTH: The shortest horizontal distance in feet measured from any point on
the front lot line to any point on the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE: The length, in feet, of the front lot line which is coterminous
with the front street line.
LOT FRONTAGE, REQUIRED: See definition of lot frontage.
LOT HELD IN SEPARATE OWNERSHIP: All contiguous land held in one ownership at
the time of the passage of this title or at any time hereafter, whether or not
such land has been or is described separately, has separate chains of title, is
described on one or more than one Property Tax notice, or is otherwise divided
on paper.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, LEGAL NONCONFORMING: A lot which was legally created prior to the adoption
of this title.
LOT LINE, FRONT: For an interior lot, the lot line adjoining the street; for a
corner lot or through lot, each lot line adjoining a street.
LOT LINE, REAR: Ordinarily, that line of a lot which is opposite and most
distant from the front line of the lot. In the case of a triangular or gore
shaped lot, a line ten feet (10') in length within the parcel parallel to and
at a maximum distance from the front lot line. In cases where this definition
is ambiguous, the Community Development Director shall designate the rear lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line not a front or rear lot line. (This does
not apply to any yard fronting on a street, which is by definition a front yard
line.)
LOT LINES: The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT, RESTRICTED: A lot shall be designated as restricted when any of the
following conditions exist upon the lot:
   1.   Located within the designated Sensitive Lands Area Overlay Zone;
   2.   Noted as restricted on a recorded subdivision plat;
   3.   Having an average slope of fifteen percent (15%) or greater;
   4.   Containing critical slopes;
   5.   With known, suspect or probable geologic hazards;
   6.   With critical wildlife habitat;
   7.   With critical drainage channels or other natural features;
   8.   Containing other vital infrastructure; or
   9.   Having been designated by the City Engineer as restricted.
LOT RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land not less than thirty feet (30') in width
connecting a lot to a street for use as private access to that lot.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the
required front yard setback line or rear yard setback line, whichever is
shorter.
MAIN USE OR BUILDING: The principal use which will occur on a lot or the
principal structure to be used by the principal use on a lot, to which all
other uses and structures are accessory.
MAJOR STREET PLAN: A map of North Salt Lake City which shows the existing and
future public street system and which has been officially adopted by the
Planning Commission and City Council as the major street plan for North Salt
Lake City.
MANUFACTURED HOMES:
   A.   For purposes of this title, a “manufactured home” is the same as
defined in Utah Code Annotated section 58-56-3, except that the manufactured
home shall be attached to a permanent foundation in accordance with plans
providing for vertical loads, uplift and lateral forces and frost protection in
compliance with the International Building Code. All appendages, including
carports, garages, storage buildings, additions or alterations shall be built
in compliance with the International Building Code.
   B.   A manufactured home may not be excluded from any land use zone or area
in which a single- family residence would be permitted, provided the
manufactured home complies with all local land use ordinances, Building Codes
and any restrictive covenants, applicable to a single-family residence within
that zone or area.
MANUFACTURED/ MOBILE HOME SALES AND SERVICE: A facility for the sale and
service of manufactured/mobile homes.
MARKET ANALYSIS: An economic analysis of the feasibility of a project.
MICROCLIMATE: The climate of a very small restricted area that is different
from the surrounding area. These areas include shade areas, sun areas, and
areas protected by surrounding structures.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT: A development that includes residential and
nonresidential uses in the same building, on the same site, or as part of an
overall land development project.
MOBILE FOOD BUSINESS: A business that serves food or beverages from a self-
contained unit either motorized or in a trailer on wheels, and conducts all or
part of its operations on premises other than its own and is readily movable,
without disassembling, for transport to another location. The term “mobile food
business” shall not include mobile ice cream vendors.
MOBILE FOOD COURT: A parcel of land where two (2) or more mobile food
businesses congregate to offer food or beverages for sale to the public. Any
cluster of more than one mobile food business, vending cart and seasonal farm
stand, located on the same parcel of land shall be considered a mobile food
court.
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK: A truck used to operate a mobile food business that serves
food or beverages from an enclosed self- contained motorized vehicle. The term
“mobile food truck” shall not include mobile food trailers or mobile ice cream
vendors.
MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling of not less than thirty feet
(30') in length, designed for long term occupancy, and to be transported on its
own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers or detachable wheels; and which has
not been demonstrated to conform to the International Building Code for other
residences in North Salt Lake City. In determining if such a dwelling is
designed for long term occupancy, the following criteria shall be used: such a
dwelling contains a flush toilet, sleeping accommodations, a tub or shower
bath, kitchen facilities, and plumbing and electrical connections provided for
attachment to appropriate external systems, and ready for occupancy except for
connections to utilities and other minor work.
MOBILE HOME LOT: A space designed and approved by North Salt Lake City for
occupancy by mobile homes, and meeting all requirements of this title.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the
placement of mobile homes for nontransient use and consisting of two (2) or
more mobile home spaces, where the entire project is to be under single
ownership or management and meets all of the requirements of this title for
mobile home parks.
MOBILE HOME SPACE: A space within a mobile home park designed and to be used
for the accommodation of one mobile home.
MOBILE HOME STAND: That part of the mobile home space which has been reserved
for the placement of the mobile home and its appurtenant structures or
additions.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for residential
use where the lots are to be individually owned or leased, and occupied by
mobile homes.
MODEL HOME: A dwelling temporarily used as an on site sales office for a
residential development under construction. When the use of the model home as a
sales office is discontinued, the home shall be converted to meet all City
standards and land use ordinance regulations for the particular dwelling unit
(s).
MOTEL: See definition of hotel/motel.
MULCH: Any material such as rock, bark, wood chips or other materials left
loose and applied to the soil.
*MUNICIPALITY: A city or town.
MUSEUM: An institution for the acquisition, preservation, study and exhibition
of works of artistic, historical or scientific value and for which any sales
relating to such exhibits are incidental and accessory to the exhibits
presented.
NATURAL RETENTION AREA: An area of poorly drained soils which lies along stream
channels or swells or is adjacent to floodplain soils, which is subject to
periodic flooding.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: On site erection, fabrication or installation of any
building, structure, facility or addition thereto; or the shaping, finishing,
or alteration of raw ground.
NONBUILDABLE AREA: The nonbuildable area of a lot shall be designated as
follows:
   1.   Any portion of a lot defined as nonbuildable under Title 10, Chapter
12;
   2.   Any portion of a lot defined as nonbuildable by an approved
geotechnical study;
   3.   Any portion of a lot with slopes which are thirty percent (30%) or
greater;
   4.   Any portion of a lot included within a defined building envelope on a
plat which have slopes which are thirty percent (30%) or greater; or
   5.   Any portion of a lot with known or reasonably known geologic hazards.
*NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE: A structure that:
   A.   Legally existed before its current land use designation;
   B.   Because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not
conform to the setback, height restrictions or other regulations, excluding
those regulations which govern the use of land.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of land that:
   A.   Legally existed before its current land use designation;
   B.   Has been maintained continuously since the time the land use ordinance
regulation governing the land changed; and
   C.   Because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not
conform to the regulations that now govern the use of the land.
NONCONFORMITY: The presence of any noncomplying use or noncomplying structure.
NONDOMESTICATED ANIMALS: Any animal which has not been tamed and made fit for a
human environment or is considered exotic. These include, but are not limited
to, large reptiles, poisonous snakes and arachnids when kept in large numbers,
most species of monkeys, feline or dog species that ordinary persons would
consider to be a “wild” animal (lions, tigers, wolves, etc.) or any other
similar animal which would, if released, cause potential harm and danger to
humans.
NONPUBLIC ZONE: Building(s) and other associated site improvements on a lot
that are located outside the public zone.
NUISANCE ANIMALS: Any animal which causes a substantial annoyance to
surrounding property owners. Raccoons and skunks are examples of nuisance
animals.
NURSING CARE FACILITY: A healthcare facility, other than a hospital,
constructed, licensed and operated to provide patient living accommodations,
twenty four (24) hour staff availability, and at least two (2) of the following
patient services:
   A.   A selection of patient care services, under the direction and
supervision of a registered nurse, ranging from continuous medical, skilled
nursing, psychological or other professional therapies to intermittent health
related or paraprofessional personal care services;
   B.   A structured, supportive social living environment based on a
professionally designed and supervised treatment plan, oriented to the
individual’s habilitation or rehabilitation needs; or
   C.   A supervised living environment that provides support, training or
assistance with individual activities of daily living.
NURSING HOME (Also Known As REST HOME OR CONVALESCENT HOME): A home for the
aged, chronically ill or incurable persons in which three (3) or more persons
not of the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food and
shelter or care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or
similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the
sick or injured.
OFF SITE FACILITIES: Improvements not on individual lots but generally within
the right-of-way and the boundaries of the development which they serve, and as
further outlined in this title.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: The space required to park one passenger vehicle,
which space shall meet the requirements of this title.
OFFICE: A type of business use, which may or may not offer services to the
public that, is engaged in the processing, manipulation or application of
business information or professional expertise. An office use is not materially
involved in fabricating, assembling or warehousing of physical products for the
retail or wholesale market, nor is an office engaged in the repair of products
or retail services. Examples of professional offices include accounting,
investment services, architecture, engineering, legal services and real estate
services. Unless otherwise specified, office use shall include doctors’ and
dentists’ offices. Office use shall not include any use or other type of
establishment which is otherwise specifically listed in the table of permitted
and conditional uses for the applicable zoning districts.
ON SITE FACILITIES: Construction or placement of the main building, and its
appurtenant improvements on a lot.
OPEN SPACE: Land used for recreation, agriculture, resource protection, amenity
or buffers; is freely accessible to all residents of the development, except in
the case of agricultural lands where access may be restricted; and is protected
by the provisions of this title to ensure that it remains in such uses. “Open
space” does not include land occupied by nonrecreational buildings, roads or
road rights-of-way; nor does it include the yards or lots of single- or
multiple-family dwelling units or parking areas as required by the provisions
of this title. Open space should be left in a natural state, except in the case
of recreation uses which may contain impervious surfaces. Such impervious
surfaces shall be included in the calculation of the impervious surface ratio.
OPEN SPACE RATIO: A measure of the intensity of land use. It is arrived at by
dividing total amount of open space within the site by the base site area.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE: Usable open space shall be any portion of a lot or building
which meets all the following conditions:
   A.   The open space shall be open to the sky or shall be open to view on at
least two (2) sides.
   B.   The space shall be readily accessible by foot traffic from the dwelling
unit to which it is accessory.
   C.   If the space is provided on a balcony, roof or other facility above
grade, it shall have such protective devices as are deemed necessary by the
Building Official to assure reasonably safe usage by children and adults.
   D.   The space shall not be provided from any required front or side yard,
parking area or driveway space.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: A zoning district pertaining to particular geographic
features or land uses imposing supplemental requirements and standards in
addition to those provided in the base or underlying zoning district.
Boundaries of overlay districts are shown on the zoning map or on special maps
referenced in the text.
PACKAGE DELIVERY FACILITY: A facility for the receipt, transfer, short term
storage, and dispatching of goods and packages.
PAINT MANUFACTURING: A facility engaged in making and storing paint and related
products from raw or partially finished materials.
PARCEL: A continuous area of real property, or lot, which is legally described
and recorded with Davis County. See definition of lot area.
PARK: A noncommercial, not for profit facility designed to serve the recreation
needs of the residents of the community.
PARK STRIP: The landscape area within a street right-of-way located between the
back of street curb and the sidewalk, or in the absence of a sidewalk, the
right-of-way line.
PARK STRIP LANDSCAPING: The improvement of property within the park strip by
the addition of plants and other organic and inorganic materials harmoniously
combined to produce an effect appropriate for adjacent uses and compatible with
the neighborhood. Park strip landscaping may include trees, a combination of
perennial ground cover, flowering annuals and perennials, specimen shrubs, and
inorganic material.
PARKING FACILITY (PARKING STRUCTURES): A building or open area, other than a
street, used for the parking of more than four (4) automobiles and available
for public use, whether free, for compensation, or accommodation for clients or
customers.
PARKING LOT: A paved, open area on a lot used for the parking of more than four
(4) automobiles whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for
clients and customers.
PARKING, SHARED: “Shared parking” means off street parking facilities on one
lot shared by multiple uses because the total demand for parking spaces is
reduced due to the differences in parking demand for each use during specific
periods of the day.
PARKING SPACE: Space within a parking area of certain dimensions as defined in
section
10-6-18 of this title, exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps, columns, for
the storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle.
PARKING, TANDEM: The in-line parking of one motor vehicle behind another in
such a way that one parking space can only be accessed through another parking
space.
PARKS, TRAILS AND RECREATION MASTER PLAN: A document that North Salt Lake City
adopts that sets forth advisory guidelines for proposed future development in
regard to trails, parks and recreation within North Salt Lake City.
PASSIVE SOLAR SYSTEM: A direct thermal system which utilizes the structure of a
building and its operable components to provide for collection, storage and
distribution of heating or cooling during the appropriate times of the year, by
utilizing the climate resources available at the site. It includes those
portions and components of a building that are expressly designed and required
for the collection, storage and distribution of solar and the architectural and
engineering design or system simulation necessary to balance or optimize
passive components.
PATIO: A paved surface on an earthen/stone base that is not more than two feet
(2') above established grade, designed for pedestrian use.
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTION: A through connection for bicyclists and pedestrians
between two (2) streets or two (2) lots.
PEDESTRIANWAY (WALKWAY OR CROSSWALK): A right-of-way designed for use by
pedestrians and not intended for use by motor vehicles of any kind; a
pedestrianway may be located within or without a street right-of-way, at grade,
or grade separated from vehicular traffic.
PERMANENT MONUMENT: Any structure of concrete, masonry or metal, permanently
placed on or in the ground placed for the surveying reference.
PERMITTED USE: A use of land which is allowed within a particular district
without the necessity of obtaining a conditional use permit.
PERSON: A firm, association, authority, organization, partnership, company or
corporation as well as an individual.
PLACE OF WORSHIP: A church, synagogue, temple, mosque or other place of
religious worship, including any accessory use or structure used for religious
worship.
PLANNED DISTRICT: A zoning district, the boundaries of which are to be shown on
the zoning map, but the regulations for which shall be determined by a general
development plan to be adopted by the City Council as part of the zoning
ordinance, after public hearing, as required for other zoning districts.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): Is both a type of real estate development, as
well as a regulatory process. For purposes of this title, a “PUD” shall mean:
   A.   An integrated design for development of residential, commercial or
industrial uses, or limited combinations of such uses, in which the density and
location regulations of the district in which the development is situated may
be varied or waived to allow flexibility and initiative in site and building
design and location, in accordance with an approved plan and imposed
requirements. Planned unit development regulations may govern the subdivision
of land if it is proposed by the development to sell individual lots in the
planned unit development. Thus, planned unit development regulations can be
subdivision regulations which may be chosen by the developer as an alternative
to specifically designated subdivision regulations of this Code, to become
effective only through the planned unit development process.
   B.   A coordinated, real estate development where a unit or the whole
building is owned by an individual and where the ownership of common spaces is
shared and maintained by other members of the homeowners’ association for the
benefit of the owners. A PUD under this definition is treated as a subdivision
and must comply with the subdivision regulations of this Code.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of North Salt Lake City.
PLANTING PLAN: A planting plan shall clearly and accurately identify and locate
new and existing trees, shrubs, ground covers, turf areas, driveways,
sidewalks, hardscape features, and fences.
PLAZA: An open area which is available for public or private uses such as
walking, seating, socializing, reading and eating.
POP-UP SPRAY HEAD: A sprinkler head that sprays water through a nozzle in a
fixed pattern with no rotation.
PRECIPITATION RATE: The depth of water applied to a given area, usually
measured in inches per hour.
PRESCHOOL: An educational facility operated on a residential premises,
regularly providing an educational program of instruction for not more than
eight (8) children, including the operator’s children less than six (6) years
of age, at any one time. Such use shall be defined as a home occupation.
PRESSURE COMPENSATING: A drip irrigation system that compensates for
fluctuating water pressure by only allowing a fixed volume of water through
drip emitters.
PRIMARY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: The main building or structure on a parcel of
land designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are
devoted.
PRIME AGRICULTURAL SOILS: Areas of soils most suited for agriculture, those in
capability units I, II or III, as indicated in the soil survey prepared by the
soil conservation service which encompasses North Salt Lake City.
PRINCIPAL USE: Any use which is named and listed in the use regulations and
other provisions of this title, except those uses specifically designated as
accessory uses; any use which is or may be conducted on a lot independently, or
any other use on the lot and not incidental or accessory to any other use on
the lot; any use which establishes the primary activity on a lot.
PRINTING PLANT: A commercial establishment which contracts with persons for the
printing and binding of written works.
PRIVATE NONPROFIT RECREATIONAL GROUNDS AND FACILITIES: Nonprofit recreational
grounds and facilities operated by a nonprofit corporation, association or
group.
PROFESSIONAL TEAM, QUALIFIED: An individual or group of individuals qualified
by virtue of training, experience, State licensing, where appropriate, and
membership in professional associations which pass upon qualifications prior to
admittance to membership. A determination of whether or not a team is qualified
shall be made solely by the Planning Commission.
PROTECTION STRIP: A strip of land between the boundary of a land development
and a street within the land development, for the purpose of controlling the
access to the street by property owners abutting the land development.
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITIES: For the public convenience,
certain infrastructure, including streets, water lines, sewer lines, public
utilities and drainage facilities, may be allowed to serve various areas of the
community, as public facilities. Possible additional facilities such as a
substation for fire or police, Post Office or hospital may be determined to be
in the public interest as public service facilities by North Salt Lake City.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE RECREATIONAL FACILITY: A golf course, swimming pool, tennis
club or other similar facility whose recreational use functions as the
principal use of the property, whether under public or private control,
operation or management.
PUBLIC ZONE: Building and other associated site improvements located on a lot
which are within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a public right-of-way, or
within the front half of the lot (as measured from the front property line to
the midpoint of the lot depth) whichever is less.
QUASI-PUBLIC CORPORATION: An artificial person, private in ownership,
individually created as a corporation by the State which has accepted from the
State the grant of a franchise or contract involving the performance of a
public purpose relating to the State or its citizens.
RACQUET OR TENNIS CLUB: An establishment providing facilities for racquetball
or tennis. Facilities may include indoor or outdoor racquetball or tennis
courts. Facilities may be open to the public for a fee or available only to
persons holding a membership.
RADIO, TELEVISION STATION: Land, buildings, or structures used as a media
production facility. Typically, structures involved in or with the production
of, but not limited to: motion pictures; radio and television shows or movies;
recording or broadcasting facilities; and other motion picture production and
distribution service offices.
RECEPTION CENTER: An establishment which is rented by individuals or groups to
accommodate private functions including, but not limited to, banquets,
weddings, anniversaries and other similar celebrations or gatherings. Such a
use may or may not include on site kitchen and catering facilities. In some
cases, a bed and breakfast and/or a restaurant may be associated with a
reception center.
RECREATION (INDOOR): Public or private recreation facilities, tennis or other
racquet courts, swimming pools, bowling alleys, skating rinks, ball courts,
video arcades, community centers, gymnasiums, health and fitness facilities, or
similar uses which are enclosed in buildings primarily for the use of persons
who do not reside on the same lot as that on which the recreational use is
located. The term “recreation (indoor)” shall include any accessory uses, such
as snack bars, pro shops, and locker rooms, which are designed and intended
primarily for the use of patrons of the principal recreational use. The term
“recreation (indoor)” shall not include theaters, cultural facilities, massage
parlors, or any use which is otherwise listed specifically in the table of
permitted and conditional uses.
RECREATION (OUTDOOR): Public or private golf courses, golf driving ranges,
miniature golf, swimming pools, tennis courts, country clubs, ball fields, ball
courts, fishing piers, skateboarding courses, water slides, mechanical rides,
go-cart or motorcycle courses, raceways, drag strips, stadiums, marinas,
overnight camping, or gun firing ranges, or other similar type uses which are
not enclosed in buildings and are operated for the use of persons who do not
reside on the same lot as that on which the recreational use is located. The
term “recreation (outdoor)” shall include any accessory uses, such as snack
bars, pro shops, and clubhouses which are designed and intended primarily for
the use of patrons of the principal recreational use.
RECREATION DWELLING (CABIN, RECREATION CABIN): A dwelling designed for limited
rather than primary occupancy and generally located adjacent to or with easy
access to recreational areas. The primary purpose for the construction of such
a dwelling is to provide shelter during those limited periods of time when
recreation is sought in the adjacent areas.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RECREATIONAL COACH): A vehicle, with or without motive
power, designed and constructed to travel on public streets and designed for
use as a human habitation of a temporary and recreational nature.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK (TRAVEL TRAILER PARK): Any area or tract of land or a
separately designated section within a mobile home park where lots are rented
or held out for rent to one or more owners or users of recreational vehicles
for a temporary time not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE: A plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park
designated and intended for the accommodation of one recreational vehicle.
REHABILITATED LANDSCAPING: Altering, repairing, or adding to a landscape to
make possible a compatible use, increase curb appeal, decrease maintenance,
etc.
RENEWABLE ENERGY: The form of energy whose supply is natural, inexhaustible and
not dependent upon fossil fuel supplies, including residential solar heat, wind
power, geothermal power and other supply sources.
RENTER: A single person or group of people who provide compensation, in any
form, in exchange for occupancy of a dwelling unit, or portion thereof, under
one lease or rental agreement.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY: A structure or group of structures used
primarily for applied and developmental research, where product testing is an
integral part of the operation and goods or products may be manufactured as
necessary for testing, evaluation, and test marketing.
*RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS:
   A.   A single-family or multiple-family dwelling unit that meets the
requirements of chapter 8 of this title and any ordinance adopted under
authority of chapter 8 of this title, and Utah Code Annotated sections 10-9a-
516, 10-9a-517, 10-9a-518 and 10-9a-519.
   B.   “Residential facility for elderly persons” does not include a
healthcare facility.
*RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY: A residence:
   A.   In which more than one person with a disability resides; and
   B.   1.   Is licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under
Utah Code Annotated title 62A, chapter 2, licensure of programs and facilities;
or
      2.   Is licensed or certified by the Department of Health under Utah Code
Annotated title 26, chapter 21, Healthcare Facility Licensing and Inspection
Act.
RESIDENTIAL SHORT TERM RENTAL (STR): Any single-family or individual multi-
family dwelling or portion thereof that is available for use for temporary
sojourn or transient visit of guests, for direct or indirect remuneration, for
a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
RESIDUAL LAND: Land which does not meet the minimum standards for a lot and
therefore must be attached and become part of another parcel which does or will
conform to lot minimum standards or be attached to public land for public
purposes.
RESTAURANT: An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and
consumed, mostly within the principal building.
RETAIL GOODS ESTABLISHMENT: A building, property or activity, the principal use
or purpose of which is the retail sale of physical goods, products or
merchandise directly to the consumer. Retail goods establishment shall not
include any use or other type of establishment which is otherwise listed
specifically in the table of permitted and conditional uses found in this
title.
RETAIL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: A building, property or activity, the principal
use or purpose of which is the provision of personal services directly to the
consumer. The term “
RETAINING WALL: A wall designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or
other materials.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The portion of land dedicated to the public use for street or
utility purposes or maintained in private use for similar purposes.
ROADWAY WIDTH: The horizontal distance from the lip of gutter to lip of gutter
of street, otherwise, the width of actual paved surface where no curb and
gutter exists.
ROTOR SPRAY HEAD: A sprinkler head that distributes water through a nozzle by
the rotation of a gear or mechanical rotor.
RUNOFF: Irrigation water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape area to
which it is applied, and which flows onto other areas.
SALES AND DISPLAY (OUTDOOR): The use of open areas of a lot for sales or
display of finished products for sale to the public. Outdoor sales and display
shall include accessory sales and display areas, such as auto accessory items
at a gas station, as well as principal sales and display areas, such as the
sales yard of a garden center. Outdoor sales and display shall not include
items sold in bulk quantities (e.g., sand, gravel, lumber), merchandise
inventory not intended for immediate sale, or items not typically sold to the
consuming public (e.g., pallets, construction equipment and supplies,
industrial products).
SCHOOL, COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY: An institution accredited by the State providing
full time or part time education beyond the high school level for a BA, BS or
associate degree, including any lodging rooms or housing for students or
faculty. (See also definitions of school, public and school, private).
SCHOOL, K-12 PRIVATE: A private institution of learning or instruction
primarily catering to minors, which is licensed as such facility by either the
City or the State of Utah. This definition includes kindergarten, elementary
schools, junior high schools, middle high schools, senior high schools or any
special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department
of Education, but not including professional and vocational schools, charm
schools, dancing schools, music schools or similar limited schools nor public
or private universities or colleges. School, K-12 private shall not include any
use or other type of establishment which is otherwise listed specifically in
the table of permitted and conditional uses found in this title.
SCHOOL, K-12 PUBLIC: A public institution of learning or instruction primarily
catering to minors, which is licensed as such facility by either the City or
the State of Utah. The definition includes kindergarten, elementary schools,
junior high schools, middle high schools, senior high schools or any special
institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department of
Education, but not including professional and vocational schools, charm
schools, dancing schools, music schools or similar limited schools nor public
or private universities or colleges. School, K-12 public shall not include any
use or other type of establishment which is otherwise listed specifically in
the table of permitted and conditional uses found in this title.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE: A school which is operated by a quasi-public or private group,
individual or organization, for profit or nonprofit and which has a curriculum
similar to that provided in any public school, whether or not a complete
educational curriculum.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC: A school operated by a school district or other public agency
in the State of Utah.
SCHOOL, SEMINARY AND RELIGIOUS INSTITUTE: An institution used for the purposes
of educating students in theology.
SEASONAL FARM STAND: A sales table, area, or kiosk of food crops and/or
nonfood, an ornamental crop, such as flowers, that is located off premises from
the location where the food was grown, or when located in any Agricultural
District, and operates during the time of year coinciding with the growing
season.
SECURITY SURVEILLANCE: When security is a paramount concern to a project, it
may require continuous and comprehensive surveillance of the private streets if
access is only through a guarded gate. Under these circumstances, it is in the
interests of the public to vary requirements sufficient to permit total control
of a manager.
SERVICES, CHILD AND YOUTH: Nonresidential social assistance services for
children and youth. These establishments provide for the welfare of children in
such areas as adoption and foster care, drug prevention, life skills training,
and positive social development.
SERVICES, COMMUNITY FOOD: Establishments primarily engaged in collecting,
preparing, and delivering food for people in need.
SERVICES, ELDERLY AND PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES: Nonresidential social
assistance services to improve the quality of life for the elderly or persons
with intellectual and/or developmental disabilities. These establishments
provide for the welfare of these individuals in such areas as daycare, non-
medical home care or homemaker services, social activities, group support, and
companionship.
SERVICES, EMERGENCY AND OTHER RELIEF SERVICES: Establishments primarily engaged
in providing food, shelter, clothing, medical relief, resettlement, and
counseling to victims of domestic or international disasters or conflicts.
SERVICES, OTHER INDIVIDUAL AND FAMILY: Nonresidential and family social
assistance services (except those specifically directed toward children, the
elderly, or persons with intellectual and/or developmental disabilities).
SERVICES, VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION: Establishments primarily engaged in
providing vocational rehabilitation or habilitation services, such as job
counseling, job training, and work experience, to unemployed and underemployed
persons, persons with disabilities and persons who have a job market
disadvantage because of lack of education, job skill, or experience.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: As defined in section
3-8-5 of this Code.
SIGN: A presentation or representation of words, letters, figures, designs,
picture or colors, publicly displayed so as to give notice relative to a
person, a business, an article of merchandise, a service, an assemblage, a
solicitation, or a request for aid; also, the sign structure supports lighting
systems and any attachments, ornaments or other features used to draw the
attention of observers.
SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign which involves motion or rotation of any part, created
by artificial means, or which displays flashing, revolving or intermittent
lights.
SIGN AREA: The entire background area of a sign upon which copy could be
placed. In computing area of a sign background, only that face or faces which
can be seen from one direction at one time shall be counted. The supporting
incidental structure of the sign shall not be used in computing sign area.
SIGN, AWNING: A sign which is integral with or placed on a translucent awning
or other “fabric” covering a framework and which is backlit.
SIGN, CANOPY: A sign which is mounted on and supported by a canopy and may be
found either above the canopy or hanging beneath the canopy, but in all cases
mounted perpendicular to the building.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign on which the advertising message, lettering or
other graphic representation is intermittently changed by rotation or means
similar thereto.
SIGN, FASCIA, FLAT OR WALL: A sign which is in any manner affixed to any
exterior wall of a building and which projects not more than eighteen inches
(18") and does not extend more than six inches (6") above the parapet, eaves or
building facade. A fascia sign may also be mounted above or below a canopy, not
necessarily flush with the wall, but in all cases only one side has copy. In
the manner described for the fascia unit, individual letter units may also be
installed as opposed to a box type sign. Flat or wall signs may be painted or
applied to the wall without projection.
SIGN, FLASHING: A sign which contains or is illuminated by lights which are
intermittently cut on or off, change in intensity or otherwise create the
illusion of flashing or movement.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign which is supported by one or more upright columns,
poles or braces, in or upon the ground.
SIGN, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from the nearest finished grade
to the top of the sign, excluding any superficial trim.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION AND INFORMATION: A sign displayed to indicate the name or
nature of a building, or of a use.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign in which a source of light is used in order to make
the message readable. This definition shall include internally and externally
lighted signs.
SIGN, LOW PROFILE: A low sign where the extent of the sign surface is attached
to the ground or a foundation in the ground, and where there are no poles,
braces or other visible means of support and other than attachment to the
ground.
SIGN, MARQUEE: Any sign attached to or made an integral part of a marquee.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: A sign which advertises a product or service not available
on the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, ON PREMISES: A sign which advertises products or services available on
the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN ORDINANCE: The sign ordinance of North Salt Lake City (chapter 4 of this
title).
SIGN, PROJECTING WALL: A sign which is affixed to an exterior wall or building
or structure and which projects more than eighteen inches (18") from the
building or structure wall, and which does not extend above the parapet, eaves
or building facade of the building upon which it is placed.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign which is erected on or above the roofline of a building and
which is wholly or partially supported by the building.
SIGN, ROTATING: A sign which revolves three hundred sixty degrees (360°) with
continuing motion.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed
of paper, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other materials,
with or without frames, intended to be displayed in or out of doors for a short
period of time.
SITE: A parcel or parcels of land intended to have one or more buildings or
intended to be subdivided into one or more lots.
SITE AREA: All land area within the site as defined in the deed. Area shall be
determined from an actual survey rather than from a deed description.
SITE PLAN: A scaled drawing of and information pertaining to a proposed
development site. A “site plan” shall include the following:
   A.   The name and business address of the developer;
   B.   The name and business address of the project designer;
   C.   The dimensions of the site;
   D.   North point;
   E.   Locations and names of existing and proposed buildings;
   F.   Locations and names of existing and proposed streets;
   G.   Public and private easements related to site;
   H.   Survey monuments;
   I.   Watercourses and impoundments;
   J.   Location and description of existing and proposed vegetation;
   K.   Location of proposed parking;
   L.   Location and size of utility service (water, sewer, power, gas,
telephone cable) lines;
   M.   Location of proposed septic or sewer connection;
   N.   Location of all other proposed on site and off site improvements.
SKYSPACE: The portion of the sky that must remain unobstructed for a solar
collector to operate effectively. The skyspace can be measured for specific
time of year use and location.
SMART AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION CONTROLLER: An automatic timing device used to
remotely control valves in the operation of an irrigation system using the
internet to connect to a real time weather source or soil moisture sensor.
Smart automatic irrigation controllers schedule irrigation events using either
evapotranspiration or soil moisture data to control when and how long
sprinklers or drip systems operate and will vary based on time of year and
weather/soil moisture conditions.
SOLAR ACCESS: The availability of sunlight to solar collectors and solar energy
systems. Solar access to a site depends upon the specific system type and most
often demands rooftop, south wall, south lot or detached collector protection.
SOLAR ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM: Includes active, passive or photovoltaic solar
systems which when placed on a structure supply energy to that structure.
SOLAR GREENHOUSE/SUNS PACE/SUNPARLOR: An attached space to a building or
residence which may provide heat or food to users as part of a passive solar
energy system.
*SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICT: All entities established under authority of Utah
Code Annotated title 17D and any other governmental or quasi-governmental
entity that is not a county, municipality, school district or unit of the
State.
SPRAY SPRINKLER: An irrigation head that sprays water through a nozzle.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building for the keeping of livestock
owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for hire, remuneration or
sale.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A detached accessory building where horses are boarded or kept
for hire.
STEEP SLOPES: Areas where the average slope exceeds eight percent (8%) which,
because of this slope, are subject to high rates of stormwater runoff and
therefore erosion.
STORAGE (OUTDOOR): Any equipment, materials, goods, wares, merchandise,
commodities, junk, debris or any other item located outside of a completely
enclosed building which is not displayed for sale or lease for a continuous
period in excess of one business day. See also definition of sales and display
(outdoor).
STORAGE, SELF: A retail service establishment providing off site storage space
to residents and businesses, offering convenience storage and limited
warehousing services primarily for personal effects and household goods within
enclosed structures having individual access, but excluding use as workshops,
hobby shops, manufacturing or commercial activity.
STORE, CONVENIENCE: A retail establishment that offers for sale a limited line
of groceries and household items intended for the convenience of the
neighborhood and may or may not include gasoline sales.
STORE, CONVENTIONAL DEPARTMENT: A retail business which offers a broad range of
merchandise lines at moderate level price points, consisting of primarily
apparel and home goods. No merchandise line predominates and goods are
displayed in a departmentalized format. Customer assistance is provided in each
department, but checkout facilities can be either departmentalized or
centralized.
STORE, PAWNSHOP: A commercial establishment which lends money at interest in
exchange for valuable personal property left with it as security.
STORE, SPECIALTY: A retail business specializing in a broad range of a single
category of goods at competitive prices. The categories usually included are
home improvement, consumer music and electronics, office supply, auto
aftermarket, computers, toys, books, home/bed/bath, pet supply, craft/hobby, or
sporting goods. They often have departments, centralized and/or exit checkout
stations and operate in various physical formats.
STORE, SUPERSTORE: A retail business primarily engaged in retailing a general
line of groceries in combination with general lines of new merchandise, such as
apparel, furniture, and appliances, sold at discount prices. They have
centralized exit checkout stations, and utilize shopping carts for customers.
STORE, WAREHOUSE CLUB: A retail business requiring patron membership and
selling packaged and bulk foods and general merchandise. They are characterized
by high volume and a restricted line of popular merchandise in a no frills
environment. They have centralized exit checkout stations, and utilize shopping
carts for customers.
STORY (FLOOR): The vertical distance between the finished floor of one level
and the finished floor of the level above or below.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which are on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls, do not extend
more than four feet (4') above the floor of such story, and the ceiling area of
which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area of the same half
story.
STREAM SPRINKLER: An irrigation head that projects water through a gear rotor
in single or multiple streams.
*STREET: A public right-of-way, including highways, avenues, boulevards,
parkways, roads, lanes, walks, alleys, viaducts, subways, tunnels, bridges,
public easements and other ways.
STREET (FRONTAGE): A street which is parallel to and adjacent to a limited
access street and which provides access to abutting properties and protection
from through traffic.
STREET (HALF): A street parallel and contiguous to a property line and of
lesser right-of-way width than will eventually be required; the additional
needed right-of-way width to be obtained in the future from the abutting
property owner prior to development as a frontage.
STREET, STUB: A street extending from within a subdivision boundary and
temporarily terminating there with no permanent vehicular turnaround. Stub
streets are provided to permit adjacent undeveloped parcels of land to be
developed later by continuing the stub street to the extended connecting street
system.
STREET TREES: Trees located in the landscape area within a street right of way
located between the back of the street curb and the sidewalk, or in absence of
the sidewalk, the right-of-way line.
STREETSCAPE: All public rights-of-way, all front yards to the plane of the
front of the house, and on corner lots, all side yards to the plane of the side
of the house.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed, the use of which requires fixed location on
the ground, or attachment to something having a fixed location upon the ground.
STUDIO, ART: A building or portion of a building where an artist or
photographer creates works of art or where instruction in art is given such as
a dance or music studio.
STUDIO, MOTION PICTURE: A facility for the production of motion pictures and
television film and tape, including motion picture and television stages;
exterior sets; construction, repair, and storage facilities; caretaker and
temporary housing; all vehicles used to transport this equipment and other
related commercial vehicles; and accessory fabrication activities.
*SUBDIVISION:
   A.   Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be divided into
two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or other division of land
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease or
development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions.
   B.   “Subdivision” includes:
      1.   The division or development of land, whether by deed, metes and
bounds description, devise and testacy, map, plat or other recorded instrument;
and
      2.   Except as provided in subsection C of this definition, divisions of
land for residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be used
for commercial, agricultural and industrial purposes.
   C.   “Subdivision” does not include:
      1.   A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the
purpose of joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a contiguous parcel
of unsubdivided agricultural land, if neither the resulting combined parcel nor
the parcel remaining from the division or partition violates an applicable land
use ordinance;
      2.   A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining unsubdivided
properties adjusting their mutual boundary if:
         a.   No new lot is created; and
         b.   The adjustment does not violate applicable land use ordinances;
      3.   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record:
         a.   Revising the legal description of more than one contiguous
unsubdivided parcel of property into one legal description encompassing all
such parcels of property; or
         b.   Joining a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided, if the joiner does not violate
applicable land use ordinances;
      4.   A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining subdivided
properties adjusting their mutual boundary if:
         a.   No new dwelling lot or housing unit will result from the
adjustment; and
         b.   The adjustment will not violate any applicable land use
ordinance; or
      5.   A bona fide division or partition of land by deed or other
instrument where the land use authority expressly approves in writing the
division in anticipation of further land use approvals on the parcel or
parcels.
    D.   The joining of a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided does not constitute a “subdivision” under
this definition as to the unsubdivided parcel of property or subject the
unsubdivided parcel to the City subdivision ordinance.
SWIMMING POOL1: Any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or
wading that contains water over twenty four inches (24") deep. This includes
inground, aboveground and onground pools, and any that are not secure, hot
tubs, spas and fixed in place wading pools.
TECHNOLOGY BASED RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: An establishment that engages in, as
a principal function, research and development of products or services using
specific or innovative technology based means. This use may include conceptual
design and testing of a product, prototype, and end user manufacturing, trials,
storage and distribution of the product(s). Preferred types of technology based
research and development may include, but are not limited to, medical device
and medical product, bioscience and information technology manufacturing,
plastic/resin type injection molding or thermoforming, information technology
and other types of outputs that typically require highly skilled inputs as
component(s) to the end product or service.
TEMPORARY USE: Any use of land which, in the determination of the Planning
Commission, and approved by the City Council, shall not extend beyond two (2)
years from inception of such land use. A determination as to whether or not a
land use is temporary shall be based solely upon facts submitted to the
Planning Commission at the time of application for a conditional use permit for
a temporary use. Unless found to be temporary, any use of the land shall be
presumed to be permanent. Such uses include construction facilities, emergency
facilities as well as interim uses of land and buildings awaiting ultimate use,
i.e., pasture for a few months before construction begins, a carnival, fair,
sports field, staging area, etc
THEATER, LIVE PERFORMANCE: An establishment for musical, theatrical, dance or
any other combination thereof, performed by one or more persons, whether or not
they are compensated for the performance, in a privately owned premises that is
open to the public, whether or not admission is charged.
THEATER, MOVIE: An establishment for showing movies or motion pictures.
TIRE DISTRIBUTION RETAIL/WHOLESALE : An establishment where the principal
business is the sale or installation of new, used, or retread tires and tubes.
TRUCK FREIGHT TERMINAL: A premises used by a motor freight company as a carrier
of goods, which is the origin or destination point of goods being transported,
for the purpose of storing, transferring, loading, and unloading goods.
TRUCK STOP: A building site and structures where the business of maintenance,
servicing, storage or repair of trucks, tractor-trailer rigs, eighteen (18)
wheel tractor-trailer rigs, buses and similar commercial or freight vehicles is
conducted, including the sale and dispensing of motor fuel or other petroleum
products and the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar
commercial vehicles. A truck stop may also include overnight sleeping
accommodations and restaurant facilities.
TURF: A surface layer of earth containing grass species with full root
structures that are maintained as mowed grass.
*UNINCORPORATED : The area outside of the incorporated boundaries of cities and
towns.
URBAN SERVICES: Services normally associated with urban living, including, but
not limited to, the following: electricity, natural gas, streets, schools,
culinary water, sewage collection and treatment facilities, and police and fire
protection.
USE, ACCESSORY: A use that:
   A.   Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to, and serves a principal
use;
   B.   Is customarily found as an incident to such principal use;
   C.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of those
occupying, working at or being serviced by such principal use;
   D.   Is located on the same building lot as such principal use; and
   E.   Is under the same ownership or control as the principal use.
USE, PRINCIPAL: “Principal use” means the main use of land and/or buildings on
a lot as distinguished from an accessory use.
UTILITY, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure used in conjunction
with the provision of public or private utilities.
UTILITY, ELECTRIC GENERATION FACILITY: An electric generating facility that
uses natural gas, coal, solar energy, steam, wind or other means to produce
electricity for exclusive delivery to the local or regional high voltage
electric transmission grid.
UTILITY, SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: A licensed facility that purifies sanitary
sewer effluent to a minimum level as established by State and/or Federal
environmental protection agencies.
UTILITY, SOLID WASTE TRANSFER STATION: A facility used to combine and compact
loads of solid waste into larger units of waste, which are then loaded onto
trucks for delivery to landfill sites.
VACANT LOT: A lot in an established area or neighborhood which at the present
time contains no structures or other aboveground improvements.
VARIANCE: An official permit to use property in a manner that departs from the
way in which other property in the same locality can be used; as regulated by
Utah State Code section 10-9a-702.
VEGETATION: Living plant material including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs,
flowers, grasses, herbs and ground cover.
VEHICLE AUCTION: A place where vehicles, operable or inoperable, are offered
for sale to persons who bid on the vehicles in competition with each other.
VEHICLE, AUTOMOBILE PART SALES: An establishment that sells new automobile
parts, tires, and accessories. May also include minor parts installation. Does
not include tire recapping establishments or businesses dealing exclusively in
used parts.
VEHICLE, AUTOMOBILE RENTAL AGENCY: Leasing or renting of automobiles,
motorcycles, and light load vehicles including incidental parking and servicing
of vehicles for rent or lease.
VEHICLE, AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: A use principally engaged in repairing of
automobiles, where all repairs are performed within an enclosed building,
including any activities excluded in the definition of “vehicle, automobile
repair, minor”.
VEHICLE, AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: A use engaged in the repair of automobiles
involving the use of three (3) or fewer mechanics’ service bays, where all
repairs are performed within an enclosed building, and where not more than ten
(10) automobiles, plus one automobile per employee, are parked on site at any
one time including, but not limited to, those permitted as gas stations. Auto
body repairs and drive train repair are excluded from this definition.
VEHICLE, AUTOMOBILE SALES/RENTAL AND SERVICE: A business establishment that
uses any building, land area, or other premises or portion thereof, that sells
or leases new or used automobiles, trucks, and/or vans. An automobile
dealership may maintain an inventory of the vehicles for sale or lease either
on site or at a nearby location and may provide on site facilities for the
repair and service of the vehicles sold or leased by the dealership.
VEHICLE, AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE AND RECYCLING (INDOOR): The dismantling of
automobiles, including the collection and storage of parts for resale, and/or
the storage of inoperative automobiles for future salvage or sale. Such
activities shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings.
VEHICLE, AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE AND RECYCLING (OUTDOOR): The dismantling of
automobiles, including the collection and storage of parts for resale, and/or
the storage of inoperative automobiles for future salvage or sale. Such
activities may be conducted outdoors or within fully enclosed buildings.
VEHICLE, BOAT/ RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE: A business establishment
that uses any building, land area, or other premises or portion thereof, that
sells or leases new or used recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, motorcycles
or other similar motorized transportation vehicles. A boat/recreational vehicle
dealership may maintain an inventory of the boats and vehicles for sale or
lease either on site or at a nearby location and may provide on site facilities
for the repair and service of the boats and vehicles sold or leased by the
dealership.
VEHICLE, TRUCK REPAIR (HEAVY): A use engaged in the repair of heavy trucks.
VEHICLE, TRUCK SALES AND RENTAL (HEAVY): A business establishment that uses any
building, land area, or other premises or portion thereof, that sells or leases
new or used trucks that are classified as “heavy” by the Federal Highway
Administration. A heavy truck dealership may maintain an inventory of the
vehicles for sale or lease either on site or at a nearby location and may
provide on site facilities for the repair and service of the vehicles sold or
leased by the dealership.
VICINITY MAP: A map or drawing, not necessarily to scale, showing where a
subdivision, or proposed subdivision, PUD, commercial development, or other
property is located.
VICINITY PLAN: A map or drawing to scale of any area proposed for development,
showing existing and proposed streets, buildings, public facilities and
utilities within the general influence area of the proposed project (1 mile
radius); boundaries of zoning districts, taxing districts, and other special
districts on and in the immediate vicinity of the land proposed for project;
watercourses, impoundments, streams, springs, wells and areas subject to
continuous or occasional flooding on and in the immediate vicinity of the land
proposed for project and significant vegetative patterns on and in the
immediate vicinity of the land proposed for development.
WAREHOUSE: A structure, or part thereof, or area used principally for the
storage of goods and merchandise.
WASTE OF WATER: Shall include, but not necessarily limited to:
The use of water for any purpose, including outdoor irrigation, that consumes,
or for which is applied substantial excess water beyond the reasonable amount
required by the use, whether such excess water is lost due to evaporation,
percolation, discharges into the sewer system, or is allowed to run into the
gutter or street.
Washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or other
paved areas except to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards.
WATER-CONSERVING PLANT: A plant that can generally survive with available
rainfall once established although supplemental irrigation may be needed or
desirable during spring and summer months.
WBWCD: Weber Basin Water Conservancy District.
WELDING SHOP: A business in which metal is joined, united, repaired, produced,
or created by heating and allowing the parts to flow together, or by hammering
or compressing with or without previous heating.
WETLANDS: Areas known as marshes, swamps or wetlands, including any area
greater than one-fourth (1/4) acre where standing water is retained for a
portion of the year and unique vegetation has adapted to the area, or as
regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTION: A business that maintains an inventory of materials,
supplies and goods related to one or more industries and sells bulk quantities
of materials, supplies and goods from its inventory to companies within the
industry. A wholesale distributor is not a retail goods establishment.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS: Includes any structure or apparatus to utilize
wind to drive generators.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, LARGE: A “large wind energy system” is a wind energy
conversion system consisting of a wind turbine or group of wind turbines,
tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has rated
capacity of more than one hundred kilowatts (100 kW).
WIRELESS TELE- COMMUNICATION FACILITY: An unmanned structure which consists of
equipment used primarily for the transmission, reception or transfer of voice
or data through radio wave or (wireless) transmissions. Such sites typically
require the construction of transmission support structures to which antenna
equipment is attached. Low power radio services facilities include “cellular”
or “PCS” (personal communications system) communications and paging systems.
YARD: A required open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as permitted elsewhere in this
title.
YARD, FRONT:
   A.   A space on the same lot with a building, between the front line of the
building and the front lot line, and extending across the full width of the
lot. The “depth” of the front yard is the minimum distance between the front
lot line and the front line of the building.
   B.   On a corner lot, there are two (2) front yards.
YARD, REAR: A space on the same lot with a building, between the rear line of
the building and the rear lot line, and extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE: A yard, extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the
side lot line and the nearest part of any building or structure on the lot.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area of the City designated in the text of this title in
which requirements and standards for the use of land and buildings are
prescribed.
ZONING MAP: A map adopted as part of a land use ordinance that depicts land use
zones, overlays or districts.
(Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord. 00-3, 2-1-2000; Ord. 05-14, 12-
13-2005; Ord. 06-9, 7-11-2006; Ord. 07-03, 1-9-2007; Ord. 09-17, 12-1-2009;
Ord. 2011-03, 5-3-2011; Ord. 2011-06, 5-3-2011; 2012 Code; Ord. 2012-02, 1-3-
2012; Ord. 2014-08, 9-2-2014; Ord. 2014-11, 9-2-2014; Ord. 2014-15, 9-2-2014;
Ord. 2014-16, 10-21-2014; Ord. 2015-04, 4-21-2015; Ord. 2016-06, 5-17-2016;
Ord. 2017-02, 1-3-2017; Ord. 2018-02, 3-6-2018; Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018; Ord.
2018-12, 10-2-2018; Ord. 2018-14, 11-20-2018; Ord. 2019-02, 3-19-2019; Ord.
2020-06, 2-4-2020; Ord. 2022-01, 4-5-2022; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022; Ord. 2023-
07, 5-30-2023; Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024; Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024; Ord. 2024-07,
10-1-2024)
CHAPTER 2
ORGANIZATION FOR ADMINISTRATION AND REVIEW
SECTION:
10-2-1: Planning Commission 1  (Rep. by Ord. 2018-01, 1-2-2018)
10-2-2: Hearing Officer
10-2-3: Parks, Trails, Arts And Recreation Advisory Board (Rep. by Ord. 2025-
02, 1-21-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 1 of this Code.
10-2-1: PLANNING COMMISSION 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 2018-01, 1-2-2018)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 2, chapter 1 of this Code.
10-2-2: HEARING OFFICER:
   A.   Created And Appointment:
      1.   Pursuant to Utah Code 10-9a-701 the City hereby establishes an
Appeal Authority consisting of a Hearing Officer to:
         a.   Hear and decide requests for variances from the terms of the land
use ordinance;
         b.   Hear and decide appeals from decisions applying the land use
ordinance;
         c.   Hear and decide appeals from a fee charged in accordance with
State Code section 10-9a-510.
      2.   The Hearing Officer shall be appointed or removed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the City Council.
   B.   Organization And Procedures:
      1.   All hearings of the Hearing Officer shall be open to the public.
      2.   The Hearing Officer shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and
      3.   The Hearing Officer may, but is not required to, have its
proceedings contemporaneously transcribed by a Court Reporter or a tape
recorder.
      4.   The Hearing Officer shall file its records in the Office of the City
Recorder.
      5.   All records in the Office of the City Recorder are public records.
      6.   Decisions of the Hearing Officer become effective at the time the
decision is filed with the City Recorder, unless a different time is designated
by the Hearing Officer.
   C.   Appeals:
      1.   The applicant or any other person or entity adversely affected by a
decision administering or interpreting a land use ordinance may appeal that
decision applying the land use ordinance by alleging that there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an official in the
administration, interpretation or enforcement of the land use ordinance. Any
person or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by the
grant or refusal of a building permit, or by any other decision of the city's
administrative staff in the enforcement and administration of the land use
ordinance, may appeal any decision to the hearing officer.
      2.   All appeals must be filed in writing with the office of the city
recorder, within ten (10) calendar days from the date of any written decision
is issued by the city or within ten (10) calendar days from when the person
knows or reasonably should know of the decision being appealed, whichever is
less.
      3.   The person or entity making the appeal has the burden of proving
that an error has been made.
      4.   Only decisions applying the land use ordinance may be appealed to
the hearing officer. A person may not appeal, and the hearing officer may not
consider, any amendments to the land use ordinances.
      5.   Adversely affected parties that appeal for relief shall be required
to present to the hearing officer every theory of relief that it can raise in
district court.
      6.   The standard of review of factual matters for the hearing officer
shall be de novo. The hearing officer shall review for correctness a decision
of the city's land use authority in its interpretation and application of a
land use ordinance.
      7.   Only those decisions in which the city's land use authority has
applied a land use ordinance to a particular application, person, or parcel may
be appealed to the hearing officer.
      8.   Appeals may not be used to waive or modify the terms or requirements
of the land use ordinance.
   D.   Variances:
      1.   Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the
requirements of the land use ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that
he owns, leases or in which he holds some other beneficial interest, may apply
to the hearing officer for a variance from the terms of the land use ordinance.
      2.   The hearing officer may grant a variance only if:
         a.   Literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an unreasonable
hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purpose of the land use ordinances;
         b.   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do
not generally apply to other properties in the same zone;
         c.   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone;
         d.   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and
will not be contrary to the public interest; and
         e.   The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial
justice done.
      3.   In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under this subsection, the hearing officer
may not find an unreasonable hardship unless:
         a.   The alleged hardship is located on or associated with property
for which the variance is sought; and
         b.   The alleged hardship comes from circumstances peculiar to the
property, not from conditions that are general to the neighborhood;
         c.   In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use
ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection D2 of this section
or this subsection D3, the hearing officer may not find an unreasonable
hardship if the hardship is self- imposed or economic.
         d.   In determining whether or not there are special circumstances
attached to the property under subsection D2 of this section or this subsection
D3, the hearing officer may find that special circumstances exist only if the
special circumstances:
            (1)   Relate to the hardship complained of; and
            (2)   Deprive the property of privileges granted to other
properties in the same zone.
      4.   The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the
conditions justifying a variance have been met.
      5.   Variances run with the land.
      6.   The hearing officer and any other body may not grant a use variance.
      7.   In granting a variance, the hearing officer may impose additional
requirements on the applicant that will:
         a.   Mitigate any harmful effects of the variance; or
         b.   Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived
or modified.
   E.   Appeal Of Hearing Officer Decision To District Court: Any person
adversely affected by any decision of a hearing officer may petition the
district court for a review of the decision within thirty (30) days of said
decision. (Ord. 2012-07, 4-30-2012)
10-2-3: PARKS, TRAILS, ARTS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD:
(Rep. by Ord. 2025-02, 1-21-2025)
 
CHAPTER 3
AMENDMENTS TO LAND USE REGULATIONS AND ZONING MAP
SECTION:
10-3-1: Authority Of The City Council
10-3-2: Procedures For Proposed Amendments And Rezonings
10-3-1: AUTHORITY OF THE CITY COUNCIL:
In accordance with Utah Code Annotated, Title 10, Chapter 9a, Part 5, as
amended, the City Council may amend any provisions of this Title or the
Official Zoning Map of the City in accordance with the procedures set forth
herein, including amendments to the number, shape, boundaries, or area of any
zoning district; any land use regulation of or within a zoning district; or any
other provision of this title. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012
Code; Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
10-3-2: PROCEDURES FOR PROPOSED AMENDMENTS AND REZONINGS:
   A.   Residents Or Other Interested Persons: Any resident of the City or
other person having an equitable interest in real property located in the City
may petition the City for an amendment or rezoning.
   B.   Application; Information Required: The person seeking to amend this
Title or Official Zoning Map shall make application to the Community
Development Department on the form provided for such amendment with the
following information and documents:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant and the name and address of
every person or company that the applicant represents in relation to the
application.
      2.   A written description of the proposed amendment and the reasons
therefor.
      3.   A nonreturnable amendment application fee.
      4.   If the proposed amendment requires a change to the Official Zoning
Map, the application shall include the following:
         a.   An accurate property map showing the areas which would be
affected by the proposed amendment, all abutting properties, and the present
and proposed zoning classifications, along with an accurate legal description
of the area to be rezoned.
         b.   A list of the names and addresses of all owners of the subject
property.
         c.   A list of the names and addresses of all property owners within
three hundred feet (300') of the subject property boundary, obtained from the
public records maintained by the Davis County Recorder.
         d.   Stamped and addressed legal size envelopes for each of the
property owners identified in section c above.
   C.   If the proposed amendment requires a change in text of the ordinance,
the application shall include the chapter and section of the proposed
amendment, and a draft of the proposed wording being requested.
   D.   Notice; Public Hearings And Public Meetings:
      1.   Public Hearings: The City shall prepare and give notice at least 10
calendar days before a public hearing to consider such amendment by mail to
affected entities and for the area directly affected by the proposed land use
regulation or zoning map amendment as a class B notice as provided by Utah Code
Annotated sections 10-9a-205, 10-9a-502, and 63G-30-102, as amended.
      2.   Public Meetings: The City shall provide notice of public meetings as
a class A notice, as provided by Utah Code Annotated sections 10-9a-205, 10-9a-
502, and 63G-30-102, as amended.
   E.   Planning Commission Review: The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing to review the application and make its recommendations concerning the
proposed amendment to the City Council within forty five (45) days from receipt
of the amendment application in a regularly scheduled meeting. The Planning
Commission shall recommend adoption of a proposed amendment only when the
following findings are made:
      1.   The proposed amendment is in accord with the General Plan goals and
policies of the City.
      2.   Changed or changing conditions make the proposed amendment
reasonably necessary to carry out the "purposes" stated in this Title.
   F.   City Council Review: The City Council shall review the proposed
amendment to this Title or Official Zoning Map and shall schedule a public
meeting on the proposed amendment as provided herein. The City Council may:
      1.   Adopt the amendment;
      2.   Modify the proposed amendment and adopt the amendment;
      3.   Modify the proposed amendment and refer back to the Planning
Commission for its recommendation to be returned to the City Council within
thirty (30) days; or
      4.   Reject the amendment.
   G.   Previously Denied Applications: Where an application for zoning
amendment has been denied, the Planning Commission and the City Council shall
not review the same zoning amendment application within one (1) year of a
denial unless there is a substantial change of conditions since the earlier
application. A new application and fee will be required. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993,
eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord. 02-3, 1-15-2002; 2012 Code; Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 4
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Title
10-4-2: Purpose
10-4-3: Scope
10-4-4: Interpretation
10-4-5: Definitions
10-4-6: General Regulations
10-4-7: Inspections
10-4-8: Enforcement
10-4-9: Notice Requirements
10-4-10: Sign Permit And Permit Fee Required
10-4-11: Reinspection Fee
10-4-12: Sign Overlay Zoning Districts
10-4-13: Codes And Symbols
10-4-14: Sign Types, Effects, Dimensions, Number And Locations By Overlay
Districts
10-4-15: Billboard Standards
10-4-16: On Premises Interstate Signs
10-4-17: Electronic Signs
10-4-18: Signs Prohibited On Public Property
10-4-19: Free Speech Zone
10-4-1: TITLE:
The regulations contained in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as
the SIGN REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF NORTH SALT LAKE CITY and its land use
management and development code. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004)
10-4-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of sign regulations set forth in this title shall be to
coordinate the type, placement and physical dimensions of signs within the
city; to recognize the various commercial communication requirements of all
sectors of the business community; to encourage the innovative use of design;
to promote both renovation and proper maintenance; to allow for special
circumstances; and to guarantee equal treatment under the law through accurate
recordkeeping and consistent enforcement. These objectives shall be
accomplished by regulation of display, erection, use and maintenance of signs.
The use and location of signs are regulated according to zoning district. The
placement and physical dimensions of signs are regulated primarily by type.
(Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004)
   B.   Further purposes of sign regulations are to protect and promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the City residents and businesses by
regulating the design, materials, size, construction, installation, location
and maintenance of signs and sign structures in a content neutral manner that
does not favor any type of speech over another. These sign regulations minimize
potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians; to encourage signs which, by
their design, are integrated with and harmonious to the buildings and sites
which they occupy; to encourage sign legibility through the elimination of
excessive and confusing sign displays; to reduce driver inattention; to
preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place in which to live and
to work and as an attraction to nonresidents who come to visit or trade; to
safeguard and enhance property values; to limit or forbid signs which interfere
with solar access of adjacent properties; to protect public and private
investment in buildings and open spaces; and to supplement and be a part of the
regulations imposed under the zoning authority of the city. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-
2004; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-3: SCOPE:
These regulations shall not relate to building design, nor shall this chapter
regulate official traffic or government signs; the copy and message of signs;
signs not intended to be viewed from a public right of way; window displays;
product dispensers and point of purchase displays; scoreboards on athletic
fields; flags of any nation, government or noncommercial organization;
gravestones; barber's poles; religious symbols; holiday decorations;
commemorative plaques; the display of street numbers; or any display or
construction not defined in this title as a "sign". (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004)
10-4-4: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, the sign regulations
contained herein are declared to be the minimum standards allowable for the
purpose set forth. The types of signs allowed by this title shall be plenary
and sign types not specifically allowed as set forth within this title shall be
prohibited. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with nor abrogate
nor annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between private parties
existing at the effective date hereof; provided, however, that where this title
imposes a greater restriction upon signs, and the location thereof requires or
imposes other conditions than those required or imposed by other laws,
ordinances or restrictions, the provisions of this title shall control. (Ord.
04-1, 2-17-2004)
10-4-5: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases as used in this sign code shall have the
following meaning:
ABANDONED SIGN: A sign that no longer identifies or advertises an ongoing
lawful business, product, location, service, idea, or activity conducted on the
premises on which the sign is located.
ALTERATION: Any change in the placement, size or shape of an existing sign.
ANIMATED SIGN: A sign employing actual motion, the illusion of motion or light
and/or color changes achieved through mechanical, electrical or electronic
means, a balloon or inflatable sign, a lighter-than-air, gas-filled balloon
tethered to a fixed location, a banner sign, a sign made of fabric or other
non-rigid material with no enclosing framework, feather flag sign, a changeable
copy sign, a sign or a portion thereof on which the copy or symbols change
either automatically through electrical or electronic means (for example, time
and temperature units), or manually through placement of letters or symbols on
a panel mounted in or on a track system.
AWNING: A structure constructed of fabric or metal placed so as to extend
outward from the building, providing a shield for doors, windows and other
openings, with supports extending back to the building, supported entirely by
the building.
AWNING SIGN: A sign that is painted on or otherwise made part of the awning
material.
BILLBOARD: A free standing ground sign located, designed or intended to direct
attention to a business, product, or service that is not sold, offered or
existing on the property where the sign is located.
BENCH SIGN: A sign that is painted on or attached to any part of the surface of
a bench, seat or chair placed outside of the main structure of a property, or
on or adjacent to a public sidewalk, roadway or other public right-of-way.
CANOPY: A structure constructed of fabric or other material placed so as to
extend outward from the building, providing a protective shield for doors,
windows and other openings, with supports extending to the ground as well as
attached to the building.
CANOPY SIGN: A sign that is painted or otherwise made part of the canopy
material. Signage is limited to the vertical portions of the canopy; the sides
and the front valance. No signage shall protrude beyond the vertical face.
COMMERCIAL SIGN: Any sign with wording, a logo or other representation that
directly or indirectly names, advertises or calls attention to a business,
product, service, profession, commodity, commercial event, or other commercial
activity, or otherwise contains commercial speech.
COMMERCIAL SPEECH: Any message proposing a commercial transaction or related to
the economic interests of the speaker or its audience.
CONVERT: To change, remodel, or rehabilitate any existing billboard sign face
to an electronic or digital format.
DIRECTIONAL SIGNS: Any sign located on private property at or near the public
right-of-way, directing or guiding vehicular or pedestrian traffic onto the
property and/or toward parking or other identified locations on the property.
FACIA SIGN: See Wall Sign
FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign supported by one or more upright poles or braces
placed in or upon the ground surface and not attached to any building. Examples
of freestanding signs are a monument sign and a pole sign.
INTERCHANGE OR INTERSECTION: Any area and its approach where traffic is
channeled off or onto an interstate route, excluding the deceleration lanes,
acceleration lanes or feeder systems, from or to another federal, state,
county, city or other route.
LOW PROFILE SIGN: A freestanding sign erected near ground level less than 30
inches in height, limited to 6 sq. ft. used to identify the name of a building
or used for directional purposes for commercial parking circulation.
MAIN TRAVELED WAY: The through traffic lanes, including auxiliary lanes,
acceleration lanes, deceleration lanes and feeder systems, exclusive of
frontage roads and ramps. For a divided highway, there is a separate main
traveled way for the traffic in each direction.
MARQUEE SIGN: A sign attached to a hood or awning of permanent construction
without pillars or posts which is supported from a building wall and extends
beyond the building, building line, or property line.
MONUMENT SIGN: A free standing ground sign mounted on a base but not attached
to any building or wall.
NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN: Any sign that is not a commercial sign.
NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH: Any message which is intended for the purpose of
supporting or opposing a candidate, proposition or other measure at an election
or for any other noncommercial expression not related to the advertisement or
promotion of any product, service or the identification of any business.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign that legally existed at the time that it was
installed under the regulations in effect at that time, but does not conform to
the current applicable regulations of the area in which it is located and has
been maintained continuously since the time the applicable regulations changed
to render it nonconforming.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A commercial sign that displays any message directing
attention to a business, product, service, profession, commodity, commercial
activity, commercial event, or other commercial message that is generally
conducted, sold, manufactured, produced, offered or occurs elsewhere than on
the premises where such sign is located.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A commercial sign that identifies the name, occupation and/or
profession of the occupants of the premises on which the sign is located.
PERMANENT SIGN: Any sign that is legally placed and which is intended to be and
is so constructed as to be of a lasting and enduring condition, remain
unchanged in character and condition beyond normal wear and tear, and
positioned in a permanent manner fixed to the ground, wall or building.
POINT OF WIDENING: The point of the gore or the point where the intersecting
lane begins to parallel the other lanes of traffic, but the point of widening
may never be greater than two thousand six hundred forty feet (2,640') from the
centerline of the intersecting highway of the interchange or intersection at
grade.
POLE SIGN: A free standing sign that is mounted atop one or more poles and not
attached or braced by any other structure.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any moveable or hand held sign not permanently attached to the
ground and easily removable using ordinary hand tools.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign that projects from and is supported by a wall or
parapet of the building with the display surface of the sign in a plane
perpendicular to or approximately perpendicular to the wall.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected upon a roof, parapet, or roof mounted equipment
structure and extending above a roof, parapet, or roof mounted equipment
structure of a building or structure.
SIGN: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, that is used
to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or
location by any means, including, but not limited to, words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. The term
"sign" shall also include the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and
any attachments, ornaments, or other features used to attract such attention as
described above.
SNIPE SIGN: A temporary or permanent sign tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued
or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences or other objects.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or a structure
that is installed or placed for a limited duration and intended to be displayed
before, during or after an event to which the sign relates.
VEHICLE SIGN: Any sign permanently or temporarily attached to or placed on a
vehicle or trailer.
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached to or painted on the wall of a building or
structure in a plane, parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of said
wall.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign viewable through or affixed in any manner to a window or
exterior glass door such that it is viewable from the exterior, including signs
located inside a building but visible primarily from the outside of the
building. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Compliance Required: Except as provided in this title, no sign shall be
erected, raised, moved, placed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered,
or have the text of the sign changed, except in conformity with the regulations
herein specified for the use district in which it is located. No permit is
required for the maintenance of a sign or for a change of copy on painted,
printed or changeable copy signs. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004)
   B.   Code And Licensing Compliance: All signs hereafter erected in the city
shall comply with the current standards of the national electrical code, the
international building code, and all other ordinances of the city. No sign
shall be placed on public property or within a public right of way except when
expressly licensed by the city council or state department of transportation.
(Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   Maintenance Of Signs: All signs shall be maintained in good condition.
Exposed parts of signs shall be painted or treated chemically in such a manner
as to preserve the condition, aesthetics and life of such signs; moving parts
shall be maintained in operable condition; and signs designed to be lighted
shall be maintained with a full complement of the lighting facilities required
by the design of each such sign.
   D.   Removal Upon Discontinuance Of Use: All signs identifying a
discontinued use on the property shall be removed by the sign owner from the
property within thirty (30) calendar days of the time the use was discontinued.
   E.   Prohibited signs: The following signs and any sign not otherwise
authorized under the terms of this code, are prohibited in the city:
      1.   Abandoned Signs.
      2.   Animated Signs.
      3.   Balloon Signs.
      4.   Snipe Signs.
      5.   Signs on vehicles or trailers if the vehicle or trailer is parked
off premises, outside of designated parking stalls, or in other locations not
normally expected of such vehicles and for the primary purpose of advertising a
product, service, business or other activity. This section is not intended to
apply to standard business logos or identification on vehicles primarily and
actively used for business purposes which are otherwise legally parked.
      6.   Signs located on trees, utility poles, public benches or any other
form of public property or within any public right-of-way.
   F.   Illumination Restrictions: Unless otherwise specified in this chapter,
all signs may be illuminated. However, no sign may utilize:
      1.   An exposed incandescent lamp with an external reflector without a
sun screen or comparable diffusion;
      2.   Any exposed incandescent lamp in excess of fifteen (15) watts unless
a screen is attached;
      3.   Any revolving beacon light.
   G.   Changeable Copy: Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, any sign
herein allowed may use manual or automatic changeable copy.
   H.   License Required; Indemnification; Insurance: No person may engage in
the business of erecting, altering, relocating, constructing or maintaining
signs without a valid state contractor's license and valid city business
license. All persons involved in the maintenance, installation or relocation of
signs near or upon the public right of way or property shall agree to hold
harmless and indemnify the city, its officers, agents and employees, against
any and all claims of negligence resulting from such work insofar as this title
has not specifically directed the placement of a sign. Such persons shall also
maintain insurance to indemnify the city against any form of liability to a
minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   I.   Nonregulated Signs: Signs not regulated by this chapter:
      1.   On premises advertising signs that are attached to windows or walls
and are clearly of a temporary nature, and which promote specific sales or
events for short periods of time and not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of
street facing wall and/or windows.
      2.   Signs which are associated with school or church events and
functions which are clearly of a temporary nature for short periods of time.
      3.   Interior signs.
      4.   Real estate company "for sale" signs and owner placed "for sale" or
"for rent" signs advertising specific property for sale or rent and are erected
temporarily on that specific property.
      5.   Temporary election campaign signs, yard sale signs, night crawlers
for sale signs, snipe signs, etc.
      6.   Directional signs (i.e., BLM, DWR, etc.). Church nameplate signs,
etc.
      7.   Nameplate signs less than one hundred fifty (150) square inches in
size.
      8.   Construction signs for each street of frontage of a construction
project, not to exceed forty five feet (45') in area. Such signs may be erected
ten (10) days prior to beginning of construction and shall be removed one day
following completion of construction.
      9.   Identification signs designed as a necessary part of a project
approved in a conditional use permit.
   J.   Temporary off premises residential development, directional and freeway
oriented signs. All temporary off premises residential development, directional
and freeway oriented signs are only for developments or master planned
communities within the boundaries of the city.
      1.   A maximum of three (3) temporary off premises signs announcing a
residential development may be permitted for each development. Such signs will
only be allowed by in any S-2 or S-3 overlay zoning district under the
provisions of sections
10-4-12 and
10-4-13 of this chapter.
      2.   In addition to the temporary off premises residential development
signs, each development may be permitted two (2) temporary off premises
directional signs. Such signs will only be allowed by in any S-2 or S-3 overlay
zoning district under provisions of sections
10-4-11,
10-4-12 and
10-4-13 of this chapter.
      3.   In addition to the temporary off premises residential development
and directional signs, a master planned community exceeding three hundred (300)
lots may be permitted one temporary freeway oriented residential development
sign. Said sign will only be allowed in the S-2 and S-3 sign overlay zoning
districts under provisions of sections
10-4-11,
10-4-12 and
10-4-13 of this chapter.
      4.   Temporary off premises residential development shall be permitted
upon the main entrances to the residential development in any zone, with a
maximum of one (1) sign per road frontage.
      5.   Temporary off premises residential development directional signs may
be permitted as a conditional use in zones other than the sign overlay zones
upon approval by the Planning Commission limited to a maximum duration of two
(2) years from the date of the approval of the conditional use permit or within
thirty (30) days of completion of the final dwelling unit construction. Upon
request, a time extension of one (1) year may be granted by the Planning
Commission. Said temporary signs shall not be permitted within the public right
of way, nor shall they impede safe vehicular traffic, or violate any clear area
of an intersection and must be located upon private property. Signs shall be
kept in good repair and will be subject to removal within thirty (30) days of
notice of disrepair.
      6.   All temporary off premises residential development, directional and
freeway oriented signs shall be removed within three (3) years from the date
when the conditional use permit was granted. Upon request, a time extension not
to exceed two (2) additional years may be granted by the planning commission.
      7.   Prior to approval and installation of any temporary off premises
residential development, directional or freeway oriented signs, the applicant
must first provide the city with written authorization from the legal property
owner, or its representative, granting permission for the sign location and
duration of the sign posting.
      8.   Temporary off premises residential development, directional and
freeway oriented signs are to identify the development or the developer only.
They are not intended for builders or contractors within the development. (Ord.
04-1, 2-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-7: INSPECTIONS:
The Community Development Department shall have the following duties with
regard to sign inspections:
   A.   Initial Inspection: The Building Official shall make an initial
inspection of any sign upon the completion, erection, reconstruction or
remodeling of the same and notification of said completion, erection,
reconstruction or remodeling. This inspection shall be made to assure
compliance with the provisions of these regulations, other ordinances of the
city and conditions precedent to the issuance of a conditional use permit, if
applicable.
   B.   Complaint Of Noncompliance: In accordance with Title 12 for
Administrative Code Enforcement, the designated enforcement official shall
inspect each sign for which a complaint of noncompliance with local ordinances
is made in writing to the City.
   C.   Routine Spot Checks: To make routine spot checks of all signs to assure
compliance with these regulations, and other ordinances of the city and
conditions precedent to the issuance of a conditional use permit, if
applicable. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-8: ENFORCEMENT:
The Community Development Department of the City of North Salt Lake City is
hereby vested with the duty of enforcing the sign regulations of this title and
in the performance of such duty is empowered and directed to:
   A.   Issue Permits: Issue permits to construct, alter or repair signs which
conform to the regulations of the city.
   B.   Ascertain Conformance: Ascertain that all signs, including construction
of, or maintenance of any signs, are in conformance with regulations of the
city and the conditions imposed precedent to the issuance of a conditional use
permit, if applicable.
   C.   Issue Notice Of Violation: Issue a notice of violation to the person
having charge or control or benefit of any sign found by the Community
Development Department to be unsafe or dangerous, or in violation of the
ordinances of the city.
   D.   Institute Proceedings: Institute any appropriate action or proceedings
in any case where any sign is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained, or in any case where any sign is used in
violation of any ordinance of the city, including, but not limited to, this
title, to accomplish the following purposes:
      1.   To prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; and
      2.   To restrain, correct or abate such violation.
   E.   Unsafe, Dangerous Sign Removal:
      1.   Abate and remove any unsafe or dangerous sign which is not repaired
or made safe within five (5) working days after giving appropriate notice to
the person having charge, control or benefit of any such sign. In such an
event, the person having charge, control or benefit of such sign shall pay to
the city the costs incurred in such removal within thirty (30) calendar days
after written notice is mailed to such person.
      2.   Upon failure to pay the costs incurred in abating an unsafe or
dangerous sign, the city may, by action of its city council, place a lien
against the property owned by the person having charge, control or benefit of
such sign to assure compliance with this provision. This provision for
abatement and removal shall not apply to any sign for which a notice of
violation is presently being appealed under the provisions of Title 12 of this
Code.
   F.   Illegal Sign Removal: Abate and remove any illegal sign other than
unsafe or dangerous signs which is not made conforming within sixty (60)
working days after giving appropriate notice to the person having charge,
control or benefit of any such sign. In such event, the person having charge,
control or benefit of such sign shall pay to the city the costs incurred in
such removal within thirty (30) calendar days after written notice is mailed to
such person. Upon failure to pay the costs incurred in abating and removing an
illegal sign, the city may, by action of its governing body, place a lien
against property owned by the person having charge, control or benefit of such
sign to assure compliance with this provision. This provision is for abatement
and removal and shall not apply to any sign for which a notice of violation is
presently being appealed under the provisions of Title 12 of this Code.
   G.   Nonmaintained Or Abandoned Sign Removal: Abate and remove any
nonmaintained or abandoned sign which is not repaired or put into use within
ten (10) working days after giving appropriate notice to the person having
charge, control or benefit of any such sign. In such an event, the person
having charge, control or benefit of such sign shall pay to the city the costs
incurred in such removal within thirty (30) calendar days after written notice
is mailed to such person. Upon failure to pay the costs incurred in abating and
removing a nonmaintained or abandoned sign, the city may, by action of its city
council, place a lien against property owned by the person having charge,
control or benefit of such sign to assure compliance with this provision. This
provision for abatement and removal shall not apply to any sign for which a
notice of violation is presently being appealed under the provisions of Title
12 of this Code. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-9: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Notification by the city to persons having charge, or control or benefit of any
sign found to be unsafe or dangerous or in violation of this title or other
ordinances of the city, and where the city is contemplating removal of said
sign, shall be accomplished by the city utilizing written notice as provided in
Title 12 of this Code. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-10: SIGN PERMIT AND PERMIT FEE REQUIRED:
All signs hereafter erected within the city shall be erected, reconstructed or
remodeled only in accord with the authority authorized by the sign permit
issued by the city. Application for a sign permit shall be made to the
Community Development Department and shall be accompanied by an administrative
fee to defray the expenses to the city incurred in the administration of this
chapter. Such fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. Large
signs which require a building permit for structural or electrical elements
shall be assessed a permit fee in accordance with valuation as provided by
Building Code. A sign permit shall be issued if the proposed sign is found to
be in compliance with the provisions of this title and other ordinances of the
city. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-11: REINSPECTION FEE:
In the event that a notice of violation is issued, a reinspection fee shall be
charged to defray the costs of reinspection. Said reinspection fee shall be
charged for each inspection required until applicable regulations of the city
are complied with. The amount of the fee shall be established by resolution of
the city council. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-12: SIGN OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS:
There are hereby created three (3) overlay zoning districts (S-1, S-2 and S-3)
to regulate the sign type, sign effects and copy content, sign dimensions,
number of signs, and sign location in the city. Refer to special zoning map for
description of districts. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-13: CODES AND SYMBOLS:
In the following section, the sign type, sign effects and copy content, sign
dimensions, number of signs, and sign location which are allowed in the various
districts are shown as "permitted" indicated by a "P" in the appropriate column
(headed by the overlay zoning district designation), or as "conditional uses",
indicated by a "C" in the appropriate column. If a regulation applies in a
given district, it is indicated in the appropriate column by a numeral to show
the linear or square feet required. If the regulation does not apply, or if it
is not allowed in a given district, it is indicated in the appropriate column
by an "NA" Not Applicable or "N" Not Permitted. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004; amd.
Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-14: SIGN TYPES, EFFECTS, DIMENSIONS, NUMBERS AND LOCATIONS BY OVERLAY
DISTRICTS:
Sign Type S-1 S-2 S-3
Sign Type                                                       S-1 S-2   S-3
   On premises signs:                                                 
Awning, Canopy, & Marquee                                       P   P     P
Fascia or Wall                                                  P   P     P
Freestanding (Pole or Pylon)                                    P   P     P
Freeway oriented                                                N   N     C
Low profile                                                     P   P     P
Multi-tenant monument                                           N   P     P
Projecting wall                                                 P   P     P
Roof                                                            N   N     N
Window                                                          P   P     P
Temporary                                                       P   P     P
   Off premises signs:                                                
Billboard (Freestanding) - see section                          N   N     P
10-4-15
Fascia or Wall                                                  N   N     N
Roof                                                            N   N     N
Temporary residential development                               N   P     P
Temporary residential directional                               N   P     P
Temporary freeway oriented residential development              N   P     P
Sign Effects And Copy Content                                            
On premises signs:                                                       
Identification                                                  P   P     P
Illuminated                                                     P   P     P
Rotating                                                        N   N     P
Flashing                                                        N   N     N
Changeable copy                                                 P   P     P
Animated                                                        N   N     P
   Off premises signs:                                                
Illuminated                                                     NA  NA    P
Rotating                                                        NA  NA    N
Flashing                                                        NA  NA    N
Changeable copy                                                 NA  NA    P
Animated                                                        NA  NA    N
Message center                                                  NA  NA    P
   Sign Dimensions                                                    
Sign height (in feet) freestanding pole or pylon:               20  30    45
Awing, Canopy, and Marquee (in square feet per face)            35  50    75
Low profile height (inches)                                     30  30    30
Maximum sign area (in square feet per face)                     35  50    75
Fascia or wall signs not to exceed 15% of available wall space  100 100   100
or sq. ft.
Window sign area (percentage of ground floor windows only)      30  30    50
Temporary off premises residential development signs:                    
Sign area (in square feet)                                      64  64    64
Sign height (in feet)                                           10  20    20
Temporary off premises residential directional signs:                    
Sign area (in square feet)                                      32  32    32
Sign height (in feet)                                           20  20    20
Temporary off premises freeway oriented residential development          
sign:
Sign area (in square feet)                                      200 200   200
Sign height (in feet)                                           30  30    30
Number of Signs:                                                         
On premises signs:                                                       
Awning, Canopy, & Marquee (per storefront entrance)             1   1     1
Fascia or Wall (per façade, limited maximum % wall space)      -   -     -
Freestanding (Pole or Pylon) per street frontage                1   1     1
Freeway Oriented                                                1   1     1
Low Profile                                                     5   5     5
Multi-Tenant per street frontage                                0   1     1
Per window                                                      1   1     1
Temporary per street frontage/per business                      1   1     1
   Off premises signs:                                                
Billboard (Freestanding)                                        -   -     1
Roof                                                            0   0     0
Temporary residential development                               0   3     3
Temporary residential directional                               0   3     3
Temporary freeway oriented residential development              0   1     1
   Location of Signs:                                                 
Minimum clearance under sign (in feet):                                  
   Freestanding, projecting from wall, marquee, fascia, canop10  10    10
   Under canopy, awning (electric)                           8   8     8
   Low profile, temporary                                    -   -     -
Minimum setback from public right of way (in feet)              5   5     5
Off premises "billboards" minimum spacing in linear feet        -   -     1,500
Temporary off premises residential development signs: Minimum   400 400   400
spacing in linear feet
Temporary off premises residential directional signs: Minimum   400 400   400
spacing in linear feet
Temporary off premises freeway oriented residential development -   1,500 1,500
sign: Minimum spacing in linear feet
Overhang of public right of way                                 N   N     N
 
(Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-15: BILLBOARD STANDARDS:
   A.   Location:
      1.   Billboards may only be erected along a highway which is an
interstate. No billboard may be erected more than one hundred feet (100') on
the perpendicular from the edge of the right of way of an interstate highway,
except where a railroad right of way runs contiguous and adjacent to the edge
of the interstate. The one hundred foot (100') corridor shall then be measured
from a point on the perpendicular not to exceed two hundred feet (200') from
the edge of the right of way of the interstate highway. In no case may the
outer edge of the corridor exceed three hundred fifty feet (350') from the
interstate right of way.
      2.   No billboard may be erected closer than five hundred feet (500')
from an interstate highway interchange.
      3.   No billboard may be erected within one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') of another billboard.
      4.   Billboards subject to relocation provided within State Code or
interstate highway expansion may be located in locations closer than one
thousand five hundred feet (1,500') only by agreement and as approved by the
City Council.
      5.   Billboard signs may not extend over any street right of way and
shall be setback a minimum of five feet (5') from the right of way line.
      6.   Billboard signs shall have a minimum separation distance of ten feet
(10') from any structure or building.
   B.   Height:
      1.   The maximum height of a billboard shall be forty-five feet (45')
above existing grade. If the interstate, which is within one hundred feet
(100') of the billboard measured from the interstate at the point at which the
billboard is perpendicular to said interstate, is on a different grade than the
billboard, then the highest point of the billboard may be twenty-five feet
(25') above the pavement elevation or any barrier wall at that location of the
interstate.
   C.   Size:
      1.   Maximum sign area for a billboard shall be six hundred seventy-two
(672) square feet in area, sixty feet (60') in width or twenty feet (20') in
height.
   D.   Lighting: Lighting shall be confined to the sign face of a billboard
and not illuminate the night sky. Electronic signs shall conform to the
provisions provide in Section
10-4-17. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-16: ON PREMISE INTERSTATE SIGNS:
   A.   On premise interstate signs shall be permitted within the S-3 overlay
zoning district on properties with a minimum of four hundred (400) linear feet
of frontage along Interstate Highways 15 or 215.shall be permitted to construct
one (1) on premises interstate sign.
   B.   The maximum sign area shall not to exceed three hundred (300) square
feet.
   C.   No on premise interstate sign may be located greater than fifty feet
(50') from the interstate right of way line and no closer than five feet (5')
of the interstate right of way line.
   D.   The maximum height of an on premise interstate sign shall be forty-five
feet (45') above existing grade. If the interstate within one hundred feet
(100') of the sign, measured from the interstate at the point at which the sign
is perpendicular to said interstate, is on a different grade than the sign,
then the highest point of the sign may be twenty-five feet (25') above the
pavement elevation or any barrier wall at that location of the interstate.
   E.   Only businesses located and licensed upon the premise may be advertised
on an on premise interstate sign.
   F.   Lighting: Lighting shall be confined to the sign face of the sign and
not illuminate the night sky. Electronic signs shall conform to the provisions
provided in Section
10-4-17. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-17: ELECTRONIC SIGNS:
The following regulations shall apply to all electronic message signs:
   A.   An electronic message sign shall only be constructed as part of a
permitted freestanding (pole), wall, or monument sign.
   B.   An electronic message sign shall not be constructed in a location that
interferes with a regulatory device, as determined by the city engineer.
   C.   An electronic message sign shall be equipped with a sensor or other
device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and must be
programmed to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions.
   D.   Additional conditions may be imposed by the planning commission
including hours of sign operation or setbacks from property lines to mitigate
the impacts on nearby residential properties, to protect critical viewsheds as
established in the general plan, or to prevent potential traffic hazards.
   E.   Duration of each display shall be a minimum of eight (8) seconds.
   F.   Transition time between messages shall be no greater than three (3)
seconds.
   G.   An electronic message sign shall only be constructed in a location and
in a manner permitted by this title. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004; amd. Ord. 05-10, 7-
12-2005; Ord. 2016-04, 3-15-2016; Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-4-18: SIGNS PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Signs are not permitted on public property, within the public right of way, or
above the public right of way without express license from the City and state
department of transportation, as applicable. Also note that signs are not
permitted in the residential districts, except as expressly described in these
regulations. (Ord. 04-1, 2-17-2004; amd. Ord. 05-10, 7-12-2005; Ord. 2025-06,
4-1-2025)
10-4-19: FREE SPEECH ZONE:
   A.   Establishment: The mayor, or designee, may establish a content neutral
free speech zone for any event which the establishment of a free speech zone
would serve a substantial government interest such as traffic flow, crowd
control or public safety on public property. All free speech zones established
shall be content neutral and appropriately marked as a free speech zone. All
free speech zones shall provide ample opportunity for protestors to communicate
their messages and be of ample size to accommodate the number of persons
reasonably anticipated that will exercise the free speech rights during the
event.
   B.   Designation of Area and Duration: For each event in which a free speech
zone has been designated, the City shall make available to the public at least
twenty four (24) hours before the event a map and description of the location
of the event, boundaries of the event, location of the free speech zone,
boundaries of the free speech zone, the hours of the regulations on free
speech, and any other restrictions. The free speech zone, duration of the
protest regulations, and other restrictions shall be narrowly tailored to meet
the legitimate government interest of crowd control, traffic control, or public
safety.
   C.   Definitions:
      1.   Free Speech Zone: The area in which protesting is allowed.
      2.   Protest: Any demonstration, picketing, speechmaking, marching, vigil
or religious service, and all other like forms of conduct which involve the
communication or expression of views or grievances.
      3.   Unlawful Protest: Protest at an event designated with a designated
free speech zone, except in the designated free speech zone or use of sound
amplification devices at any event that the mayor has restricted or prohibited
the use of such mechanical or sound amplification devices.
   D.   Restrictions: In any area designated as a free speech zone area,
protestors may not engage in activities that obstruct or impede pedestrians or
vehicles or harass bystanders with physical contact. Protestors may not tie,
nail, or otherwise physically attach any banners, signs, pictures,
instructional materials, symbols, or other personal property to any City
property or private property.
   E.   Sound Amplification Devices: The City may restrict or prohibit the use
of mechanical loudspeakers or sound amplification devices in the free speech
zone, including, but not limited to, megaphones, bullhorns, and electric
amplifiers, if determined that the use of sound amplification devices will
substantially interfere with the event or will substantially interfere with
crowd control, traffic control, or public safety and that the protestors have a
reasonable opportunity to communicate their message without sound
amplification.
   F.   Penalties: A person is guilty of unlawful protest for refusing to
comply with the lawful order of the police to protest in the free speech zone
or for refusing to comply with the lawful order of the police regarding the use
of any mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplification device at an event for
which such use has been restricted or prohibited. Unlawful protest is a class C
misdemeanor, which offense is punishable by imprisonment for a term not to
exceed ninety (90) days and a fine not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) or by both the fine and the term of imprisonment, if the offense
continues after a request by the police to desist. Otherwise, unlawful protest
is an infraction, which offense is punishable by a fine in an amount not
exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
CHAPTER 5
NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES
SECTION:
10-5-1: Maintenance, Repairs And Alterations
10-5-2: Additions, Enlargements And Moving
10-5-3: Alteration Where Parking Insufficient
10-5-4: Restoration Of Damaged Structures
10-5-5: Preexisting Use May Be Continued; Provisions
10-5-6: Effect Of Vacating Noncomplying Structure And Ceasing Nonconforming Use
10-5-7: Change Of Use
10-5-8: Noncomplying Mobile Home Units
10-5-9: Termination Of Nonconforming Uses
10-5-1: MAINTENANCE, REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
Maintenance, repairs and structural alterations may be made to a noncomplying
structure or to a structure housing a nonconforming use. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993,
eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
10-5-2: ADDITIONS, ENLARGEMENTS AND MOVING:
   A.   A building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use and a building
or structure noncomplying as to height, area or yard requirements shall not be
added to or enlarged in any manner, or moved to another location on a lot, nor
shall any nonconforming use of land be expanded on a lot, except as provided
herein.
   B.   A building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use or a building
or structure noncomplying as to height, area or yard regulations may be added
to or enlarged or moved to a new location on the lot upon issuance of a
conditional use permit by the planning commission after public hearing. (Ord.
93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
10-5-3: ALTERATION WHERE PARKING INSUFFICIENT:
A building or structure lacking sufficient automobile parking space in
connection therewith as required by this title may be altered or enlarged,
provided additional off street automobile parking space is supplied to meet the
basic requirements of this title for such alteration or enlargement. (Ord. 93-
5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-5-4: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED STRUCTURES:
A noncomplying building or structure or a building or structure occupied by a
nonconforming use which is substantially damaged or is destroyed by fire,
flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of God, or vandalism, etc.,
may be restored. The occupancy or use of such building or structure, or part
thereof, which existed at the time of such damage or destruction may be
continued or resumed; provided, that such restoration is started within a
period of one year and is diligently pursued to completion in conformance with
the ordinances of the city within two (2) years, and complies with all
applicable codes. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
10-5-5: PREEXISTING USE MAY BE CONTINUED; PROVISIONS:
A structure utilized prior to the effective date hereof for a use which, after
the effective date hereof, is nonconforming, may continue to be utilized for
such nonconforming use unless the structure is vacated or the use ceases for a
continuous period in excess of three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days.
Land used prior to the effective date hereof for a purpose which, after the
effective date hereof, is nonconforming, may continue to be so used; provided,
that such nonconforming use is not ceased for a continuous period in excess of
three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days. No such nonconforming use of land
may in any way be expanded or extended, either in the same or on adjoining
property, except as provided under subsection
10-5-2B of this chapter. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-5-6: EFFECT OF VACATING NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE AND CEASING NONCONFORMING
USE:
   A.   A vacant structure may be occupied by a use for which the structure or
structure was used, designed or intended, if so occupied within a period of
three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days after the use became
nonconforming.
   B.   However, a structure or portion thereof occupied by a nonconforming use
which is, or hereafter becomes, vacant and remains unoccupied by said
nonconforming use for a continuous period in excess of three hundred sixty five
(365) calendar days, shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which
conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
   C.   Should a nonconforming use of land be ceased for a period in excess of
three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days, any future use of such land shall
be in conformity with the provisions of this title, and the previously
authorized nonconforming use is expressly prohibited. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993,
eff. 7-15-1993)
10-5-7: CHANGE OF USE:
The nonconforming use of a building or structure may not be changed except to a
conforming use; but where such change is made, the use shall not thereafter be
changed back to a nonconforming use. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-5-8: NONCOMPLYING MOBILE HOME UNITS:
   A.   If a noncomplying mobile home is removed from the premises, it cannot
thereafter be returned, except: (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012
Code)
      1.   If the mobile home is returned in sixty (60) days where such removal
was upon order of the building official for correction of deficiencies or by
decision of the owner for the purpose of correcting deficiencies; or
      2.   A new mobile home may be moved on the premises if:
         a.   Accomplished within sixty (60) days; and
         b.   The restored or new mobile home is owned by the same owner as the
mobile home removed; and
         c.   Said mobile home is to be occupied for a continuous period of at
least six (6) months by the same occupants as the mobile home removed.
   B.   Mobile home and recreational coach parks shall be licensed annually by
the city council as businesses. Such licenses shall not be issued to nor
renewed for mobile home and recreational coach parks that do not meet the
minimum standards contained in this title or otherwise established by the city
council. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-5-9: TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES:
The city council may in any ordinance provide for the termination of
nonconforming uses either by specifying the period or periods in which
nonconforming uses shall be required to cease, or providing a formula or
formulas whereby the compulsory termination of a nonconforming use may be so
fixed as to allow for the recovery or amortization of the investment and
reasonable termination costs in the nonconforming use. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993,
eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 6
OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Off Street Parking Required; Purpose
10-6-2: Access Requirements
10-6-3: Nonconforming Facilities
10-6-4: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
10-6-5: Minimum Off Street Parking Stall Requirements For Specific Uses
10-6-6: Recreational Vehicle Parking
10-6-7: Design Elements
10-6-8: Access To Individual Parking Stalls
10-6-9: Grading
10-6-10: Guest Parking
10-6-11: Landscaping
10-6-12: Lighting
10-6-13: Location, Conditional Use, Off Premises Requirements
10-6-14: Maintenance
10-6-15: Mixed Use Developments
10-6-16: Off Street Loading Spaces
10-6-17: Screening
10-6-18: Size Of Parking Stalls
10-6-19: Shared, Overlapped Parking
10-6-20: Stacking Spaces
10-6-21: Surfacing
10-6-22: Walkways
10-6-1: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIRED; PURPOSE:
   A.   At the time any building, structure or use is erected, enlarged,
increased or changed, off street parking shall be provided according to the
requirements of this chapter. Off street parking shall be on the same lot as
the building or use served, except in cases where conditional off site parking
facilities have been granted by the City.
   B.   The purpose of this chapter is to set a minimum standard for off street
parking, to ensure that ample parking for the generated demand of the use will
be available on site (off street), to avoid the necessity of parking on the
street, except in certain areas designated by the City where off street parking
requirements cannot be met by past development and redevelopment and where
other programs are in effect to mitigate the parking problem, or as may be
required and established by a conditional use permit.
   C.   All off street parking within the City shall be permanently maintained
in good condition for the duration of the uses served by the facility. (Ord.
2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-2: ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
Clearly defined driveways for adequate ingress and egress to and from all uses
shall be provided as follows:
   A.   Residential Lots: For each residential lot, not more than one access
driveway which shall be a maximum of thirty feet (30') wide at the street lot
line, or as established by conditional use permit and not to exceed forty feet
(40'). Lots with a frontage greater than one hundred feet (100') may provide
two (2) access driveways each up to fifteen feet (15') wide for circular
driveways and other special type circulation and parking.
      1.   No driveway shall be closer to a side property line than three feet
(3').
      2.   No driveway shall be closer than thirty feet (30') to the point of
the intersection of two (2) property lines at any corner of two (2) local
streets as measured along the property line, and no driveway shall extend
across such extended property line.
      3.   No driveway shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to the point of
intersection of two (2) property lines at any corner where either street is a
minor collector, major collector or minor arterial as measured along the
property lines, and no driveway shall extend across such extended property
line.
   B.   Other Than Residential Lots: For other than residential lots, access
shall be provided to meet the following requirements:
      1.   Each property shall be entitled to one driveway on each street
frontage.
      2.   Street frontages greater than two hundred feet (200') may be
permitted up to two (2) driveways, if determined by the City Engineer that the
proposed second driveway does not pose a traffic hazard or unreasonable
impediment to traffic flow.
      3.   The Planning Commission may approve additional driveway approaches
for properties with greater than four hundred feet (400') of frontage as a
conditional use. The applicant must demonstrate that an undue hardship or
unusual conditions exist on the property which justify the necessity of
additional driveways. The City Engineer must recommend approval and any
conditions of approval to the Planning Commission with a finding that the
additional driveway will not create a traffic hazard or unreasonable impediment
to traffic flow. A traffic study will be required on streets designated as
minor collector, major collector or minor arterial.
      4.   No driveway shall be closer to a side property line than eight feet
(8') except in the case of shared driveways.
      5.   The minimum spacing for multiple driveways on a single property
shall be twice the width of the driveway with the greatest width (see driveway
exhibit below).
      6.   Each driveway shall be not more than forty feet (40') wide, measured
at right angles to the centerline of the driveway, except as increased by
permissible curb return radii, or as established by conditional use permit. The
entire flare of any return radius shall fall within the right-of-way.
      7.   No driveway shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to the point of
intersection of two (2) property lines at any corner where either street is a
minor collector, major collector or minor arterial as measured along the
property line, and no driveway shall extend across such extended property line.
      8.   On a street where there are no curbs or gutters, all driveways shall
be well marked and protection provided the entire length of the frontage,
exclusive of the driveways, as per approved plans.
      9.   Where topography or other physical lot conditions do not allow for a
driveway, a shared driveway may be allowed. Both property owners must sign and
record a cross easement agreement benefiting both parties, and a copy of the
agreement must be provided to the City.
      10.   On streets which are designated as a minor arterial, major
collector, minor collector, and local streets with significant traffic flows:
As part of a site plan approval and upon recommendation of the City Engineer,
the Planning Commission may require that shared driveways be utilized for
adjoining properties, where feasible and warranted.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2097.png]
(Ord. 2018-13, 10-16-2018)
10-6-3: NONCONFORMING FACILITIES:
Any property use which, as of the effective date hereof, or of any following
amendment of this chapter, is nonconforming with the regulations relating to
off street parking facilities, may continue in the same manner as if the
parking facilities were conforming, however, such existing parking facilities
shall not be further reduced. A building, structure or use which lacks
sufficient parking as required by this chapter may not be altered or enlarged
or the use changed unless additional parking for the alteration or enlargement
is supplied that meets the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-
2012)
10-6-4: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
In accordance with the Americans With Disabilities Act, the City shall require
the following minimum number of accessible parking stalls for disabled persons:
   A.   Required Minimum:
      STALLS REQUIRED FOR DISABLED PERSONS
Total Stalls In Lot Or Garage Minimum Number Of Accessible Stalls For Disabled
                              Persons
Total Stalls In Lot Or Garage Minimum Number Of Accessible Stalls For Disabled
                              Persons
   1 - 25                  1
   26 - 50                 2
   51 - 75                 3
   76 - 100                4
   101 - 150               5
   151 - 200               6
   201 - 300               7
   301 - 400               8
   401 - 500               9
   501 - 1,000             2% of total stalls
   1,001+                  20, plus 1 for each 100 stalls over 1,000
 
   B.   Van Accessible Stalls: One van accessible stall is required for every
parking area and may be counted toward the required minimum number of
accessible stalls for disabled persons. The dimensions of the van accessible
stall shall be either nine feet (9') wide with an eight foot (8') wide loading
zone, or eleven feet (11') wide with a five foot (5') wide loading zone. The
loading zone may be shared with an adjoining stall for disabled persons.
   C.   Size Of Stall: Stalls provided for disabled persons shall be of
standard size, plus five feet (5') of loading/unloading area parallel to the
length of the stall. Loading area may be shared with an adjoining disabled
persons stall.
   D.   Signage: All parking stalls for the disabled shall be designated as
reserved by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility for the disabled. Stalls
designated for accessibility for vans shall have an additional sign reading
"Van Accessible" mounted below the symbol sign. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-5: MINIMUM OFF STREET PARKING STALL REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC USES:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the number of parking stalls for
various uses will be set forth in this section.
   A.   Parking Calculations: The following provisions shall be used to
calculate the total number of parking spaces required by this section:
      1.   Final calculations of these requirements for any given use resulting
in a fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
      2.   When a lot or parcel contains more than one use, parking stalls
shall be provided in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for each
use unless shared parking is permitted pursuant to this section.
      3.   Parking requirements based on square footage shall be calculated
using gross floor area ("GFA") unless otherwise provided in this section or
elsewhere in this title.
      4.   Parking requirements based on the number of employees shall be
calculated using the largest number of persons working on any shift.
   B.   Manufacturing And Industrial:
Contractor's yard, business service   1 stall per 500 square feet of floor area
                                      in a building
                                      1 stall per 1,000 square feet of floor
Laboratory, research and development  area or 1 stall per employee on highest
                                      shift, whichever is greater
                                      1 stall per 1,000 square feet of gross
Manufacturing, processing or assembly floor area or 1 stall per employee on
                                      highest shift, whichever is greater
                                      2 stalls per 1,000 square feet of gross
                                      floor area for the first 10,000 square
On site warehouse storage             feet, plus 1 stall per 2,000 square feet
                                      for the remaining space. Office area
                                      parking requirements shall be calculated
                                      separately based on office parking ratios
Recycling or processing center        1 stall per 300 square feet of floor area
Self-service storage facility         1 stall per 2,000 square feet of floor
                                      area
                                      1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross
Warehouse with freight movement       floor area or 1 stall per employee on
                                      highest employment shift, whichever is
                                      greater
                                      1 stall per 1,000 square feet of gross
Wholesale sales                       floor area or 1 stall per employee on
                                      highest shift, whichever is greater
 
(Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
   C.   Commercial And Office:
                                    3 stalls per service bay (3 may park in
                                    tandem) plus 1 additional stall per every
Auto repair, body shop and parts    300 square feet of retail floor area;
                                    separate storage area for vehicles under
                                    repair shall be provided
                                    1 stall per 200 square feet of sales office
                                    area plus 1 space for every 10 vehicles
Automobile sales                    displayed, or 5 stalls, whichever is
                                    greater; separate storage area for vehicles
                                    for sale or under repair shall be provided
                                    Drive-up windows shall provide 4 stacking
Bank or financial institution       spaces from window, plus 1 stall per 250
                                    square feet of floor area
Call center                         1 stall per employee at peak shift
                                    2 stalls per bay, plus 6 required stacking
Car wash, full service              spaces, plus 1 stall per employee at
                                    highest shift
Car wash, self-service              2 stalls, plus 3 stacking spaces in front
                                    of each bay
Convenience store                   1 stall per 200 square feet of floor space,
                                    plus 3 stacking spaces for drive-up windows
Daycare center                      1 stall per company vehicle and 1 stall per
                                    6 children
                                    1 stall per 200 square feet of gross floor
Dental/medical office, clinic       area or 5 spaces per doctor, whichever is
                                    greater
                                    1 stall per 200 square feet of floor area
General commercial and retail sales for the first 50,000 square feet, 1 stall
                                    per 250 square feet thereafter
                                    1 stall per 250 square feet for the first
General office                      20,000 square feet, 1 per 300 square feet
                                    thereafter, plus 1 stall per company owned
                                    vehicle
Grocery store                       1 stall per every 200 square feet of floor
                                    area
                                    1 stall per sleeping unit, plus 1 stall for
Hotel, motel                        every 200 square feet of assembly, banquet,
                                    or restaurant floor area, plus 1 stall per
                                    employee on highest shift
Laundromat                          1 stall per 3 washing machines
                                    2 stalls per service bay, plus 3 required
Service station, auto lube center   stacking spaces per bay; separate storage
                                    area for vehicles under repair shall be
                                    provided
 
(Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 9-2-2014)
   D.   Entertainment And Food Services:
Amusement center                        1 stall per 75 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
                                        1 stall per 4 seats of total seating
Assembly center/dance, reception,       capacity plus 1 stall per 100 square
concert hall                            feet of assembly area within the main
                                        auditorium where there are no fixed
                                        seats
Auditorium                              1 stall per 4 fixed seats
Bar or tavern                           1 stall per 50 square feet of gross
                                        floor area
Court, indoor or outdoor                3 stalls for every court
                                        1 stall per 4 seats of total seating
                                        capacity plus 1 stall per 100 square
Dancing and entertainment establishment feet of assembly area within the main
                                        auditorium where there are no fixed
                                        seats
                                        1 stall per 75 square feet of floor
Fast food restaurant                    area, but not less than 5 stalls, plus
                                        3 required stacking spaces per drive-
                                        through lane
Gyms, health and athletic clubs         1 stall per 125 square feet of building
                                        50 stalls for every playing field, plus
                                        1 space for every 3 seats of spectator
Indoor/outdoor soccer facility          seating, plus 2 spaces for every 3
                                        employees on highest employment shift,
                                        but in no case less than 100 stalls
Liquor store                            1 stall per every 250 square feet of
                                        retail space
Live theater                            1 stall per 3 seats
                                        1 stall per 5 fixed seats; nonfixed
Movie theater                           seating to be determined by the
                                        planning commission
                                        1 stall per 100 square feet of gross
                                        floor space or 1 space for each 2
Sit down restaurant                     seats, whichever is greater; plus 1
                                        stall per employee during highest
                                        employment shift
Stadium or arena                        1 stall per 4 fixed seats
 
   E.   Institutional And Public:
                                      1 stall for every 5 seats or 12 feet in
                                      bench length, or 1 stall per 40 square
Church, synagogue or other place of   feet of floor area in a primary meeting
worship                               room. A conditional use permit may be
                                      granted by the planning commission for
                                      shared parking
Community correctional facility       1 stall per 5 bed capacity
Community service facility            1 stall per 250 square feet of building
                                      floor area
Golf course                           1 stall per 2 employees, plus 3 stalls
                                      per golf hole
                                      1 stall per 200 square feet of floor area
Governmental building                 used by the public, plus 1 stall per full
                                      time employee
Hospital                              2 stalls per bed based on total bed
                                      capacity
Library, museum or gallery            1 stall per 300 square feet of floor area
Mental health facility                2 stalls per 1,000 square feet of gross
                                      floor area
                                      1 stall per 40 square feet of floor area
Mortuary                              in assembly room plus 1 stall per
                                      employee on highest shift
                                      1 stall per 40 square feet of gross floor
Public assembly and civic association area in the primary meeting room or
                                      assembly area
                                      1 stall per 300 square feet of office
Utilities                             area, plus 1 stall for each company
                                      vehicle
 
   F.   Residential:
Dwelling Units:
Single-family                     2 stalls per dwelling unit
2 to 4 units                      2 stalls per dwelling unit with minimum of 1
                                  covered per unit
                                  2 stalls per unit, plus 0.25 stall per unit
More than 4 units                 for guest parking with minimum of 1 covered
                                  stall per unit
                                  Off street parking stalls in multi-family
                                  development shall be distributed
Guest/visitor parking             proportionally to the dwelling unit
                                  locations. Generally, such parking shall not
                                  be located more than 200 feet from the
                                  dwelling units intended to be served
Group Living:
                                  1 stall per employee on the highest shift
Assisted living facility          plus 1 stall per company vehicle plus 1 stall
                                  per 3 bed capacity
Bed and breakfast                 2 stalls per dwelling unit, plus 2 stalls per
                                  guestroom
Group home                        1 stall per 2 beds, plus 1 stall per employee
                                  on the highest employment shift
                                  1 stall per employee on the highest
Nursing home                      employment shift, 1 stall per company
                                  vehicle, plus 1 stall per 2.5 bed capacity
Protective housing facility       1 stall per every 4 residents, plus 1 stall
                                  per employee on highest shift
Rehabilitation treatment facility 1 stall per 400 square feet of floor area
                                  1 stall per unit for the first 30 units, 0.75
Retirement home                   stall per unit for the next 20 units, and 0.5
                                  stall in excess of 50 units
 
   G.   Schools:
 
Grades K – 9                   2 stalls per classroom plus school
                                 auditorium stalls
High school                      10 stalls per classroom plus school
                                 auditorium stalls
Housing associated with a school Number of stalls for school, plus 1
                                 stall per 2 beds
Public/private college, trade    As per conditional use permit granted by
vocational                       the planning commission
                                 1 stall per 5 seats or 40 square feet in
School auditorium                auditorium where there is no fixed
                                 seating
 
   H.   Shopping Centers:
 
                                   5 stalls per 1,000 net square feet
Under 15,000 net square feet       (minimum); 5.5 stalls per 1,000 net square
                                   feet (maximum)
15,000 to 400,000 net square feet  4 stalls per 1,000 square feet (minimum);
                                   4.5 stalls per 1,000 square feet (maximum)
                                   4 stalls per 1,000 net square feet
400,000 to 600,000 net square feet (minimum); 5 stalls per 1,000 net square
                                   feet (maximum)
Over 600,000 net square feet       5 stalls per 1,000 square feet (minimum and
                                   maximum)
 
   I.   Unspecified Uses: All other uses not listed above shall be determined
by the planning commission based on the recommendation from the community and
economic development director and the city engineer, or the nearest comparable
use standard.
   J.   Sufficient Parking To Be Provided:
      1.   Sufficient parking should be provided to assure:
         a.   Maximum utilization of the facilities on site will not unduly
impose on neighbors in the vicinity;
         b.   Any reasonable future use will have adequate parking.
      2.   The community and economic development director, in conjunction with
the planning commission, shall determine the minimum required off street
parking requirements by conditional use, being guided by the requirements set
forth herein for uses which are similar to the unspecified use. (Ord. 2012-04,
2-7-2012)
10-6-6: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING:
The parking of recreational vehicles shall conform to the standards set forth
below:
   A.   Addition To Required Parking: Recreational vehicle parking stalls shall
be in addition to, and not in lieu of, other required off street parking
stalls.
   B.   Front Yard Setback Area: Recreational vehicle parking is prohibited in
the front yard setback, unless it is in the driveway of or the side of the
house. If parked in the driveway, no portion of the recreational vehicle may
extend into the public right of way.
   C.   Enclosed Structures: Recreational vehicle parking is permitted in any
enclosed structure conforming to the building code and zoning requirements for
the zoning district in which it is located.
   D.   Side, Rear Yards: Recreational vehicle parking in side or rear yards
may be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Recreational vehicle parking permitted for each residence shall be
limited to one motor home or travel trailer and a total of two (2) recreational
vehicles of any type in excess of twelve feet (12').
      2.   Recreational vehicles may be parked in the rear yard only on an
adequate hard surfaced pad with access provided by either a hard surfaced
driveway, hard surfaced drive strips or an access drive constructed of turf
block materials with an irrigation system.
      3.   Side yard parking shall only be permitted subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   The parking area for the recreational vehicle must be in
concrete, asphalt, turf block or other solid surface.
         b.   The recreational vehicle parking stall shall not interfere with
access to other required parking for the structure.
         c.   Access to the recreational vehicle parking from the existing
driveway on the property shall be tapered from the existing driveway and be
hard surfaced.
         d.   The access or transition area from the existing driveway to the
recreational vehicle parking stall shall not be used for any parking.
   E.   Use As Storage Prohibited: No parked recreational vehicle shall be used
for storage of goods, materials or equipment other than those which are
reasonably and customarily associated with the recreational vehicle.
   F.   Secure Manner Of Storage: All recreational vehicles must be stored in a
safe and secure manner. Any tiedowns, tarpaulins or ropes must be secured to
prevent flapping in windy conditions.
   G.   Use As Dwelling Prohibited: Recreational vehicles shall not be occupied
as a dwelling while parked on the property. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-7: DESIGN ELEMENTS:
   A.   Safety And Ease Of Movement: Parking lots shall be designed to ensure
safe and easy ingress, egress and movement through the interior of the lot. The
number of curb cuts onto major roads shall be minimized. Shared access
driveways between adjacent sites in all commercial and industrial zones are
encouraged. Parking lot islands shall be provided on the interior of the
parking lot to help direct traffic flow and to provide landscaped areas within
such lots.
   B.   Effect On Adjacent Properties: Use will not be detrimental to adjacent
properties in the vicinity of the area.
   C.   Conformity: Parking lots shall be designed in accordance with
applicable city codes, ordinances and guidelines with respect to:
      1.   Minimum distances between curb cuts;
      2.   Proximity of curb cuts to intersections;
      3.   Provisions for shared driveways;
      4.   Location, quantity and design of landscaped islands; and
      5.   Design of parking lot interior circulation system.
   D.   Landscaping Standards: In addition to the landscape standards specified
in Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscape Standards, parking lots
shall be designed according to the following landscaping standards:
      1.   Islands On Doubled Rows Of Parking: On doubled rows of parking
stalls, there shall be one thirty six foot by nine foot (36' x 9') landscaped
island on each end of the parking rows, plus one thirty six foot by nine foot
(36' x 9') landscaped island to be placed at minimum of every twenty (20)
parking stalls. Each island on doubled parking rows shall include a minimum of
two (2) trees per island.
      2.   Islands On Single Rows Of Parking: On single rows of parking or
where parking abuts a sidewalk, there shall be one eighteen foot by nine foot
(18' x 9') landscaped island a minimum of every twenty (20) stalls. Islands on
a single parking row shall have a minimum of one tree.
      3.   Islands At Ends Of Parking Rows: Landscaped islands at the ends of
parking rows shall be placed and shaped in such a manner as to help direct
traffic through the parking area. There shall be a break in parking rows at a
minimum of forty (40) parking stalls for each double row of parking for the
purpose of facilitating traffic circulation on the site via drive aisles.
   E.   Perimeter Landscaping Strips: A landscaped screen, berm or fence may be
required by the planning commission or city council around the perimeter of the
parking area to mitigate intrusion of lighting from headlights and other
potential negative impacts to surrounding property. All perimeter landscaping
strips shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') in width.
   F.   Walkways: Parking lots larger than seventy five thousand (75,000)
square feet shall provide raised or delineated pedestrian walkways. Walkways
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide and shall be placed through the
center of the parking area and extend to the entrance of the building.
   G.   The use of sod/turf shall not be permitted in areas less than eight
feet (8') in width. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012; amd. Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-6-8: ACCESS TO INDIVIDUAL PARKING STALLS:
   A.   Off street parking areas shall allow vehicles to enter and exit from a
public street by forward motion only. This regulation shall not apply to
single-family, two-family and townhouse residential units.
   B.   All parking for single-family, two-family and townhouses must meet the
minimum parking requirements without counting tandem, i.e., one space behind
another, parking spaces in a driveway. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-9: GRADING:
Parking lots shall be properly graded to drain surface water in an approved
manner to eliminate standing water and ice. Water shall not drain onto adjacent
properties nor across the public sidewalk. Drainage plans are to be approved by
the city engineer prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-
7-2012)
10-6-10: GUEST PARKING:
Off street guest parking stalls in multi-family developments shall be
distributed proportionally to the dwelling unit locations they are intended to
serve. Generally, such parking shall not be located more than two hundred feet
(200') from the dwelling units intended to be served. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-11: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Each off street parking area, except for residential, shall be
adequately landscaped to comply with a plan approved by the planning commission
through the site plan review process, and such landscaping shall be permanently
maintained.
   B.   Off street parking stalls shall be located at least ten feet (10') from
any street property line to provide a landscaped buffer zone from the street.
   C.   Landscape design shall conform to Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient
Landscape Standards. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012; amd. Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-6-12: LIGHTING:
Lighting used to illuminate any parking lot shall be arranged to reflect the
light away from adjoining residential premises and from street traffic.
Location and type of lighting will be subject to review and approval by the
planning commission through the site plan review process. Lighting is required
for all parking lots to provide for safety and visibility of the lot. (Ord.
2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-13: LOCATION, CONDITIONAL USE, OFF PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Off premises parking in lieu of required on site parking is allowed by
conditional use permit.
   B.   Off street parking shall not be allowed in required front yard setbacks
except by conditional use permit and then only in areas where the character of
the street and general landscaping plan will not be adversely affected.
   C.   Off street parking facilities shall be provided with setback distances
equivalent to the requirements of the zone district, and ingress and egress
points shall be limited to protect the function of adjoining streets.
   D.   Required parking for persons with disabilities shall not be located in
an off premises parking lot or structure.
   E.   Such off site parking facilities may be located in an adjoining zone
district within six hundred feet (600') of the site served, such distance to be
measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway from the nearest point of the
site served to the nearest point of the separated off street parking stalls;
provided, that such off site parking facilities shall not be located in a
residential zone district or separated from the principal use by a street right
of way with a width of more than seventy two feet (72').
   F.   To encourage combining of shopping trips and pedestrian activity and to
reduce redundant driveways, adjacent developments are encouraged to link
parking areas and accessways. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-14: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   All surfacing, landscaping, lighting, screening, along with any other
parking area elements shall be continually and properly maintained in good
condition. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-15: MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Mixed use developments shall minimize the impact of parking on the
building's relationship to the street and pedestrian oriented character and
character of the neighborhood.
   B.   Off street parking shall be located to the side or rear of buildings.
   C.   Parking lots shall not be located between the building and the primary
street frontage.
   D.   Mixed use developments with residential uses shall meet access and
driveway criteria for multiple-family residential developments. The planning
commission shall resolve any conflicting provisions. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-16: OFF STREET LOADING SPACES:
   A.   Commercial, industrial or other uses that require the delivery of
materials or goods via motorized vehicle shall provide and maintain on site
loading areas meeting the following minimum requirements:
 
Gross Floor Area (In Square Feet)    Loading Spaces Required
Less than 5,000                      None
5,001 to 30,000                      1
30,001 to 70,000                     2
70,001 to 120,000                    3
Each additional 100,000 over 120,000 +1
 
   B.   Each loading space shall not be less than fourteen feet (14') in width
and twenty five feet (25') in length, and shall have an overhead clearance of
not less than fourteen feet (14') in height.
   C.   Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be provided
on the site.
   D.   Adequate screening of trucks by a masonry wall not less than six feet
(6') in height that matches the architecture of the structure shall be
provided. Any lighting from the loading spaces shall also be deflected away
from adjacent residential areas.
   E.   Short term deliveries (30 minutes or less) by vehicles under twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds' GVW may use general parking facilities.
   F.   Loading spaces shall not obstruct or encroach on any setbacks or public
rights of way, walkways, landscape areas, or other parking areas. (Ord. 2012-
04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-17: SCREENING:
   A.   The sides and rear of any off street parking lot which adjoins an area
which is to remain primarily residential shall be screened from such area by a
masonry wall or solid visual barrier fence six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 2012-
04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-18: SIZE OF PARKING STALLS:
   A.   The dimensions of each off street parking stall, exclusive of access
drives, shall be at least nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18'), with a minimum
aisle width of twenty four feet (24') for ninety degree (90o) stalls.
   B.   The dimension of parking spaces for commercial vehicles shall be
determined by the planning commission.
   C.   Twenty four feet (24') of on site aisle space shall be located behind
every parking stall which is accessed by a two-way aisle.
   D.   The following aisle widths shall be required where the parking stalls
are accessed from a one-way aisle:
      1.   Twenty four feet (24') behind every ninety degree (90o) parking
stall.
      2.   Fifteen feet (15') behind every thirty degree (30o) parking stall.
      3.   Fifteen feet (15') behind every forty five degree (45o) parking
stall.
      4.   Sixteen feet (16') behind every sixty degree (60o) parking stall.
   E.   Parking stalls for the disabled shall be at least nine feet (9') wide
with a five foot (5') aisle space adjacent to them. Stalls accessible to vans
must have an eight foot (8') minimum aisle space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2107.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2113.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2105.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2109.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2111.png]
(Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-19: SHARED, OVERLAPPED PARKING:
   A.   Contiguous Uses: Where uses are contiguous, shared or overlapping
parking is encouraged.
   B.   Multiple Uses On One Lot: Where multiple uses on one lot share the same
off street parking facilities, reduced total demand for parking stalls may
result due to differences in parking demand for each use during the course of
the day. The following schedule of shared parking is provided indicating how
shared parking for certain uses can be used to reduce the total parking
required for shared parking facilities.
      SCHEDULE OF SHARED PARKING
General Land   Weekdays                                                              Weekends
Use            Midnight – 7:00 A.M. 7:00 A.M. – 6:00 P.M. 6:00 P.M. – Midnight Midnight – 7:00 A.M. 7:00 A.M. – 6:00 P.M. 6:00 P.M. – Midnight
Classification (Percent)              (Percent)               (Percent)              (Percent)              (Percent)               (Percent)
General Land   Weekdays                                                              Weekends
Use            Midnight – 7:00 A.M. 7:00 A.M. – 6:00 P.M. 6:00 P.M. – Midnight Midnight – 7:00 A.M. 7:00 A.M. – 6:00 P.M. 6:00 P.M. – Midnight
Classification (Percent)              (Percent)               (Percent)              (Percent)              (Percent)               (Percent)
Entertainment  5                      20                      100                    5                      50                      100
Hotel          100                    65                      100                    100                    65                      100
Office and     5                      100                     5                      0                      5                       0
industrial
Place of       0                      30                      50                     0                      100                     75
worship
Restaurant     50                     70                      100                    70                     45                      100
Retail         0                      100                     80                     0                      100                     60
 
   C.   Determining Total Requirements For Shared Parking Facilities:
      1.   For each applicable general land use category, calculate the number
of stalls required for a use if it were the only use (refer to the schedule of
minimum off street parking requirements). Use those figures for each land use
to calculate the number of stalls required for each time period for each use (6
time periods per use). For each time period, add the number of stalls required
for all applicable land uses to obtain a grand total for each of the six (6)
time periods. Select the time period with the highest total parking requirement
and use that total as the shared parking requirement. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-20: STACKING SPACES:
   A.   Uses with drive-up service windows or devices shall provide on site
space for stacking of vehicles waiting to reach the drive-up window or device
in accordance with the following:
 
Banks                     4 stacking spaces for each service window or device
Car wash (full service)   6 stacking spaces for each service bay
Restaurants and fast food 3 stacking spaces for each service window or device
All others                3 stacking spaces for each service window or device
 
   B.   Each space shall measure nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20') and have a
height clearance of fourteen feet (14') or as determined by the fire marshal.
Such spaces shall not interfere with other required off street parking or
traffic circulation. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-21: SURFACING:
   A.   Each off street parking lot shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or
portland cement or other binder pavement and shall be permanently maintained so
as to provide a dustless surface. The planning commission may grant some
industrial uses the ability to utilize dustless gravel for parking and outdoor
storage areas through the site plan review process, provided that there is a
detention area in the parking lot.
   B.   The parking area shall be so graded as to dispose of all surface water.
      1.   If such water is to be carried to adjacent streets, it shall be
piped under sidewalks. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
10-6-22: WALKWAYS:
   A.   Customer parking shall be connected to any structure or space dedicated
to customer use.
   B.   Clearly marked walkways, continuous in material and design, shall be
provided for walkways crossing drive aisles or internal roadways. The
pedestrian crossing shall emphasize and place priority on pedestrian access and
safety.
   C.   Clear and direct lines of sight shall be provided in pedestrian
settings to increase visibility, safety and security. (Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012)
CHAPTER 7
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
10-7-1: Purpose And Intent
10-7-2: Conditional Use Permit Process
10-7-3: Performance Standards For Conditional Uses
10-7-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter and the intent of the City in its adoption is to
promote the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the present and
future inhabitants of the City. This chapter accomplishes the aforesaid purpose
and intent by providing sufficient flexibility to allow in certain areas
compatible integration of uses which are related to the permitted uses of the
district or are of a temporary nature only, but which may be suitable and
desirable only in certain locations in that district due to conditions and
circumstances peculiar to that location or upon certain conditions which make
the uses suitable or only if such uses are designed, laid out and constructed
on the proposed site in a particular manner. While flexibility in allowing uses
which would otherwise be generally unsuitable to a given district is an
important goal of this chapter, it is also recognized that constraints on
governmental decision making are a legal imperative. This chapter, therefore,
also provides a framework of standards within which those governmental
decisions must be made. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
10-7-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT PROCESS:
   A.   Conditional Use Permit Required: A conditional use permit shall be
required for all uses listed as conditional uses in this Title.
   B.   Preapplication Procedures: To facilitate the handling of applications,
the Community Development Department may adopt preapplication procedures to
allow for adequate investigations and staff review and may require compliance
with such preapplication review procedures as a prerequisite to formal
application and action by the Planning Commission. Preapplication review shall
in no way be interpreted to mean review by the Planning Commission.
   C.   Requirements: An application for a conditional use permit shall be
filed with the Community Development department on a form provided for such
request, and shall include the following:
      1.   Signature of the property owner or his authorized representative;
      2.   Payment of the review fee as specified in the current fee schedule;
      3.   A detailed description of the proposed use, including all pertinent
information related to the use and applicable to the conditional use including,
but not limited to:
         a.   A site plan and building floor plan detailing the area to be used
in operation of the conditional use, any onsite features existing or proposed
such as detention/retention facilities, fencing, landscaping, parking, building
footprint, or other site amenities;
         b.   A general description of the major activities associated with the
conditional use (indoor and outdoor), such as the number of employees,
equipment used, hours of operation, etc. as applicable;
         c.   A description of any disruptive impacts the conditional use may
have on properties adjacent to or in the vicinity, such as noise, chemical use
or storage, lighting, or odors;
         d.   A description of any potential health hazards to employees,
customers, or residents adjacent to or in the vicinity of the conditional use,
including potential hazards created by accidental chemical release or other
emergency;
         e.   A description of the expected traffic generated by the
conditional use such as passenger vehicles and delivery trucks, including hours
and frequency.
         f.   A description of future land uses expected on the site, such as
additional building construction and expansion of the current or proposed land
use;
         g.   A description of the expected water and sewer demand for the
conditional use;
         h.   A description of any potential environmental impacts, such as
emission, dust generation, or storm water drainage;
         i.   All proposed mitigation measures to address potential impacts
related to the conditional use;
         j.   For new construction or conditional uses which will require site
or public improvements, a concurrent site plan application is required.
   D.   Submission And Docketing For Review: Upon receipt of a complete
application, including payment of all required fees and submission of all
necessary documentation related to the proposed use, the Community Development
Director and other members of the development review staff, shall review the
application for completeness and compliance with the provisions of this Title
and other pertinent City regulations. When the Community Development Director,
or designee, determines that the application is properly prepared and ready for
submission to the Planning Commission for review, the application will be
docketed for review at the next regular public meeting of the Planning
Commission. Incomplete applications shall not be docketed for Planning
Commission review.
   E.   Action By Planning Commission:
      1.   A conditional use shall be approved if reasonable conditions are
proposed, or can be imposed, to mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental
effects of the proposed use in accordance with applicable standards.
      2.   If the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of a proposed
conditional use cannot be mitigated by the proposal or the imposition of
reasonable conditions to achieve compliance with applicable standards, the
conditional use may be denied.
   F.   Public Hearings: A public hearing may be held when deemed by the
Planning Commission to be in the public interest and shall be noticed as a
class B notice sent to any affected entities and all property owners within
three hundred feet (300') of the property boundary a minimum of ten (10)
calendar days prior to the hearing date. However, in the following instances,
the holding of a public hearing shall be mandatory:
      1.   The Planning Commission determines that existing streets and
thoroughfares are not suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic or on-
street parking demand, and increased densities resulting from the proposed use
may generate traffic in such amounts as to overload the street network outside
the district.
      2.   The Planning Commission determines that increases in miscellaneous
traffic, light, odor or environmental pollution generated by the proposed use
may significantly change the intended characteristics of the district as
outlined in this Title, or may present unsuitable safety risks to inhabitants
of the district.
      3.   The Planning Commission determines that the architectural design of
the proposed use varies significantly from the architectural characteristics of
the district (as outlined in this Title) in which such use is proposed.
   G.   Appeal: Any decision made in the administration of this chapter may be
appealed as outlined in
10-2-2 of this Title.
   H.   Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   Temporary Suspension: In the event any person holding a conditional
use permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or
conducts or carries on said site development in such a manner as to materially
adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working
in the neighborhood of the property of the said permittee, a temporary
suspension may be made effective immediately upon notification by the Community
Development Director.
      2.   Hearing; Notice: No conditional use permit shall be permanently
revoked or suspended until a hearing is held by the Planning Commission. The
permittee shall be notified in writing of such hearing and said notification
shall state:
         a.   The grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation or
suspension, in clear and concise language.
         b.   The time and place such hearing is to be held. Such notice shall
be served by registered mail or personal service on the permittee at least ten
(10) calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. At any such hearing,
the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and he may call
witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. Upon conclusion of such hearing,
the Planning Commission shall determine whether or not the permit shall be
suspended or revoked.
         c.   Action by the Planning Commission to revoke a conditional use
permit may be appealed in accordance with City Code section
10-2-2.
   I.   Expiration Of Permit: Every conditional use permit shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has
not been commenced within one (1) year, or is not completed within two (2)
years from date of issue. If the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence
that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within
the specified time limits, the Planning Commission may grant a reasonable
extension of time, up to one (1) year, if written application is made before
the expiration of the permit.
   J.   Inspections: Following the issuance of a conditional use permit, the
Community Development Director, or designee, with the assistance of any other
applicable department shall inspect such use to ensure that development is
undertaken and completed in compliance with the conditional use permit. (Ord.
93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; Ord. 01-05, 4-3-2001; Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
10-7-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   Conditions Relating To Safety For Persons And Property: Applicants for
conditional use permits shall meet all specific requirements made in this
Title. In addition, the Planning Commission may require additional studies or
reports from qualified subject matter experts for recommendations related to
mitigation of concerns of safety for persons and property, health and
sanitation, environment, general plan proposals and neighborhood needs,
performance and administration. More specifically, the Planning Commission may
require:
      1.   Building elevations and grading plans which will prevent or minimize
floodwater damage, where property may be subject to flooding.
      2.   The relocation, covering or fencing of irrigation ditches, drainage
channels, and other potential attractive nuisances existing on or adjacent to
the property.
      3.   Increased setback distances from lot lines where the Planning
Commission determines it to be necessary to ensure the public safety and to
ensure compatibility with the intended characteristics of the district as
outlined in this Title.
      4.   Appropriate design, construction and location of structures,
buildings and facilities in relation to any earthquake fault hazard which may
exist on the property, and limitations or restrictions on the use and/or
location of uses due to special site conditions, including, but not limited to,
geologically hazardous areas, floodplains, fault zones and landslide areas.
      5.   Limitations and control of the number, location, color, size,
height, lighting and landscaping of outdoor advertising signs and structures in
relation to the creation of traffic hazards and appearance and harmony with
adjacent development.
      6.   Plans for the location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading
and unloading facilities.
      7.   Construction of curbs, gutters, drainage culverts, sidewalks,
streets, fire hydrants and street lighting.
      8.   Reduction of permitted street grades for winter and storm conditions
or exposure.
      9.   Fences shall not create visual nor other safety hazards. Backing
movements, passing vehicles, sidewalk traffic or small children shall be
considered in the location of fences.
      10.   Mitigation strategies as recommended in any required studies or
reports.
   B.   Conditions Relating To Health And Sanitation:
      1.   Water: A guarantee of sufficient water to serve the intended land
use and a water delivery system meeting standards adopted by the City Council.
      2.   Wastewater And Waste Disposal Systems: A wastewater disposal system
and a solid waste disposal system meeting standards adopted by the City
Council.
      3.   Water, Sewer And Drainage Facilities: Construction of water mains,
sewer mains and drainage facilities serving the proposed use, in sizes
necessary to protect existing utility users in the district and to provide for
an orderly development of land in the City.
   C.   Environmental Concerns:
      1.   Sensitive Areas: Limitations or restrictions on the use or location
of uses in sensitive areas due to soils capabilities, wildlife and plant life.
      2.   Pollution: Processes for the control, elimination or prevention of
land, water or air pollution; the prevention of soil erosion; and the control
of objectionable odors.
      3.   Ground Cover: The planting of ground cover or other surfacing to
prevent dust and erosion.
      4.   Structuring Land: Restructuring of the land and planting of the same
as directed by the Planning Commission when the conditional use involves
cutting and/or filling the land and where such land would be adversely affected
if not restructured.
   D.   Conditions Relating To Compliance With Intent Of General Plan And
Characteristics Of Vicinity (Or Neighborhood):
      1.   Incompatible Characteristics: The removal of structures, debris or
plant materials, incompatible with the intended characteristics of the district
outlined in this Title.
      2.   Screening: The screening of yards or other areas as protection from
obnoxious land uses and activities.
      3.   Landscaping: Landscaping to ensure compatibility with the intended
characteristics of the district as outlined in this Title.
      4.   Walls, Fences, Hedges And Screening: Limitations or controls on the
location, height and materials of walls, fences, hedges and screen plantings to
ensure harmony with adjacent development, or to conceal storage areas, utility
installations or other unsightly development.
      5.   Structure Relocation: The relocation of proposed or existing
structures as necessary to provide for future streets on the major street plan
of the City, adequate sight distances for general safety, groundwater control
or similar problems.
      6.   Recreational Facilities: Provision for or construction of
recreational facilities necessary to satisfy needs of the conditional use.
      7.   Density; Intensity: Population density and intensity of land use
limitations where land capability or vicinity relationships make it appropriate
to do so to protect health, safety and welfare, or conservation of values.
      8.   Other Improvements: Other improvements which serve the property in
question and which may compensate in part or in whole for possible adverse
impacts to the district from the proposed conditional use.
      9.   Fencing: The character of the neighborhood and aesthetics of the
streetscape shall be considered in the location of fences and in determining
the reduction of any front yard for fencing purposes.
   E.   Conditions Relating To Performance:
      1.   Time limits on the validity of the conditional use permit. Such time
limits shall be determined by the following guidelines:
         a.   A conditional use permit for uses which are of a temporary nature
only may be issued for the intended duration of the temporary use or for two
(2) years, whichever period of time is shorter.
         b.   Unless there is substantial and positive development action under
a conditional use permit within a period of one (1) year of its issuance, said
permit shall expire. The Planning Commission may grant a maximum extension for
one (1) year, when deemed in the public interest.
      2.   A bond or other valuable assurance in favor of the City in an amount
to be determined by the City. The amount of said bond or other valuable
assurance shall be calculated by the City Engineer.
      3.   Specific short and long range plans of development may be required
to demonstrate timeliness, feasibility and impact on the public.
   F.   Energy Conservation Concerns And General Performance:
      1.   Solar orientation of buildings and uses.
      2.   Use of renewable energy sources.
      3.   Efficiency of exterior lighting.
      4.   Shading and protection of important buildings and pavings (parking
lots, etc.), landscaping and trees, location of buildings and screens.
      5.   Effective use of vestibules.
      6.   Wind screening.
      7.   Circulation (travel) efficiency.
      8.   Efficiency of stormwater removal and erosion control.
      9.   Maintenance efficiency for on site improvements to be maintained by
users, occupants and owners, etc. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 8
RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-8-1: Residential Housing Construction (Permanent)
10-8-2: Residential Facilities For Elderly Persons
10-8-3: Residential Facilities For Persons With A Disability
10-8-1: RESIDENTIAL HOUSING CONSTRUCTION (PERMANENT):
   A.   Residential Facilities Constructed On Site Or Manufactured Off Site:
Residential facilities construction shall comply with all applicable
regulations in effect in the city, be constructed on a legal lot in a zone
which permits the residential facility, and obtain the appropriate building
permit. A certificate of occupancy is required and will be issued upon finding
that the residential facility has complied with the controlling regulations.
      1.   New On Site Residential Facility Construction: New construction of
residential facilities on site shall meet the requirements of the international
building code and be inspected by the building official.
      2.   New Off Site Constructed Residential Facilities:
         a.   New residential facilities constructed or manufactured off site
in a "factory" must be certified to be in compliance with the international
building code or the national manufactured housing construction and safety
standards act of 1974 and bear the approved U.S. department of housing and
urban development approved (HUD) insignia. The HUD insignia may not be removed
from its original location on the structure, nor any unapproved modification
made to the structure without approval of the city. Installation of an off site
manufactured residential facility that is designed to meet international
building code requirements shall be permanent and comply with international
building code requirements for component assemblies. The installation shall be
designed to meet seismic and wind load requirements. A copy of the calculations
shall become part of the building permit application.
         b.   Installation of the off site manufactured residential facility
constructed to meet HUD requirements and bearing the HUD insignia shall comply
with the authorized "installation manual" which accompanies the unit from the
factory. The installation shall be designed to meet seismic and wind load
requirements. A copy of the calculations shall become part of the building
permit application. The residential facility shall be permanently installed on
an approved foundation which is constructed according to the HUD installation
manual or the international building code.
   B.   Previously Used And Older Residential Facilities: Used off site
constructed residential facilities, before being moved into the city or moved
within the city, shall:
      1.   Provide a certification from a qualified licensed professional
approved by the city that the structure was constructed to meet HUD
requirements and retains the insignia of approval, has not been modified, or,
if it has been modified, that such modification does not invalidate the
original factory certification for its intended use.
      2.   Provide a certification from a qualified licensed professional
approved by the city that the facility was constructed to meet international
building code requirements and has not been modified, or, if it has been
modified, that such modification does not invalidate the original approval of
having been constructed to meet international building code requirements.
      3.   If a residential facility does not meet the above criteria and the
building official is convinced that the plans for its installation in the city
will bring it into full compliance with the international building code, said
building official may approve the plans and allow the residential facility to
be moved to its intended permanent legal location in the city.
   C.   Exterior Appearance Of Residential Facility 1 : Roof, exterior siding,
dimensions and skirting or foundation of a residential facility shall meet the
following standards:
      1.   Roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 2.5:12 over at least seventy
five percent (75%) of the structure and have a surface of wood shakes, wood or
composition asphalt mineral surface shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal
tiles, single ply, slate, built up gravel, or standing rib metal roofing. Roof
overhangs must not be less than six inches (6"), including rain gutters which
may account for up to four inches (4") of overhang measured from the vertical
side of the dwelling.
      2.   Exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete,
stucco, "masonite", metal or vinyl clad lap, or any material with similar
appearance which meets the international building code.
      3.   The minimum width of any dwelling shall be at least twenty two feet
(22') at the narrowest point of the main floor at ground level for at least
thirty two feet (32') measured at right angles to the width face, exclusive of
garage area.
      4.   Skirting is required with materials which meet the international
building code standards and is aesthetically consistent with concrete or
masonry type foundation materials. A masonry foundation constructed in
accordance with plans and specifications available, upon request, from the city
is acceptable.
   D.   Storage Space Required For Residential Facilities: A residential
facility must provide a minimum of seventy two (72) square feet of enclosed
storage space with at least six feet (6') of clear height located within the
residential facility, in the basement, in the garage area (supplemental to) or
in an accessory storage structure on site which conforms to all applicable land
use and building code regulations and requirements. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff.
7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-1-42 of this title.
10-8-2: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS:
   A.   Operational Requirements:
      1.   An elderly residential facility may not operate as a business. An
elderly residential facility may not be considered a business because a fee is
charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of operation and maintenance
of the facility.
      2.   An elderly residential facility shall:
         a.   Be owned by one of the residents or be a facility for which the
title has been placed in trust for a resident;
         b.   Be consistent with existing, applicable land use ordinances
affecting the desired location; and
         c.   Be occupied on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis by eight (8)
or fewer elderly persons in a family type arrangement.
   B.   Land Use Provisions Governing Elderly Residential Facilities In Zoning
Districts Where Residential Dwellings Are Allowed (Except Areas Zoned To Permit
Exclusively Single- Family Dwellings):
      1.   Elderly residential facilities are permitted uses in the MU, R1-7,
RM-7 and RM-20 zoning districts, subject to the regulations of this section.
Permits for proposed elderly residential facilities shall be granted if the
owners, operators or applicants comply with the following provisions:
         a.   The proposed facility must meet building, safety, land use and
health ordinances applicable to similar dwellings;
         b.   Adequate off street parking must be provided;
         c.   The proposed facility must be capable of a use as an elderly
residential facility without structural or landscaping alterations that would
change the structure's residential character;
         d.   The proposed elderly residential facility shall not be located
within three-fourths (3/4) mile of an existing elderly residential facility.
   C.   Land Use Provisions Governing Elderly Residential Facilities In Areas
Zoned Exclusively For Single-Family Dwellings:
      1.   Elderly residential facilities are conditional uses in the R1-12 and
R1-10 zoning districts, subject to the regulations of this section. In
considering a conditional use application, the planning commission shall
require that applicants for elderly residential facilities demonstrate
compliance with the following provisions:
         a.   The proposed facility must meet building, safety, land use and
health ordinances applicable to similar dwellings;
         b.   The proposed facility must be capable of a use as an elderly
residential facility without structural or landscaping alterations that would
change the structure's residential character;
         c.   The proposed facility must conform to all of the city ordinances
governing the location of elderly residential facilities in areas zoned
exclusively for single-family dwellings.
      2.   The requirement of this section that an elderly residential facility
obtain a conditional use permit or other permit do not apply if the facility
meets the requirements of the city ordinances that allow a specified number of
unrelated persons to live together.
   D.   Additional Provisions Governing Elderly Residential Facilities:
      1.   The proposed elderly residential facility shall not house nor allow
to be housed any person being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse;
      2.   Placement in any elderly residential facility shall be strictly on a
voluntary basis and not a part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation,
or treatment in a correctional facility.
      3.   The use granted by this section is nontransferable and terminates if
the structure devoted to a use other than an elderly residential facility or if
the structure fails to comply with ordinances under this section.
      4.   The city, nor any of its officers, agents, representatives or
employees shall discriminate against elderly persons or against elderly
residential facilities.
      5.   The decision regarding any application for an elderly residential
facility shall be based upon legitimate land use criteria and may not be based
upon the age of the facility's residents. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993;
amd. 2012 Code)
10-8-3: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY:
   A.   Operational Requirements:
      1.   A residential facility for persons with a disability shall:
         a.   Obtain permits that verify compliance with the same building,
safety and health regulations as are applicable in the same zone to similar
uses that are not residential facilities for persons with a disability;
         b.   Be occupied on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis by eight (8)
or fewer disabled persons in a family type arrangement under the supervision of
a house family or manager;
         c.   Be operated by or operated under contract with either the state
department of human services or the state department of health depending upon
the licenses required for the programs or entities operating the proposed
residential facility for persons with a disability; and
         d.   Shall not be located within three-fourths (3/4) mile of an
existing residential facility for persons with a disability.
   B.   Additional Provisions Governing Residential Facilities For Persons With
A Disability:
      1.   No person being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse shall be placed
in a residential facility for persons with a disability.
      2.   No person who is violent shall be placed in a residential facility
for persons with a disability.
      3.   A residential facility for persons with a disability is a permitted
use in any zone where similar residential dwellings that are not residential
facilities for persons with a disability are allowed.
      4.   A residential facility for persons with a disability that would
likely create a fundamental change in the character of a residential
neighborhood may be excluded from a zone.
      5.   The provisions of this section shall comply with Utah Code Annotated
title 57, chapter 21, Utah fair housing act, and the federal housing amendments
act of 1988, 42 USC section 3601 et seq. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993;
amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 9
ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
SECTION:
10-9-1: Establishment Of Zoning Districts
10-9-2: Filing Of Title And Map
10-9-3: Rules For Locating Boundaries
10-9-4: Authorized Uses Within Districts Are Plenary
10-9-5: Additional Requirements In Each District
10-9-6: Zoning At Time Of Annexation
10-9-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
For the purposes of this title, the territory of the city which has adopted
this title, is divided into one or more of the following listed zoning
districts as shown on the zoning map:
Chapter 10 of this title:
Chapter 10 of this title:
 Multiple use district (MU)
 Residential district (R1-7)
 Residential district (R1-10)
 Residential district (R1-12)
 Multiple residential district (RM-7)
 Multiple residential district (RM-20)
Chapter 11 of this title:
 Commercial shopping district (C-S)
 General commercial district (C-G)
 Manufacturing distribution district (M-D)
 General industrial district (M-G)
Chapter 12 of this title:
 Sensitive area district (SA) and geologic hazards
Chapter 13 of this title:
 Planned district (P)
Chapter 14 of this title:
 Redevelopment overlay zone (R)
Chapter 15 of this title:
 Airport overlay zone (AOZ)
Chapter 16 of this title:
 Airport environs overlay zone (AE)
Chapter 17 of this title:
 Special use restricted zone (SR)
Chapter 18 of this title:
 Natural open space zone (NOS)
Chapter 21 of this title:
 Existing uses overlay zone
Chapter 22 of this title:
 Private garage unit overlay zone (GUOZ)
Chapter 23 of this title:
 Planned area zoning district (PAZD)
Chapter 24 of this title:
 Mixed commercial zoning district (MXC)
Chapter 25 of this title:
 Highway commercial zoning district (C-H)
 
(Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. Ord. 2012-09, 6-19-2012; Ord. 2012-
11, 9-18-2012; Ord. 2013-05, 3-19-2013; Ord. 2015-04, 4-21-2015; Ord. 2015-16,
10-20-2015; Ord. 2015-18, 11-17-2015)
10-9-2: FILING OF TITLE AND MAP:
This title and the map or maps shall be filed in the custody of the city
recorder and may be examined by the public subject to the reasonable
regulations established by the city recorder. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-
1993)
10-9-3: RULES FOR LOCATING BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any district, the following
rules shall apply:
   A.   Wherever the district boundary is indicated as being approximately upon
the centerline of a street, alley or block, or along a property line, then,
unless otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the centerline of such
street, alley, block or such property line shall be construed to be the
boundary of such district.
   B.   Whenever such boundary line of such district is indicated as being
approximately at the line of any river, irrigation canal or other waterway, or
railroad right of way, or public park or other public land, or any section
line, then in such case the center of such river or stream, canal or waterway,
or of such railroad right of way, or the boundary line of such public land or
such section line, shall be deemed to be the boundary of such district.
   C.   Where such district boundary lines cannot be determined by the above
rules, their location may be found by the use of the scale appearing upon the
map.
   D.   Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the district
boundary location, the planning commission shall interpret the map. (Ord. 93-5,
7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-9-4: AUTHORIZED USES WITHIN DISTRICTS ARE PLENARY:
The uses of land allowed in each district shall be plenary and uses of land not
specifically allowed as set forth therein shall be prohibited in the respective
district. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-9-5: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS IN EACH DISTRICT:
In addition to the requirements imposed within each district, the requirements
contained in each of the various chapters and sections of this title may apply.
Chapters 1, 3, 5 and 6 of this title are applicable in all districts. The
requirements of chapters 4, 7, 8, 14 and 17 of this title also may be
applicable in any or each of the other districts. The applicability of overlay
districts shall be evidenced by notation on the zoning map. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-
1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-9-6: ZONING AT TIME OF ANNEXATION:
   A.   The city may assign a zoning designation to territory annexed to the
city at the time the territory is annexed.
   B.   If this title does not designate a zone for the territory to be annexed
to the city, or if the city does not assign a zone to territory at the time it
is annexed, the territory annexed to the city shall be zoned according to the
zone of the city with which it has the longest common boundary. (Ord. 93-5, 7-
6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
CHAPTER 10
RESIDENTIAL AND MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-10-1: Purpose
10-10-2: Codes And Symbols
10-10-3: Use Regulations
10-10-4: Landscaping Requirements
10-10-5: Home Occupations
10-10-6: Domestic Farm Animals
10-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the following districts is:
   A.   Residential District R1-12: To provide areas for low density, single-
family residential neighborhoods of spacious and uncrowded character.
   B.   Residential District R1-10: To provide areas for medium low density,
single-family residential neighborhoods where low and medium costs of
development may occur.
   C.   Multiple Residential District RM-7: To provide areas for medium
residential density with the opportunity for varied housing styles and
character.
   D.   Residential District R1-7: To provide areas for medium low density,
single-family or dual-family residential neighborhoods where low and medium
costs of development may occur.
   E.   Multiple Residential District RM-20: To provide areas for medium high
residential density with the opportunity for varied housing styles and
character. (Ord. 03-3, 4-15-2003; amd. Ord., 7-12-2007; Ord. 2020-06, 2-4-2020)
10-10-2: CODES AND SYMBOLS:
In section
10-10-3 of this chapter, uses of land or buildings which are allowed in various
districts are shown as permitted uses, indicated by a "P" in the appropriate
column, or as conditional uses, indicated by a "C" in the appropriate column.
If a use is not allowed in a given district, it is either not named in the use
list or it is indicated in the appropriate column by a numeral to show the
linear or square feet required, or by the letter "A". If the regulation does
not apply, it is indicated in the appropriate column by a dash. (Ord. 03-3, 4-
15-2003; amd. Ord., 7-12-2007)
10-10-3: USE REGULATIONS:
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 2025-
07, passed 5-6-2025). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall
be hereafter erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained in a Single-
Family Residential District or Multiple Residential District, except as
provided in this title:
 Zone
 R1-12 R1-10 R1-7 RM-7 RM-20
              Zone
              R1-12        R1-10        R1-7         RM-7         RM-20
Accessory Uses
Accessory
buildings and P            P            P            P            P
uses.
Residential
accessory     P            P            P            P            P
swimming
pool.
Community
(HOA)         P            P            P            P            P
swimming
pool.
Temporary
model homes,
sales
pavilions, or
construction
office
trailers for
a period not
to exceed
three (3)     P            P            P            P            P
years and to
be removed
within thirty
(30) of final
occupancy of
the last
dwelling in
the
development.
Special Uses
In home child
daycare for 5
to 8 children
(see
subsection    P            P            P            P            P
10-10-5E of
this chapter
for
supplemental
regulations).
Preschool for
up to 8
children (see
subsection
10-10-5F of   P            P            P            P            P
this chapter
for
supplemental
regulations).
Domestic farm P            P            P            P            P
animals.
The tilling
of the soil,
the raising
of crops,     P            P            P            P            P
horticulture
and
gardening.
Assisted
living
center. If
the assisted
living center
is an
apartment
building, the
facility
shall not
exceed the
density
allowed in
the base
zoning
district. If
the assisted  P            P            P            P            P
living center
is a rooming
house, for
the purpose
of
calculating
the density
allowed under
the base
zoning
district, 4
boarders
shall
constitute 1
dwelling
unit.
Residential Uses
Single-family P            P            P            P            P
dwelling.
Two-family    -            -            P            P            P
dwelling.
Three-family  -            -            -            P            P
dwelling.
Four-family   -            -            -            P            P
dwelling.
Multiple-
family
dwelling with -            -            -            P            P
greater than
4 dwelling
units.
Accessory
dwelling
units, in
accordance    P            P            P            P            P
with section
10-19-17 of
this title.
A two-family
dwelling on a
corner lot    -            -            A            A            A
requires 2
front and 2
rear yards.
Residential
facilities
(group homes)
for persons   P            P            P            P            P
with a
disability
and the
elderly.
Home          P            P            P            P            P
occupation.
Household
pets. Subject
to Davis
County Animal
Control       P            P            P            P            P
Ordinance,
including the
number of
household
pets allowed.
Public And Quasi-Public Buildings and Uses
Hospital:
medical or
dental clinic
accessory to  -            -            -            C            C
a hospital
and located
on the same
premises.
Private
educational
institution
having a
curriculum
similar to    -            -            -            C            C
that
ordinarily
given in
public
schools.
Privately
owned
recreational
grounds and
facilities
not open to   C            C            C            C            C
the general
public or to
which
admission
charge is
made.
Publicly
owned
cemeteries,
essential
services,
streets,
recreational  P            P            P            P            P
trails, parks
and golf
courses,
utilities,
schools and
rights of
way.
Substation
transmission
lines 50 kV
or greater    C            C            C            C            C
capacity and
railroad
rights-of-
way.
Other Uses
Professional
offices when
harmonious
with the
general       -            -            -            C            C
character of
the district
where
located.
Land
excavations
in
association
with an       P            P            P            P            P
approved
building
permit or
subdivision.
Subdivisions. P            P            P            P            P
Planned unit  P            P            P            P            P
developments.
Mobile home
developments,
including     -            -            -            C            -
mobile homes
parks or
subdivisions.
Area Regulations (in square feet)
Single-family 12,000       10,000       7,000        7,000        7,000
dwelling lot.
Two-family    -            -            7,000        7,000        10,000
dwelling lot.
Three-family  -            -            -            -            13,000
dwelling lot.
Four-family   -            -            -            -            15,000
dwelling-lot.
Single
family,
attached
developments
density:
PUDs, multi-                            8 d.u./
family                                  net ac.
buildings, or                           *single      8 d.u./      20 d.u./ net
multiple                                family and   net ac.      ac.
building                                two family
development                             only
on a single
lot, under a
common
development
plan (net
acreage).
Minimum lot
area in
square feet
for all main  -            -            5,000        3,500        3,500
uses or
buildings
other than
dwelling.
Width Regulations (in feet)
The minimum
width for any
lot measured
at the
setback line, 90           80           60           70           70
except as
modified by
planned unit
developments.
Frontage Regulations (in feet)
The minimum
width of any
lot at the
street right-
of-way line,  45           45           45           45           45
except as
modified by
planned unit
development.
Front Yard Regulations (in feet)
Corner lots, main buildings shall have 2 front yards, and 1 rear yard opposite
the front elevation, and 1 side yard.
The minimum
depth for the
front yard    25           25           25           25           25
for main
building.
Lots having
an average
slope of 15   20           20           20           20           20
percent or
more.
Maximum front 100          100          40           40           40
yard setback.
Accessory
buildings may
have the same
minimum front
yard depth as
main
buildings if
they have the
same side     6            6            6            6            10
yard required
for main
buildings;
otherwise
setback from
the rear of
the main
building.
Rear Yard Regulations (in feet)
The minimum
depth for the
back yard.
(corner lot   25           25           25           20           20
rear yard
setback: 20
feet)
Accessory
buildings
(may be
reduced to
one (1) foot
if all roof
drainage
stays on the
lot, the
walls of the
building have
a one (1)
hour fire     3            3            3            3            3
rating with
no windows or
doors
adjacent to
the property
line, and the
building is a
minimum of
ten (10) feet
from any
dwelling on
adjacent lot.
Swimming
Pools
(community or
HOA pools     5            5            5            5            5
shall be
setback 15
feet)
Side Yard Regulations (in feet)
The minimum
side yard for 8            8            8            8            8
any dwelling.
Total width
of the 2      20           20           20           20           20
required side
yards.
Other main    20           15           15           15           15
buildings.
Total width
of the 2
required side 40           35           45           45           45
yards.for
other main
buildings
The minimum
side yard in
feet for an
accessory
building,
(May be
reduced to
one (1) foot
if all roof
drainage
stays on the
lot, the
walls of the
building have
a one (1)     3            3            3            3            3
hour fire
rating with
no windows or
doors
adjacent to
the property
line, and the
building is a
minimum of
ten (10) feet
from any
dwelling on
adjacent
lot.)
Swimming
pool.
(Community or
HOA pools     5            5            5            5            5
shall be
setback 15
feet)
Height Regulations (in feet)
The maximum
height for
all buildings
and           35           35           35           35           35
structures.
See section
10-1-25 of
this title.
Coverage Regulations (in percentage of lot)
The maximum
coverage by   30           35           35           50           50
buildings.
The maximum
coverage for
any rear yard 25           25           25           25           25
area by
accessory
buildings.
Depth Regulations (in feet)
The minimum
depth of a
lot, except
as may be     110          110          100          95           100
modified by
planned unit
development.
Landscaping
Maximum area
of lot
permitted to
be lawn, sod,
or turf
Multi-family
developments
may be
permitted by
the Planning  25%          25%          25%          10%          10%
Commission to or 6,500 sq. or 6,500 sq. or 6,500 sq. or 5,000 sq. or 5,000 sq.
exceed the    ft.          ft.          ft.          ft.          ft. whichever
maximum turf  whichever is whichever is whichever is whichever is is less
areas         less         less         less         less
allowed, for
bona fide
active
recreational
areas or
amenities
during site
plan
approval.
Multi-family
dwellings,
minimum
landscape     N/A          N/A          N/A          15%          15%
required
(percentage
of lot)
 
Improvements Required To Be Completed (C) Or In Progress and Bonded (B)
Before A Building Permit May Be Issued *
Improvements Required To Be Completed (C) Or In Progress and Bonded (B) Before
A Building Permit May Be Issued *
*Multi-family developments or common planned development sites shall be
required to have street/site paving complete in addition to the internal
improvements required below prior to issuance of any building permit(s).
Improvements are to be in compliance with standards adopted by the
Municipality.
                                                   ZONES
                                                   R1-12 R1-10 R1-7 RM-7 RM-20
Street grading                                     C     C     C    C    C
Street base                                        C     C     C    C    C
Street paving                                      B     B     B    B    B
Curb and gutter                                    C     C     C    C    C
Sidewalk                                           B     B     B    B    B
Surface drainage facilities                        C     C     C    C    C
Wastewater disposal facilities                     C     C     C    C    C
Culinary water facilities                          C     C     C    C    C
Firefighting facilities                            C     C     C    C    C
Street name signs                                  B     B     B    B    B
Street monuments                                   B     B     B    B    B
Streetlights                                       B     B     B    B    B
Address numbers                                    B     B     B    B    B
Public utilities (power, gas, telephone, cable TV, B     B     B    B    B
etc.)
 
(Ord. 03-3, 4-15-2003; amd. Ord. 07-03, 1-9-2007; Ord., 7-12-2007; Ord. 2011-
03, 5-3-2011; Ord. 2014-15, 9-2-2014; Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018; Ord. 2018-12,
10-2-2018; Ord. 2018-14, 11-20-2018; Ord. 2020-06, 2-4-2020; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-
2022; Ord. 2023-05, 3-7-2023; Ord. 2023-07, 5-30-2023)
10-10-4: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose for landscaping is to provide for the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the City. This objective
is to be accomplished by completing construction and development projects in
such a way as to appear completed and maintained, promote the benefits of plant
life in our ecology system, aesthetically enhance the environment, and
generally improve the inhabitability and aesthetics of the City.
   B.   Design And Installation:
      1.   In land development projects where sidewalks are installed leaving a
landscaped area between the sidewalk and curb or pavement, access sleeves in
adequate number for future irrigation systems shall be provided.
      2.   In any project where driveways or other impediments to landscaping
are installed prior to issuance of an approved landscape plan, access sleeves
in adequate number for future irrigation systems shall be provided.
   C.   Planting And Other Landscaping:
      1.   All landscaped areas shall be installed in accordance with Title 10,
Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscape Standards.
      2.   All park strip areas within the street right-of-way shall be
landscaped.
      3.   Required front yard setback areas shall be landscaped and planted
except for required paving for driveways and sidewalks, retaining walls,
stairs, etc., unless the undisturbed natural landscaping can and will be
maintained.
      4.   Required side yard setback areas shall be landscaped and planted
except for required paving for driveways and sidewalks, retaining walls,
stairs, patio intrusions, etc.
      5.   Required rear yard setback areas shall be landscaped and planted
except for required paving for driveways and sidewalks, retaining walls,
stairs, patios, recreation apparatus and associated ground surfaces, etc.
   D.   Maintenance: All land not covered by structures and paving shall be
landscaped, planted and maintained in reasonable condition. Automatic
irrigation systems shall function to properly provide moisture to plant life.
All landscape elements shall be maintained in an orderly, free from debris,
etc., condition, including painted surfaces and other finishes, as necessary
and generally attractive. Vegetation that overgrows or overhangs travelways and
sidewalks on the street right-of-way shall be pruned or otherwise trimmed, by
the respective owner of the vegetation, as to not interfere with passage on
said travelway or sidewalk. (Ord. 03-3, 4-15-2003; amd. Ord., 7-12-2007; Ord.
2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-10-5: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Scope: Business activities may be conducted within a residence if such
activities comply with the standards of this section. All home occupations
shall be secondary and incidental to the residential use. A home occupation
should be conducted so that neighbors, under normal conditions, would not be
aware of its existence. Home occupations are a temporary privilege which can be
revoked if disruption of the residential neighborhood occurs.
   B.   Issuance Of Business License: The Zoning Administrator may, upon
application, issue a home occupation business license if the Administrator is
satisfied that the applicant will meet all of the conditions listed below and
that the applicant has agreed in writing to comply with all said conditions.
   C.   Conditions: Each and every one of the following conditions must be
agreed to by the applicant for a home occupation business license and observed
at all times by the holder of the license:
      1.   The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling and shall not change the appearance, character or condition
thereof. There shall be no displays, advertisements, stock in trade or signs
related to the business, except those required by State law and which meet the
provisions of this title.
      2.   Only members of the family related by blood, marriage or adoption,
and who reside in the dwelling, may work on site. The only exception is that
one additional person may be employed as a secretary, apprentice or assistant
where there are no more than five (5) family members actively engaged in the
home occupation. Employees who are not family members and/or who do not reside
at the dwelling shall not meet, park or otherwise congregate at the home or in
the general vicinity.
      3.   The home occupation shall not involve more than one room in the
dwelling and cannot exceed twenty percent (20%) of the ground floor area.
      4.   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling,
except for work performed off site. It shall not involve the attached garage or
carport section of the dwelling, nor any accessory garage, building or yard
space or activity outside of the main building.
      5.   The home occupation shall not involve the sale of commodities on the
premises. Commodities may be produced on the premises and sold through other
business outlets not on the premises. Items that are incidental to a service
provided may be sold on a limited basis, i.e., a beautician who also sells hair
products to clientele.
      6.   The home occupation shall not create noise, dust, odors, noxious
fumes, glare or other nuisances, including interruption of radio and/or
television reception, which are discernible beyond the premises.
      7.   The home occupation shall not create a hazard by using or storing
flammable material or explosives or other dangerous materials.
      8.   The home occupation shall not create unusual amounts of waste,
residential or otherwise.
      9.   The home occupation shall not involve the use of mechanical or
electrical apparatus, equipment or tools not commonly associated with a
residential use or as are customary to home crafts.
      10.   The home occupation shall not generate traffic in greater volumes
than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, with the
exception of daycares, preschools, and private swimming lessons, nor involve
the use of commercial vehicles other than standard delivery vehicles for
delivery of materials to or from the premises.
      11.   The home occupation shall not involve the use or parking of
equipment or motor vehicles having a gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds or more directly at the residence. One vehicle under twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds may be used in association with the home occupation, provided
it is garaged or stored entirely within a building or structure.
      12.   The home occupation shall be in conformance with all applicable
Fire, Building, Plumbing, Electrical and Life Safety and Health Codes of the
State, the County and the City.
      13.   All home occupation business licenses shall be valid for one year
and may be renewed annually, provided there have been no reported violations,
complaints or detrimental characteristics which may, in the opinion of the
Development Review Committee, require termination of said home occupation.
      14.   Handicapped persons may obtain a waiver of one or more of these
conditions through the Planning Commission to allow such persons to become
self-sufficient.
   D.   Specific Businesses Prohibited As Home Occupations: In order to
minimize traffic and off street parking and to avoid health and sanitation
risks from the disposal of medical wastes, medical, dental and other health
professional offices are specifically excluded as home occupations. Other types
of businesses prohibited as home occupations include:
      1.   Auto, truck or motorcycle repair at the residence;
      2.   Furniture or cabinet making;
      3.   Major appliance repair (washers, dryers, refrigerators, etc.);
      4.   Small engine and lawn mower repair;
      5.   Auto body or fender work;
      6.   Trailer or boat repair;
      7.   Photo developing and processing beyond a hobby darkroom;
      8.   Sexually oriented businesses;
      9.   Group instruction facilities.
   E.   Child Daycare:
      1.   Child daycare is a permitted use in the following zoning districts:
R1-12, R1-10, R1-7, MU, RM-7 and RM-20.
      2.   A child daycare business license is required prior to conducting any
business on site. The applicant must submit proof that an application has been
made to the State Department of Health with their City business license
application.
      3.   No more than eight (8) children may be cared for in one day,
including no more than two (2) children under the age of two (2). The childcare
providers' children under age three (3) count toward the maximum number.
      4.   Child daycares must be in compliance with all State requirements
located in Utah Code, in addition to all City home occupation conditions
located in subsection C of this section.
   F.   Preschools:
      1.   Preschools, where not more than eight (8) children over the age of
three (3) years will be receiving instruction at any given time, are a
permitted use in the following zoning districts: R1-12, R1-10, R1-7, MU, RM-
7 and RM-20.
      2.   There shall be no more than two (2) sessions per day lasting no more
than four (4) hours, with no child attending more than one session per day.
      3.   A preschool business license is required prior to conducting any
business on site. (Ord. 2014-15, 9-2-2014)
   G.   Noncompliance: Any home occupation business license shall be revoked by
the City Council upon violation of any requirements of this section, or upon
failure to comply with any of the conditions or limitations of the permit,
unless such violation is corrected within ten (10) days of the receipt of
written notice thereof. A permit may be revoked for repeated violations of the
requirements of this section, notwithstanding compliance to the violation
notice.
   H.   Appeal: In the event of denial of any permit, or objection to the
limitations placed thereon, appeal may be made to the Planning Commission in
accordance with the provisions for appeals under this title. (Ord. 07-03, 1-9-
2007; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 9-2-2014)
10-10-6: DOMESTIC FARM ANIMALS:
Subject to the requirements of this section and any other applicable provisions
of this chapter, domestic farm animals may be kept on a lot or parcel of land
in permitted single- family residential districts.
   A.   Allowance: Where permitted, the type and quantity of domestic farm
animals allowed on a property shall be determined by the allotted animal points
specified based on the acreage of the property, as shown in tables 10-10-6C and
10-10-6D of this section. The applicant shall not exceed the number of animal
points allowed per lot size.
   B.   Permitted: Domestic farm animals shall be permitted on any single
family or two family lot in any zone, as an accessory use to a dwelling.
   C.   Table 10-10-6C:
 
Type Of Animal                                    Number Of Animal Points
Chickens, rabbits, pheasants, ducks, pigeons      3 points each
Turkeys, geese                                    10 points each
Sheep, goats, llamas                              50 points each
Roosters, donkeys, pigs, cows, horses, ostriches  Not allowed
Nuisance animals (i.e., raccoons, skunks, etc.)   Not allowed
Any nondomesticated animal, including exotic pets Not allowed
 
   D.   Table 10-10-6D:
 
Lot Size (In Square Feet)       Number Of Animal Points Allowed
Less than 7,000 square feet     18 points
7,000 to 21,780 square feet     45 points
                                45 points, plus 1 point for every 500 square
In excess of 21,780 square feet feet of lot size beyond 21,780 square feet, up
                                to a maximum of 90 points
 
   E.   Regulations: The following regulations shall apply:
      1.   Domestic farm animals shall be housed in an animal enclosure, run,
or rear yard area that is strong, sturdy, and secure. Enclosures such as
chicken coops and rabbit hutches shall be roofed and fully enclosed. The
enclosure shall be weather proof and predator safe.
      2.   Domestic farm animals shall be kept in an enclosure, run, or fenced
rear yard area at all times when outside.
      3.   An animal run or fenced back yard must be provided and must be
securely constructed with a hardware mesh type material, or similar secure
material to keep the domestic farm animals contained.
      4.   Only one animal enclosure and run shall be allowed per property lot.
      5.   Animal enclosures must be located at least thirty five feet (35')
from any neighboring residential dwelling.
      6.   Animal enclosures shall be in rear yards and shall be no closer than
five feet (5') from the side and rear property line.
      7.   Animal enclosures and runs must be properly ventilated, clean, dry,
and odor free, always kept in a neat and sanitary condition and in a manner
that will not disturb the use or enjoyment of the neighboring lots due to
noise, odor or other adverse impacts.
      8.   A chicken coop shall have nest boxes for egg laying and perches on
which the chickens can sleep.
      9.   No domestic farm animals may be kept inside any residence.
      10.   No building or structure to house domestic farm animals shall be
constructed on a lot prior to the time of occupancy of the principal structure.
      11.   Animal enclosures and manure storage shall be kept twenty feet
(20') from streams, tributaries, ditches, stormwater management facilities,
drop inlets and/or other storm drainage areas that would allow fecal matter to
enter any City storm drainage system or stream. Dumping animal manure into the
City's storm drainage system is prohibited. (Ord. 2018-12, 10-2-2018)
CHAPTER 11
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-11-1: Purpose
10-11-2: Codes And Symbols
10-11-3: Use Regulations
10-11-4: Building Site Regulations
10-11-5: Developments On Redwood Road
10-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the following districts is:
   A.   Commercial Shopping District C-S: To provide areas in appropriate
locations where a combination of businesses, retail commerce, entertainment and
related activities may be established, maintained and protected. The
regulations of this district are designed to promote and encourage the
development of comparison shopping centers.
   B.   General Commercial District C-G: To provide areas in appropriate
locations where a combination of business, retail commerce, entertainment and
related activities may be established, maintained and protected. Regulations of
this district are designed to provide a suitable environment for those
commercial and service uses which are vital to economic life, but some of which
would be intrusive and disruptive in a shopping center type of commercial
development. Light manufacturing and small wholesaling where conducive to the
foregoing uses, subject to noise, traffic, odor and other considerations, which
would not be detrimental to promoting the primary uses.
   C.   Manufacturing Distribution District M-D: To provide areas in
appropriate locations where light manufacturing, industrial processes and
warehousing not producing objectionable effects may be established, maintained
and protected. The regulations of this district are designed to protect
environmental quality of the district and adjacent areas.
   D.   General Industrial District M-G: To provide for areas in appropriate
locations where heavy industrial processes necessary to the economy may be
conducted. The regulations of this district are designed to protect
environmental quality of the district and adjacent areas. (Ord. 2015-18, 11-17-
2015)
10-11-2: CODES AND SYMBOLS:
In section
10-11-3 of this chapter, uses of land or buildings which are allowed in various
districts are shown as permitted uses, indicated by a "P" in the appropriate
column, or as conditional uses, indicated by a "C" in the appropriate column.
If a use is not allowed in a given district, it is either not named in the use
list or it is indicated in the appropriate column by an "N".(Ord. 2015-18, 11-
17-2015; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-11-3: USE REGULATIONS:
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure shall
be hereafter erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained in the
Commercial and Industrial Districts except as provided in this title.
                Zone
Use Regulations C-S C-G M-D M- G Specific Use Standards
                                                                                 Zone
                                                                                 C- C- M- M- Specific
Use Regulations                                                                  S  G  D  G  Use
                                                                                             Standards
A. ACCESSORY
   Caretaker residence                                                        P  P  P  P  10-19-3
                                                                                             (A)
   Outdoor display of retail merchandise                                      P  P  P  N  10-19-3
                                                                                             (D)
   Outdoor storage                                                            C  C  P  P  10-19-3
                                                                                             (E)
   Temporary portable storage containers                                      N  P  P  P  10-19-3
                                                                                             (F)
   Prohibited uses:                                                                    
      Outdoor storage, as primary use                                      N  N  N  N
B. AGRICULTURAL
   Community/urban gardens                                                    P  P  P  N  10-19-4
                                                                                             (A)
   Prohibited uses:                                                                  
      Commercial crop production                                           N  N  N  N   
      Livestock
C. AUTOMOTIVE
                                                                                             10-19-5
   Dealer, commercial vehicles                                                N  N  P  N  (A)
                                                                                             10-19-5
                                                                                             (B)
   Dealer,                                                                             
      Passenger vehicle                                                    N  P  P  N  10-19-5
      Recreational vehicle, motorcycle, and boat                                       (A)
                                                                                             10-19-5
   Leasing and rental, commercial vehicles, utility trailer, and RV           N  P  P  P  (A)
(recreational vehicle)                                                                       10-19-5
                                                                                             (B)
   Leasing and rental, passenger vehicles                                     N  P  P  N  10-19-5
                                                                                             (A)
   Maintenance, car washes (primary & accessory use to gas stations)          N  P  P  P  10-19-5
                                                                                             (C)
   Maintenance, detail, trim, and accessory installation                      P  P  P  P  10-19-5
                                                                                             (D)
   Maintenance, oil change and lubrication shops                              N  P  P  P  10-19-5
                                                                                             (D)
   Maintenance, other automotive and commercial vehicle                       N  N  P  P  10-19-5
                                                                                             (D)
   Repair, automotive body, paint and interior repair                         N  N  P  P  10-19-5
                                                                                             (D) & (E)
   Repair, general automotive and commercial vehicle                          N  N  P  P  10-19-5
                                                                                             (D) & (E)
                                                                                             10-19-3
   Repossession services                                                      N  N  P  P  (E)
                                                                                             10-19-5
                                                                                             (F)
   Retail sales, automotive parts and accessories                             N  P  P  N  10-19-5
   No outdoor storage                                                                     (G)
                                                                                             10-19-3
   Retail sales, tire and wheel installation                                  N  P  P  N  (C)
                                                                                             10-19-5
                                                                                             (H)
   Storage, motor vehicle towing and impound lots                             N  N  P  P  10-19-5
                                                                                             (I)
   Wholesale, automotive parts and supplies (new)                             N  N  P  P  10-19-5
                                                                                             (J)
   Wholesale, motor vehicles                                                  N  N  P  P  10-19-5
                                                                                             (K)
   Wholesale, tire and tube                                                   N  N  P  P  10-19-5
                                                                                             (L)
   Prohibited uses:                                                                  
      Salvage yards                                                        N  N  N  N   
      Pick-n-pull lots
D. BANKING
                                                                                             10-19-3
   Banks, credit unions, mortgage brokers, financial managers                 P  P  P  N  (B)
                                                                                             10-19-6
                                                                                             (A)
                                                                                             3-7-1  to
   Pawnshops                                                                  N  N  P  N  3-7-23
                                                                                             10-19-6
                                                                                             (B)
   Prohibited uses:
      Check cashing
      Check loan                                                                    
      Credit intermediation                                                N  N  N  N
      Quick loan activities
      Title Loan
E. BUILDING, CONTRACTING, & SUPPLIES
   Construction and contractor services, office only                          N  P  P  P   
   (general, landscaping, mechanical, electrical)
   Construction and contractor services                                                    
      On-site manufacturing or assembly (cabinets, countertops, other carpe r      10-19-7
      On-site material storage                                             N  N  P  P  10-19-3
                                                                                             (E)
   Dealers, building materials                                                N  N  P  N  10-19-7
                                                                                             10-19-7
   Dealer, manufactured (mobile) home, modular buildings, tiny homes          N  N  P  P  10-19-3
                                                                                             (D) & (E)
                                                                                             10-19-7
   Leasing and rental, construction, mining, forestry machinery and equipment N  N  P  P  10-19-3
                                                                                             (D) & (E)
                                                                                             10-19-7
   Retail, construction materials (home improvement, hardware, landscaping)   P  P  P  N  10-19-3
                                                                                             (D) & (E)
                                                                                             10-19-7
   Wholesale, construction, mining machinery and equipment (except petroleum) N  N  P  P  10-19-3
                                                                                             (D) & (E)
                                                                                             10-19-7
   Wholesale, construction materials                                          N  N  P  P  10-19-3
                                                                                             (D) & (E)
F. EDUCATION, SCHOOLS, & TRAINING
   Education, colleges, universities, professional schools, training, technicaN  P  P  N   
and trade schools
   Education, elementary and secondary schools                                N  P  N  N   
   Educational support services (tutoring)                                    P  P  P  N   
   Group instruction, martial arts, preschools, sports, dance and recreation  P  P  P  N  10-19-8
                                                                                             (A)
   Micro-Education Schools                                                    P  P  P  P  10-19-8
                                                                                             (B)
   Passenger vehicle driving schools                                          N  P  P  N   
   Professional CDL driving schools                                           N  N  P  N  10-19-8
                                                                                             (C)
G. ENTERTAINMENT
   Amusement centers and arcades(ax throwing, bowling, go carts, mini golf,   P  P  P  N  10-19-9
skating)                                                                                     (A)
   Athletic club, fitness and recreational sports (tennis, pickleball,        P  P  P  N  10-19-9
volleyball, swimming)                                                                        (B)
   Botanical gardens and nature parks, and other similar institutions         P  P  P  P   
   Museums                                                                    P  P  P  N   
   Production and distribution, motion picture, video, television, music,     N  N  P  P  10-19-9
including recording                                                                          (C)
   Promoters, performing arts, sports or similar events with facilities       P  P  P  N  10-19-9
                                                                                             (D)
   Publishers, general, software, television, and movies (does not include    P  P  P  N   
printing)
   Studios, independent artists, writers, and performers                      P  P  P  N  10-19-9
                                                                                             (E)
   Theater and live entertainment venues, performing arts companies, sports   P  P  P  N  10-19-9
teams,                                                                                       (F)
   Theater, movie                                                             P  P  P  N  10-19-9
                                                                                             (F)
   Prohibited:
      Amusement and theme parks
      Golf courses & country clubs                                                  
      Racetracks                                                           N  N  N  N
      Theater, drive-in movie
      Zoos
H. GENERAL OFFICE
   Call centers, information services, and data processing services           N  P  P  N  10-19-10
                                                                                             (A )
   Employment placement agencies                                              N  P  P  N  10-19-10
                                                                                             (B)
   General Office                                                             P  P  P  N   
   Leasing and rental, Office machinery and equipment                         P  P  P  N  10-19-10
                                                                                             (C)
   Other business service centers (including copy shops)                      P  P  P  N   
   Professional, scientific, and technical laboratories and services          N  P  P  N   
I. HEALTHCARE
   Ambulance services                                                         N  P  P  N   
   Blood and plasma donation centers                                          N  P  P  N   
   Diagnostic imaging centers and medical laboratories                        N  P  P  N   
   Home healthcare services                                                   N  P  P  N   
   Kidney dialysis centers                                                    N  P  P  N   
   Medical clinic, general, surgical, or emergency                            N  P  P  N   
   Medical Spas (estheticians, intravenous fluids, laser treatments, skin careP  P  P  N   
weight loss, etc.)
   Offices of dentists, physicians, and therapists (mental health, occupationaP, P  P  N   
physical, speech)
   Optical goods stores                                                       P  P  P  N   
   Outpatient mental health and substance abuse centers                       N  C  C  N  10-19-11
                                                                                             (A )
   Residential care facilities, nursing care and assisted living              N  P  N  N  10-19-11
                                                                                             (B)
   Prohibited:
      Hospital, general medical and surgical                                      
      Hospital, psychiatric and substance abuse hospitals                  N  N  N  N   
      Hospital, specialty (except psychiatric and substance abuse) hospitals
      Residential care facilities, mental health, substance abuse facilities
J. HOSPITALITY
                                                                                             3-2
   Bar establishment                                                          P  P  P  N  10-19-12
                                                                                             (A)
                                                                                             3-2
   Banquet and reception centers                                              N  P  P  N  10-19-12
                                                                                             (A)
   Food service contractors, caterers, and commissaries                       N  P  P  N  10-19-12
                                                                                             (C)
   Mobile food business and food truck park                                   P  P  P  N  10-19-12
                                                                                             (C)
   Lodging, hotels, motels, bed and breakfast inns                            N  P  P  N  10-19-12
                                                                                             (D)
   Lodging, recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds                        N  P  N  N  10-19-12
                                                                                             (E)
   Restaurants:                                                                            
      Bar                                                                              3-2
      Brewery                                                                      10-19-12
      Coffee shops, and cafeterias                                         P  P  P  N  (A)
      Drive-thru                                                                       10-19-12
                                                                                             (F)
                                                                                             3-2
   Taverns (beer only)                                                        P  P  P  N  10-19-12
                                                                                             (A)
   Sexually oriented businesses                                               N  N  N  C  3-8
K. MANUFACTURING & ASSEMBLY
   Assembly, heavy: Operations which use welders, rivets, specialized equipmenN, N  P  P  10-19-13
large scale products                                                                         (A)
   Assembly, light and sub-assembly: Operations which use light machinery and             10-19-13
equipment, smaller scale, fastening, adhesive bonding, heat staking, ultrasonic  N  P  P  P  (A)
welding, component assembly with no dangerous or hazardous materials.
   Manufacturing, heavy:
   Operations which manufacture or compounding processes of raw materials,
utilize large volumes of highly flammable, toxic matter or explosive materials                
needed for the manufacturing process not for individual consumers, such as:                   
      Asphalt and concrete service and batching plants                                  
      Brick or stone manufacturing                                                     10-19-13
      Chemical                                                                     (A)
      Food (human)                                                                 10-19-13
      Furniture, mattresses, window blinds, cabinets, and fixtures                 (B)
      Leather                                                              N  N  C  C  10-19-13
      Machinery                                                                        (C)
      Paper                                                                            10-19-13
      Petroleum and coal products                                                      (D)
      Plastics and rubber products                                                     10-19-13
      Repair, commercial and industrial machinery and equipment                        (E)
      Transportation equipment
      Wood (lumber, plywood, veneers, flooring, trusses)
   Manufacturing, light: Operations which manufacture small products, mainly for
individual consumers, such as:
      Apparel                                                                       
      Computer and electronic product                                      N  N  P  P  10-19-13
      Electrical equipment, appliance and component                                    (A)
      Printing and publishing
      Textile and textile products
   Prohibited:                                                                       
      Animal slaughtering, rendering (pet food/livestock feed)             N  N  N  N   
      Primary metal manufacturing
L. MINING & SUPPORT SERVICES
   Mineral Extraction                                                         N  N  N  N  10-19-14
   (see SR zone, Chapter 17)                                                              (A)
   Mineral Extraction Support Activities                                      N  N  P  P  10-19-14
                                                                                             (B)
   Oil & Gas Extraction & Refining Support Activities                         N  N  C  C  10-19-14
                                                                                             (B)
   Prohibited Mining Activities:
      Crude petroleum extraction                                                    
      Mineral extraction                                                   N  N  N  N
      Natural gas extraction
M. PERSONAL SERVICES
   Animal care,                                                                            
      Boarding, day care and kennels                                               10-19-15
      Pet services                                                         P  P  P  N  (A)
      Veterinary services
   Appliance, electronic, and small engine repair and maintenance             N  P  P  N  10-19-15
                                                                                             (B)
   Couriers, messengers and local delivery                                    P  P  P  P   
   Exterminating and pest control services                                    N  N  P  N  10-19-15
                                                                                             (C)
   Funeral homes & mortuaries                                                 N  P  P  N  10-19-15
                                                                                             (D)
   Janitorial services                                                        N  P  P  N  10-19-15
                                                                                             (E)
   Laundry, coin operated and drop off services                               P  P  P  N  10-19-15
                                                                                             (E)
   Laundry, commercial or industrial                                          N  N  P  N  10-19-15
                                                                                             (E)
   Laundry, dry cleaners                                                      N  P  P  N  10-19-15
                                                                                             (E)
   Linen supply                                                               N  N  P  N  10-19-15
                                                                                             (E)
   Packaging and labeling services                                            P  P  P  N   
   Pharmacies and drugstores, cosmetics, and health supplement stores         P  P  P  N  10-19-15
                                                                                             (F)
   Photofinishing                                                             P  P  P  N   
   Photography studios                                                        P  P  P  N   
   Personal and household goods repair and maintenance                        N  P  P  N  10-19-15
                                                                                             (G )
   Salons, hair, nail, lashes, permanent cosmetics, tattoos                   P  P  P  N  10-19-15
                                                                                             (H )
   Prohibited Uses:                                                                    
      Cemeteries, crematories, and mausoleums                              N  N  N  N
N. RELIGIOUS, GRANT MAKING, CIVIC, PROFESSIONAL, & SIMILAR ORGANIZATIONS
   Religious organizations, churches                                          P  P  P  N  10-19-16
                                                                                             (A )
   Volunteer and nonprofit organizations                                      P  P  P  N   
O. RESIDENTIAL
   Accessory Caretaker Residence (ACR)                                        P  P  P  P  10-19-3
   Prohibited Uses:
      Single Family Dwellings
      Two Family Dwellings
      Multi-Family Dwellings                                                        
      Townhomes                                                            N  N  N  N
   Developments which contain residential uses or mixed commercial and
residential uses (other than an accessory caretaker residence) must obtain a
rezone to a "Planned District (P)", see chapter 13 of this title
P. RETAIL TRADE
   Retail, General
      Art dealers
      Books, magazines, music
      Clothing and accessories
      Convenience
      Electronics & Appliances
      Floral
      Food, specialty                                                               
      Furniture & home furnishings                                         P  P  P  N  10-19-18
      General merchandise & groceries (less than 10,000 sq.ft.)                        (A)
      Gift, novelty, souvenirs
      Hardware,
      Luggage and leather goods
      Office supply, book
      Pet & pet supplies
      Recreational and hobby equipment
      Used merchandise, antiques and thrift
   Retail, Specialty
      Beer, wine and liquor
      Car washes
      Department stores
      General merchandise and groceries (greater than 10,000 sq. ft.)               
      Home and nursery centers                                             N  P  P  N  10-19-18
      Outdoor power equipment                                                          (B)
      Passenger vehicle fueling stations (gasoline, electric, natural gas, etc.)
      Rental, consumer electronics and appliances
      Rental, entertainment and entertainment products (bounce houses)
      Tobacco (Permitted only in MD Zone)
   Retail, online and other                                                                
      Electronic shopping and mail order houses                                    10-19-18
      General rental centers Liquefied petroleum gas (bottled gas) dealers N  N  P  N  (C)
      Vending machine operators, not as an accessory use
   Prohibited Uses:
      Heating oil dealers                                                           
      Other direct selling establishments                                  N  N  N  N
      Other fuel dealers
Q. SOCIAL SERVICES
   Child and youth services, such as:                                                
      Boys and Girls Clubs, YMCA, Scouts, Big Brothers/Big Sisters, Junior N  P  N  N   
Achievement, Toys for Tots, Children's Justice Center, etc.
   Community food services such as meals on wheels or food pantry             P  P  P  N   
   Community service organizations, such as:                                         
      Volunteers of America, Habitat for Humanity, Housing Authority, CommuN tP  P  N   
Housing Trusts
   Daycare services, child or adult                                           P  P  P  N  10-19-19
                                                                                             (A )
   Emergency and other relief services, such as:                                       
      Red Cross, Salvation Army                                            P  P  P  N
   Other individual and family services, such as:                                    
      Social action groups, Housing Services, Credit Counselling, Utility  N  P  N  N   
Assistance, Veteran's Services
   Services for the elderly and persons with disabilities                     N  P  P  N   
   Vocational rehabilitation services                                         N  P  P  N   
   Prohibited Uses:                                                                    
      Homeless shelters & services                                         N  N  N  N
R. TRANSPORTATION & FREIGHT
   General passenger transportation services
      Charter
      Emergency or medical
      Freestanding parking lots and garages                                         
      Public transit and school                                            P  P  P  P  10-19-21
      Rideshare and taxi services                                                      (A )
      Scenic and sightseeing
      Special needs
      Specialty vehicle and limousine
   Freight and commodities transportation                                                  
      Freight trucking (local or long distance)                                    10-19-21
      Moving services                                                      N  N  P  P  (A)
      Rental, moving trucks                                                            10-19-21
                                                                                             (B)
   Support services for transportation
      Commercial air, rail, and water transportation equipment rental and
leasing                                                                                       
      Freight logistics, maintenance, operations, or container and truck st a      10-19-21
      General passenger transportation maintenance, operation, or storage  N  N  P  P  (A )
facilities
      Packing and crating
      Rail transportation logistics
   Prohibited transportation uses                                                    
      Air traffic control, airport operations and facilities               N  N  N  N   
      Passenger aircraft services and helipads
S. UTILITIES, PUBLIC SERVICES, WASTE MANAGEMENT, & REMEDIATION SERVICES
   Communications, broadcasting services, stations, & operations              C  C  P  P   
   Communications, cellular, satellite & wireless operations                  P  P  P  P  10-19-22
                                                                                             (A )
   Communications, resellers                                                  P  P  P  P   
   Communications, towers and facilities                                                   
      Cellular                                                                     10-19-22
      Satellite                                                            P  P  P  P  (A )
      Wireless
   Energy distribution and storage facilities, electric or natural gas        N  C  C  C  10-19-22
                                                                                             (B)
   Energy generation, accessory
      Geothermal                                                                    
      Solar                                                                N  N  P  P
      Wind
   Pipeline distribution and facilities                                       N  N  P  P  10-19-22
                                                                                             (C)
   Postal service                                                             P  P  P  P   
   Public utility station and wireless communication accessory structures     P  P  P  P  10-19-22
                                                                                             (D)
   Septic tank, portable toilet and related services                          N  N  N  C  10-19-22
                                                                                             (E)
   Sewage treatment facilities                                                N  N  N  C  10-19-22
                                                                                             (F)
   Utilities transmission lines and control                                   N  N  P  P  10-19-22
                                                                                             (G)
   Water distribution                                                         P  P  P  P   
   Waste, nonhazardous: treatment and disposal                                N  N  N  C  10-19-22
                                                                                             (H)
   Waste, materials recovery facilities
      Facilities for separating and sorting recyclable materials from               
nonhazardous waste streams (i.e., garbage)                                       N  N  N  C  10-19-22
      Facilities for commingled recyclable materials, such as paper, plastics,         (I)
used beverage cans, and metals, are sorted into distinct categories.
   Waste, remediation services                                                             
      Cleaning up and reversing environmental damage                               10-19-22
      Removal of hazardous materials from contaminated buildings, structureN  N  N  C  (J)
soil, groundwater, surface water, and sediment
   Prohibited:
      Fossil fuel/nuclear power generation                                        
      Solid waste landfills, combustors and incinerators                   N  N  N  N   
      Steam and air conditioning supply
      Waste, hazardous: collection, treatment, disposal
T. WAREHOUSING & WHOLESALE TRADE (DURABLE GOODS)
   Wholesale, trade, durable goods
   (new or used items generally with a normal life expectancy of 3 years or
more) such as:
      Commercial equipment
      Construction Materials
      Electronic parts and equipment
      Farm and garden machinery and equipment
      Furniture                                                                     
      Hardware                                                             N  N  P  P  10-19-23
      Industrial machinery, equipment, and supplies                                    (A )
      Jewelry, watch, precious stone and precious metal
      Plumbing and HVAC equipment and supplies
      Professional, equipment and supplies
      Recyclable material wholesalers
      Refrigeration equipment and supplies
      Service establishment equipment and supplies
      Sporting and recreational goods and supplies
   Wholesale, trade, rental, durable goods
   (new or used items generally with a normal life expectancy of 3 years or
more) with outdoor storage such as:                                                       
      Commercial and industrial machinery and equipment rental and leasing          
      Metal service centers and offices                                    N  N  C  C  10-19-23
      Motor vehicle                                                                    (A )
      Recyclable material wholesalers
      Transportation equipment and supplies
   Prohibited Wholesale, trade, durable goods                                        
      Chemical and allied products                                         N  N  N  N   
      Other hazardous materials and products
U. WAREHOUSING & WHOLESALE TRADE (NONDURABLE GOODS)
   Wholesale trade, nondurable goods                                                   
   (items with a normal life expectancy of less than 3 years):
      Alcoholic beverage
      Automotive supplies
      Book, periodical and newspaper
      Clothing
      Drug, drug proprietaries and druggist sundries
      Grocery and related products                                                  
      Farm supplies                                                        N  N  P  P  10-19-23
      Flower, nursery stock and florist supplies                                       (B)
      Paint, varnish and supplies
      Paper and office supplies wholesalers
      Piece goods, notions and other dry goods
      Plastics materials and basic forms and shapes
      Tobacco and tobacco products
   Wholesale trade, nondurable goods
   (items with a normal life expectancy of less than 3 years):
      Fuel oil                                                                      
      Gasoline merchant                                                    N  N  C  C  10-19-23
      Liquid petroleum gas                                                             (B)
      Lubricating oil and grease
      Petroleum and petroleum products (except bulk stations and terminals)
   Prohibited Wholesale trade, nondurable goods
      Chemical and allied products                                                
      Farm product raw material wholesalers                                N  N  N  N   
      Hazardous materials and products
      Other products that produce odors
V. WAREHOUSING & WHOLESALE TRADE (ELECTRONIC)
   Wholesale electronic markets and brokers: arrangement for the sale of goods
owned by others, generally on a fee or commission basis, No storage or           N  N  P  P   
warehousing
W. WAREHOUSING, STORAGE FACILITIES
   General warehousing and storage facilities                                 N  N  P  P  10-19-24
                                                                                             (A )
   Self-storage units                                                         N  N  P  P  10-19-24
                                                                                             (B)
   Storage Facility, Indoor Climate Controlled                                N  N  P  P  10-19-24
                                                                                             (C)
 
(Ord. 2015-18, 11-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-02, 3-6-2018; Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-
2018; Ord. 2022-01, 4-5-2022; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022; Ord. 2023-07, 5-30-2023;
Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024; Ord. 2024-07, 10-1-2024; Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-11-4: BUILDING SITE REGULATIONS:
 ZONE
 C-S C-G M-D M-G
                                                                ZONE
                                                                C-S C-G M-D M-G
A. Height regulations:                                                    
The maximum height for all buildings and structures in feet     30  60  45  45
shall be (except as approved by conditional use)
The maximum number of stories                                   2   4   3   3
B. Area:                                                                  
Minimum area in acres for lots (unless modified by conditional  1   1   2   5
use)
Maximum percentage of area covered by any buildings             65  65  65  65
Minimum landscape percentage of area, except where reduced by
the Planning Commission during site plan approval, in support
of water conservation efforts and when enhanced landscaping is  15% 15% 15% 15%
concentrated within the front setback and is not necessary for
buffering purposes within the side and rear yard areas.
Maximum percentage of area landscaped with turf, lawn, or sod
shall be the following percentage or 5,000 sq. ft., whichever   5%  5%  5%  5%
is less
C. Dimensions:                                                            
Frontage: The minimum width of any lot at the street right-of-  65  65  65  65
way line in feet shall be
Width: The minimum width of any lot in feet at the building     100 100 100 100
setback line
Minimum front yard setback (corner lots have 2 front yard       20  20  20  20
setbacks)
Maximum front yard setback (corner lots have 2 front yard       n/a 80  n/a n/a
setbacks)
Minimum side yard setback                                       0   0   0   0
Minimum rear yard setback                                       0   0   0   0
D. Parking location:                                                      
Front                                                           P   P   P   P
Side                                                            P   P   P   P
Rear                                                            P   P   P   P
Fence and wall standards (fence and wall standards are detailed           
further in section 10-1-33 of this title):
Maximum wall or solid fence height (within 20 feet of a public  3'  3'  3'  3'
street)
Maximum fence height - 75 percent or more open (within 20 feet  4'  4'  4'  4'
of a public street)
Minimum solid fence or wall height - outdoor storage            N   6'  6'  6'
Barbed wire - no more than 3 strands strung tightly atop a      N   N   P   P
minimum 6 foot high fence
Electric fences                                                 N   N   P   P
E. Required improvements to be completed or in progress before            
building permit may be issued:
Street paving                                                   A   A   A   A
Street curb and gutter                                          A   A   A   A
Sidewalk                                                        A   A   N   N
Surface drainage facilities                                     A   A   A   A
Wastewater disposal facilities                                  A   A   A   A
Culinary water facilities                                       A   A   A   A
Firefighting facilities                                         A   A   A   A
Street name and traffic signs                                   A   A   A   A
Streetlights                                                    A   A   A   A
Public utilities - power, gas, telephone, cable TV, etc.        A   A   A   A
 
(Ord. 2015-18, 11-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2018-02, 3-6-2018; Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-
2018; Ord. 2022-01, 4-5-2022; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022; Ord. 2023-07, 5-30-2023;
Ord. 2024-02, 5-7-2024; Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-11-5: DEVELOPMENTS ON REDWOOD ROAD:
   A.   All developments adjacent to Redwood Road shall be required to follow
the City's landscaping cross section for developments on Redwood Road as
outlined in section 13-8-7(F) and the landscape standards identified in Title
10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscape Standards. (Ord. 2015-18, 11-17-2015;
amd. Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022; Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
CHAPTER 12
SENSITIVE AREA DISTRICT (SA) AND GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Purpose
10-12-2: Definitions
10-12-3: Applicability
10-12-4: Responsibility For Geologic Hazard Studies
10-12-5: Minimum Qualifications Of The Geologist
10-12-6: Minimum Qualifications Of The Engineer
10-12-7: Preliminary Activities
10-12-8: Geologic Hazard Investigation Permit
10-12-9: Geologic Hazard Studies And Reports Required
10-12-10: Geologic Hazard Reports
10-12-11: Review Of Geologic Hazard Reports
10-12-12: Land Disturbance Permit Regulations
10-12-13: Compliance With Permit
10-12-14: Protective Devices
10-12-15: Maintenance Of Site
10-12-16: Access And Haul Routes
10-12-17: Consent Of Adjacent Property Owners
10-12-18: Cuts And Fills
10-12-19: Erosion Control And Drainage Devices
10-12-20: Areas Subject To Slides And Unstable Soil
10-12-21: Planting And Irrigation Of Cut And Fill Slopes
10-12-22: Lot Standards And Identification Of Building Envelope
10-12-23: Property Line And Corner Markers
10-12-24: Slope Protection Easements
10-12-25: Master Drainage Plan Required
10-12-26: Landscaping Of Certain Lots For Erosion Control
10-12-27: Erosion Control And Revegetation
10-12-28: Wet Weather Plan
10-12-29: Disclosure When A Geologic Hazard Report Is Required
10-12-30: Warning And Disclaimer
10-12-31: Change Of Use
10-12-32: Conflicting Regulations
10-12-33: Appendices
10-12-33-1: Appendix A, Minimum Standards For Surface Fault Rupture Hazard
Studies
10-12-33-2: Appendix B, Minimum Standards For Slope Stability Analysis
10-12-33-3: Appendix C, Minimum Standards For Liquefaction Investigations And
Evaluations
10-12-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of the SA district is to designate and describe those areas
within the city that possess environmental characteristics which require
special public consideration of use applications which might affect the
structure of the land. These "sensitive land development regulations" provide
standards, guidelines and criteria, having the effect of minimizing flooding,
fire, erosion, and other natural and manmade hazards, and protect people and
property while protecting the natural scenic character of the sensitive land
areas not suitable for development, or suitable for development only after
mitigation of hazards and ensuring the efficient expenditure of public funds.
   B.   The standards, guidelines and criteria to be achieved by the SA
district overlay zone shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   The protection of the public from natural and manmade hazards;
      2.   The minimizing of the threat and consequential damages of fire in
foothill areas by establishing fire protection measures;
      3.   The preservation of natural features, wildlife habitat and open
space;
      4.   The preservation of public access to mountain areas and natural
drainage channels;
      5.   The preservation and enhancement of visual and environmental quality
by use of natural vegetation and the prohibition of excessive excavation and
terracing;
      6.   The establishment of traffic circulation facilities that ensure
ingress and egress for vehicles, including emergency vehicles, into all
developed areas at any time of the year with minimal cuts, fills or visible
scars;
      7.   The encouragement of variety of development designs and concepts
that are compatible with the natural terrain of the foothill areas, that will
preserve open space and natural landscape;
      8.   The establishment of land use management criteria that will
encourage protection of natural elements while allowing a harmonious and
satisfying residential environment;
      9.   Encouragement of regard for the view of the foothills, and from the
foothills;
      10.   Determine areas in the city that, due to geologic hazards, may not
be suitable for development, and may require engineering measures to reduce the
hazards to an acceptable level.
   C.   The intent of geologic hazards regulations is to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city of North Salt Lake, protect the
city's infrastructure and financial health, and minimize adverse effects of
geologic hazards to public health, safety, and property by encouraging wise
land use.
   D.   This chapter and its appendices address surface fault rupture, slope
stability, and liquefaction hazards and present minimum standards and methods
for evaluating geologic hazards.
   E.   Results of geologic hazard studies shall comply with this chapter and
its appendices. The standards set forth in the appendices are minimum
requirements. More complex projects may require more detailed and in depth
evaluations than outlined herein. In addition, the appendices shall not
supersede other more stringent requirements that may be required by other
regulatory agents.
   F.   Site specific geologic hazard assessments performed by qualified
engineering geologists shall be required prior to developing projects located
within a sensitive area district or otherwise required areas of potential
geologic hazard. The developer shall submit the applicable study and complete
the report process as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ACCEPTABLE AND REASONABLE RISK: No loss or significant injury to occupants, no
release of hazardous or toxic substances, and minimal structural damage.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: Any structure not designed for human occupancy, which may
include tool or storage sheds, gazebos, and swimming pools.
ACTIVE FAULT: A fault displaying evidence of displacement along one or more of
its traces during Holocene time, which is approximately ten thousand (10,000)
years ago to the present.
AVALANCHE: A large mass of snow, ice, soil or rock, or a mixture of these
materials, falling, sliding, or flowing rapidly under the force of gravity.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP): Activities, facilities, measures, planning or
procedures used to minimize erosion and sedimentation and manage stormwater
before, during, and after earth disturbance activities.
BUILDABLE AREA: Based on an accepted engineering geology report, the portion of
a site not impacted by geologic hazards, or the portion of a site where it is
concluded the identified geologic hazards can be mitigated to a level where
risk to human life, property and city infrastructure are reduced to an
acceptable and reasonable level and where structures may be safely sited.
CITY: The public works director, city engineer, community development director,
planning manager, building official or other city employee.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of North Salt Lake.
CRITICAL FACILITIES: Essential, hazardous, special occupancy facilities, and
occupancy categories III and IV as defined in the currently adopted
international building code, and lifelines such as major utility,
transportation, and communication facilities and their connections to critical
facilities.
DEBRIS FLOW: A slurry of rock, soil, organic material, and water transported in
an extremely fast and destructive flow that flows down channels and onto and
across alluvial fans; including a continuum of sedimentation events and
processes including debris flows, debris floods, mudflows, clear water floods,
or alluvial fan flooding.
DEVELOPMENT: All critical facilities, subdivisions, single- and multi-family
dwellings, commercial and industrial buildings; also additions to or
intensification of existing buildings, storage facilities, pipelines and
utility conveyances, and other land uses.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST: A Utah licensed geologist, who, through education,
training, and experience, is competent in applying geologic data, geologic
techniques, and geologic principles, which includes conducting field
investigations, so that geologic conditions and geologic factors affecting
engineered works, groundwater resources, and land use planning are recognized,
adequately interpreted, and clearly presented for use in engineering practice,
land use planning, and for the protection of the public, and who utilizes
specialized geologic training and experience to provide quantitative geologic
information and recommendations and also works with and for land use planners,
environmental specialists, architects, public policy makers, and property
owners to provide geologic information on which decisions can be made.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGY: Geologic work that is relevant to engineering and
environmental concerns, and the public health, safety, and welfare. Engineering
geology is the application of geological data, principles, and interpretation
so that geological factors affecting planning, design, construction, and
maintenance of engineered works, land use planning, and groundwater resources
are adequately recognized and properly interpreted for use in engineering, land
use planning, and related practice.
ESSENTIAL FACILITY: Any buildings or other structures intended to remain
operational in the event of an adverse geologic event, including all structures
defined in section
10-12-33-1, table A2 of this chapter.
FAULT: A fracture in the earth's crust forming a boundary between rock or soil
masses that has moved relative to each other.
FAULT SCARP: A steep slope or cliff formed by movement along a fault.
FAULT SETBACK: An area on either side of a fault within which structures for
human occupancy or critical facilities or their structural supports are not
permitted.
FAULT TRACE: The intersection of a fault plane with the ground surface, often
present as a fault scarp, or detected as a lineament on aerial photographs.
FAULT ZONE: A corridor of variable width along one or more fault traces within
which deformation has occurred.
GEOLOGIC HAZARD: A surface fault rupture, liquefaction, slope stability,
landslide, debris flow, or rockfall that may present a risk to life or
property.
GEOLOGIC HAZARD STUDY AREA: A potentially hazardous area as shown on the
geologic hazard study area maps within which hazard investigations are required
prior to development.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER: A professional, Utah licensed engineer who, through
education, training and experience, is competent in the field of geotechnical
engineering.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING: The investigation and engineering evaluation of earth
materials including soil, rock, and manmade materials and their interaction
with earth retention systems, foundations, and other civil engineering works.
The practice involves the fields of soil mechanics, rock mechanics, and earth
sciences and requires knowledge of engineering laws, formulas, construction
techniques, and performance evaluation of engineering.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council of the city of North Salt Lake.
LANDSLIDE: The downslope movement of a mass of soil, surficial deposits or
bedrock, including a continuum of processes between landslides, and earth
flows.
LIQUEFACTION: A process by which certain water saturated soils lose bearing
strength because of earthquake related ground shaking and subsequent increase
of groundwater pore pressure.
NONBUILDABLE AREA: That portion of a site which a geologic hazards report has
concluded may be impacted by geologic hazards that cannot be reasonably
mitigated to an acceptable level, and where the siting of habitable structures,
structures requiring a building permit, or critical facilities, is not
permitted.
ROCKFALL: A rock or mass of rock, newly detached from a cliff or other steep
slope which moves downslope by falling, rolling, toppling, or bouncing;
includes rockslides, rockfall avalanches, and talus.
SETBACK: An area within which support of habitable structures or critical
facilities is not permitted.
SLOPE STABILITY: The resistance of a natural or artificial slope or other
inclined surface to failure by slope movement, usually assessed under both
static and dynamic (earthquake induced) conditions.
STRUCTURE DESIGNED FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY: Any residential dwelling or any other
structure used or intended to support or shelter any use or occupancy, which is
expected to have an occupancy rate of at least two thousand (2,000) person
hours per year, but does not include an accessory building. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-
20-2015)
10-12-3: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Provisions: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any zoning
district in the city and shown as within the sensitive lands overlay area on
the sensitive lands map or any other areas as required by subsection D of this
section.
   B.   Additional Provisions: This chapter makes additional provisions to
those otherwise set forth in the land use and subdivision ordinances, and other
chapters of the act. Additional requirements not covered in this chapter may be
required by the city engineer if determined that it reasonably appears that
there are additional hazards associated with the site. In the event of conflict
between such foregoing designated chapters of this title, the more restrictive
provisions shall apply.
   C.   Expired Approvals: Subdivisions, planned unit developments, or other
construction projects, whose preliminary or final plat approvals have expired
or are proposed to be redeveloped, further subdivided or amended, shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Additional Property Outside Overlay Zone: Properties located outside
the boundaries of the sensitive lands overlay map will be subject to the
regulations and standards of this chapter in the event that the city engineer
determines the property to have any of the following: an average slope of
fifteen percent (15%) or greater; known, suspect, or probable geologic hazards;
critical wildlife habitat or natural features; critical drainage channels; or
other vital infrastructure. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR GEOLOGIC HAZARD STUDIES:
   A.   Geologic hazard studies often involve both engineering geology and
geotechnical engineering. Engineering geologic studies shall be performed under
the direct supervision of a qualified engineering geologist. Geotechnical
engineering studies shall be performed under the direct supervision of a
qualified geotechnical engineer.
   B.   Project developers and their consultants shall present the results of
any geologic hazard study in compliance with this chapter, its appendices and
the latest guidelines adopted by the Utah geological survey. The standards set
forth in the appendices to this chapter are the city's minimum requirements,
but may be made more restrictive (in specific, fact sensitive circumstances) by
the DRC based on recommendations of the city engineer or city geologic
consultant, or designee, if evidence becomes available that suggests more
stringent requirements are appropriate. In addition, the appendices shall not
supersede other more stringent requirements that may be required by other
regulatory agencies or governmental entities that have jurisdiction.
   C.   Building permits on single lots:
      1.   Any lot, whether or not in platted subdivisions, which is in the
sensitive lands overlay area, or otherwise meets the criteria defined herein,
shall be submitted with a site specific geotechnical report in accordance with
chapter 18 of the international building code (IBC) and any engineered
construction plan which has been designed in compliance with the
recommendations made within the geotechnical report for site excavation,
grading, slope stability, structural components, landscaping, or any other
geologic hazard mitigation specified.
      2.   The building permit may be issued administratively after it is
determined that the lot may be developed in accordance with the intent of this
chapter.
      3.   The building official shall require the geotechnical firm to observe
the excavation of the site and submit verification of soil conditions and
suitability of the site for construction.
      4.   If the only hazard associated with the site is high liquefaction,
then the applicant must submit a soils report with recommendations for control
of subsurface water as well as footing and foundation design. (Ord. 2015-16,
10-20-2015)
10-12-5: MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS OF THE GEOLOGIST:
Engineering geology and the evaluation of geologic hazards is a specialized
discipline within the practice of geology requiring technical expertise and
knowledge of techniques not commonly used in other geologic investigations.
Therefore, geologic hazard investigations involving engineering geologic
studies shall only be accepted by the city of North Salt Lake when conducted
and signed by a qualified engineering geologist. The minimum qualifications of
the engineering geologist who performs geologic hazard investigations are:
   A.   An undergraduate or graduate degree in geology, engineering geology, or
geological engineering, or closely related field, from an accredited college or
university;
   B.   At least five (5) full years of experience in a responsible position in
the field of engineering geology in Utah, or in a state with similar geologic
hazards and regulatory environment. This experience must demonstrate the
engineering geologist's knowledge and application of appropriate techniques in
performing geologic hazard studies; and
   C.   A Utah state professional geologist's license. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-
2015)
10-12-6: MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS OF THE ENGINEER:
Evaluation and mitigation of geologic hazards often require contributions from
a qualified geotechnical engineer, particularly in the design of mitigation
measures. Geotechnical engineering is a specialized discipline within the
practice of civil engineering requiring technical expertise and knowledge of
techniques not commonly used in civil engineering investigations. Therefore,
geologic hazard investigations requiring contributions from a qualified
geotechnical engineer will only be accepted by the city of North Salt Lake when
also signed and sealed by a qualified geotechnical engineer. Minimum
qualifications of the geotechnical engineer who participates in geologic hazard
investigations are:
   A.   A graduate degree in civil engineering, with an emphasis in
geotechnical engineering; or a BS degree in civil engineering with twelve (12)
semester hours of post BS credit in geotechnical engineering or course content
related to evaluation of geologic hazards from an accredited college or
university;
   B.   At least five (5) full years of experience in a responsible position in
the field of geotechnical engineering in Utah, or in a state with similar
geologic hazards and regulatory environment, and experience demonstrating the
engineer's knowledge and application of appropriate techniques in participating
in geologic hazard studies; and
   C.   A Utah state professional engineer's license. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-
2015)
10-12-7: PRELIMINARY ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Geologic Hazard Investigation: This section shall apply to any geologic
hazard investigation for the purpose of determining the feasibility of
development or for the purpose of exploring, evaluating or establishing
locations for permanent improvements.
   B.   Scoping Meeting: The developer or consultant shall schedule a scoping
meeting with the city to evaluate the engineering geologist/geotechnical
engineer's investigative approach. At this meeting, the consultant shall
present a work plan that includes locations of anticipated geologic hazards and
locations of proposed exploratory excavations, such as trenches, borings, and
CPT soundings, which meet the minimum standard of practice. The investigation
approach should allow for flexibility due to unexpected site conditions. Field
findings may require modifications to the work plan. Upon completion of a
successful scoping meeting, a geologic hazard investigation permit application
may be submitted to the city of North Salt Lake.
   C.   Geologic Hazard Investigation Permit: As required by this chapter and
except as otherwise noted therein, no person shall commence or perform any land
disturbance, grading, relocation of earth, or any other land disturbance
activity, without first obtaining a geologic hazard investigation permit.
Application for the permit shall be filed with the city engineer on forms
furnished by the city for such purposes only after a scoping meeting has been
completed.
   D.   Contact Information: The applicant shall specify a primary contact
responsible for coordination with the city during the land disturbance
activity. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-8: GEOLOGIC HAZARD INVESTIGATION PERMIT:
   A.   Application For Permit: Application for a geologic hazard investigation
permit shall be filed with the city engineer on forms furnished by the city for
such purpose. Applications shall include all the plans, specifications,
reports, documentation and information required herein. Three (3) sets of all
required plans, specifications and reports shall be submitted with each
application. All such plans, specifications and reports shall be prepared and
signed by a civil engineer, or other professionally qualified individual, where
applicable. Additional experts in applicable fields shall be utilized for
preparation of such documents and reports as appropriate. No application shall
be processed until all required plans, specifications, reports, documentation
and information have been received by the city in accordance with the
provisions and requirements of this title.
   B.   Plans And Specifications: Each application shall include a detailed
site plan including the following:
      1.   A vicinity map;
      2.   The property lines and dimensions and bearings;
      3.   The location of any existing buildings or structures on the property
or within fifty feet (50') of the property boundary;
      4.   Existing vegetation;
      5.   Accurate topography, including a minimum of one hundred feet (100')
outside project boundary;
      6.   The elevations, dimensions, locations, extent, and slopes of all
proposed land disturbance activities shown by contours or other means;
      7.   Locations of proposed test pits, bores, trenches, or other
excavations;
      8.   Known or probable locations of geologic hazards;
      9.   The estimated start and completion dates for the proposed land
disturbance activities and proposed land disturbance activities schedule and
permit term;
      10.   Temporary construction entrance and exit plans;
      11.   Signed, written authorization from the property owner giving the
applicant permission to access the property and perform the proposed land
disturbance;
      12.   Any additional plans, drawings, or calculations required by the
city engineer;
      13.   Grading plan for the proposed land disturbance activity and site;
      14.   Drainage plan for the proposed land disturbance activity and site;
      15.   Erosion and sediment control plan for the proposed land disturbance
activity and site; and
      16.   Revegetation plan for the proposed land disturbance activity and
site.
   C.   Fees: All applicable fees shall be paid by applicant with the filing of
an application for a permit in accordance with the consolidated fee schedule.
An application shall not be deemed complete until the required fees have been
received by the city.
   D.   Conditions Of Approval: In granting any permit pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the city engineer or the city engineer's authorized
representative may attach such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to
protect public health and safety. Such conditions may include, but will not be
limited to:
      1.   The improvement of any existing site condition to bring it up to the
standards of this title;
      2.   Requirements for fencing excavations or fills which would otherwise
be hazardous;
      3.   Duration of permit; and
      4.   Posting of a performance bond for the completion of the work
proposed in the geologic hazards investigation application, including, but not
limited to, the proposed remediation and restoration of the site.
   E.   Denial Of Geologic Hazard Investigation Permits:
      1.   A geologic hazard investigation permit shall not be issued in any
case where it is found that the work proposed by the applicant is hazardous, or
is likely to endanger any private property, result in the deposit of debris on
any public way, or interfere with any existing drainage course; as determined
by the city engineer,
      2.   A geologic hazard investigation permit shall not be issued if the
proposed land disturbance activity would not comply with the requirements of an
applicable site plan, subdivision plat, or any provisions of law, including the
provisions of this title.
   F.   Approved Plans: The applicant shall retain the approved set of plans
and specifications at the site covered by the geologic hazard investigation
permit at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. No
approved plans or specifications shall be changed, modified, altered or
amended, without approval of the city engineer.
   G.   Emergencies: The provisions of this title shall not apply to any land
disturbance activity which is conducted during a period of emergency or
disaster, as declared and defined by the city, and which is directly connected
with or related to the relief of conditions caused by such emergency or
disaster. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-9: GEOLOGIC HAZARD STUDIES AND REPORTS REQUIRED:
Any applicant requesting development approval on a parcel of land within a
geologic hazard study area or where there are known or readily apparent
geologic hazards and the area is not depicted on the geologic hazards study
area maps, shall submit to the city five (5) paper copies and one electronic
copy of a site specific geologic hazard study report. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-
2015)
10-12-10: GEOLOGIC HAZARD REPORTS:
   A.   Each geologic hazards report shall be site specific and shall identify
all known or suspected potential geologic hazards, originating on site or off
site, whether previously identified or previously unrecognized, that may affect
the subject property. All geologic hazards reports shall include the original
or wet signature and professional seal, both in blue ink, of the qualified
professional. Geologic hazards reports coprepared by professional geologists
and engineers shall include both professionals' original signature and seal in
blue ink.
   B.   Surface fault rupture reports shall contain all requirements as
described in section
10-12-33-1, "Appendix A, Minimum Standards For Surface Fault Rupture Hazard
Studies", of this chapter. Surface fault rupture studies shall be prepared by a
qualified engineering geologist.
   C.   Slope stability and landslide reports shall contain all requirements as
described in section
10-12-33-2, "Appendix B, Minimum Standards For Slope Stability Analysis", of
this chapter. Slope stability and landslide studies shall be prepared by a
qualified engineering geologist and a qualified geotechnical engineer.
   D.   Liquefaction reports shall contain all requirements as described in
section
10-12-33-3, "Appendix C, Minimum Standards For Liquefaction Investigations And
Evaluations", of this chapter. Liquefaction analyses shall be prepared by a
qualified geotechnical engineer. Liquefaction investigations are not required
for residential construction classified in the international residential code
as R-3.
   E.   The preparation of geologic hazard reports shall follow the most recent
guidelines published by the Utah geological survey, a division of the Utah
department of natural resources.
   F.   All geologic hazards reports shall include, at a minimum:
      1.   A one to twenty four thousand (1:24,000) scale geologic map, with
references, showing the general surface geology (landslides, alluvial fans,
etc.), bedrock geology where exposed, bedding attitudes, faults, and other
geologic structural features;
      2.   A detailed site map of the subject area, at a scale equal to or more
detailed than one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200'), showing the
locations of subsurface investigations and site specific geologic mapping
performed as part of the geologic investigation, including boundaries and
features related to any geologic hazards, topography, and drainage. The site
map must show the location and boundaries of the property, geologic hazards,
delineation of any recommended setback distances from hazards, and recommended
locations for structures. Buildable and nonbuildable areas shall be clearly
identified;
      3.   Trench logs, when applicable, prepared in the field and presented in
the geologic hazard report at a scale equal to, or more detailed than, one inch
equals five feet (1" = 5');
      4.   Boring logs when applicable, prepared with standard geologic
nomenclature;
      5.   Listing of aerial photographs used and other supporting information,
as applicable;
      6.   Conclusions, clearly supported by adequate data included in the
report, that summarize the characteristics of the geologic hazards, and that
address the potential effects of the geologic conditions and geologic hazards
on the proposed development and occupants thereof, particularly in terms of
risk and potential damage;
      7.   Specific recommendations for additional or more detailed studies, as
may be required to understand or quantify a geologic hazard;
      8.   An evaluation of whether or not mitigation measures are required,
including an evaluation of multiple mitigation options;
      9.   Specific recommendations for avoidance or mitigation of the effects
of the hazards, consistent with the purposes set forth in section
10-12-1 of this chapter, including design or performance criteria for
engineered mitigation measures and all supporting calculations, analyses,
modeling or other methods, and assumptions. Final design plans and
specifications for engineered mitigation must be signed and stamped by a
qualified geotechnical, civil and/or structural engineer, as appropriate;
      10.   Data upon which recommendations and conclusions are based, shall be
clearly stated in the report; and
      11.   A statement shall be provided regarding the suitability of the
proposed development from a geologic hazard perspective.
   G.   When a submitted report does not contain adequate data to support its
findings, additional or more detailed studies shall be required to explain or
quantify a particular geologic hazard or to describe how mitigation measures
recommended in the report are appropriate and adequate. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-
2015)
10-12-11: REVIEW OF GEOLOGIC HAZARD REPORTS:
   A.   The city shall review any proposed land use which requires preparation
of a geologic hazards report under this chapter to determine the possible risks
to the safety of persons, property and city infrastructure from geologic
hazards.
   B.   Prior to consideration of any request for preliminary plat approval or
site plan approval, the geologic hazards report, if required, shall be
submitted to the city for review.
   C.   All direct costs associated with the review of geologic hazard studies
shall be paid by the applicant.
   D.   The city shall determine whether the report complies with all of the
following standards:
      1.   A suitable geologic hazard report has been prepared by qualified
professionals.
      2.   The proposed land use does not present an unreasonable risk to the
health, safety, and welfare of persons or property, including buildings, storm
drains, public streets, culinary water facilities, utilities or critical
facilities, whether off site or on site, or to the aesthetics and natural
functions of the landscape, such as slopes, streams or other waterways,
drainage, or wildlife habitat, whether off site or on site, because of the
presence of geologic hazards or because of modifications to the site due to the
proposed land use.
      3.   The proposed land use demonstrates that, consistent with the state
of the practice, the identified geologic hazards can be mitigated to a level
where the risk to human life and damage to property are reduced to an
acceptable and reasonable level in a manner which will not violate applicable
federal, state, or local statutes, ordinances or regulations. Mitigation
measures shall consider, in their design, the intended aesthetic functions of
other governing ordinances such as the sensitive lands overlay zone. The
applicant shall include with the geologic hazards report a mitigation plan that
defines how the identified hazards or limitations will be addressed without
impacting or adversely affecting off site areas. Mitigation measures shall be
reasonable and practical to implement especially if such measures require
ongoing maintenance by property owners.
   E.   The city may set other requirements as are necessary to overcome any
geologic hazards and to ensure that the purposes of this chapter are met. These
requirements may include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Additional or more detailed studies to understand or quantify the
hazard or determine whether mitigation measures recommended in the report are
adequate;
      2.   Specific mitigation requirements, establishing buildable and
nonbuildable areas, limitations on slope grading, and controls on grading or
revegetation;
      3.   Grading plans, when required, shall be prepared, signed and sealed
by a licensed professional engineer. As built grading plans, when required,
shall be signed and sealed by the project geotechnical engineer as well as the
professional engineer that prepared the grading plans. Grading plans, when
required, shall include, at a minimum, the following:
         a.   Maps of existing and proposed contours;
         b.   Present and proposed slopes for each graded area;
         c.   Existing and proposed drainage patterns;
         d.   Location and depth of all proposed cuts and fills;
         e.   Description of methods to be employed to achieve stabilization
and compaction;
         f.   Location and capacities of proposed drainage, structures, and
erosion control measures based on maximum runoff for a 100-year storm;
         g.   Location of existing buildings or structures on or within one
hundred feet (100') of the site, or which may be affected by proposed grading
and construction; and
         h.   Plans for monitoring and documentation of testing, field
inspections during grading, and reporting to the city;
      4.   Installation of monitoring equipment and seasonal monitoring of
surface and subsurface geologic conditions, including groundwater levels; and
      5.   Other requirements such as time schedules for completion of the
mitigation and phasing of development.
   F.   The city of North Salt Lake may also establish additional requirements
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, protect
city infrastructure and financial health, and minimize potential adverse
effects of geologic hazards to public health, safety, and property as a
condition of approval of any development which requires a geologic hazards
report.
   G.   The city of North Salt Lake may require qualified professionals to be
on site, at the cost of the developer, during certain phases of construction,
particularly during grading phases and the construction of retaining walls. For
any real property where development has proceeded on the basis of a geologic or
geotechnical report which has been accepted by the city, no final inspection
shall be completed, performance bond released, or building permit issued until
the geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist who signed and approved the
report certifies, in writing, that the completed improvements conform to the
descriptions and requirements contained in the geologic or geotechnical report.
   H.   An applicant may appeal any decision made under the provisions of this
chapter only after the city has issued a written review of a report. The appeal
shall be submitted in writing to the city recorder within ten (10) days of the
issuance of the written review or other decision and shall set forth the
specific grounds or issues upon which the appeal is based. The city shall
assemble a professional panel of three (3) qualified experts to serve as the
appeal authority for any technical dispute. The panel shall consist of an
expert designated by the city, an expert designated by the applicant, and an
expert chosen by the city's and the applicant's designated experts. If the
city's and the applicant's designated experts cannot reach a consensus of the
third expert within thirty (30) days, the city shall select the third expert.
Decisions of the panel will be binding and will be based on the majority
decision of the panel. The costs of the appeal process shall be paid by the
applicant. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-12: LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT REGULATIONS:
As part of the final plat approval and in addition to other subdivision
regulations, final construction plans shall be designed according to the
following land disturbance regulations in sections
10-12-14 to
10-12-33 of this chapter. After a final plat has been approved, the approved
final construction plans along with any associated documents and bonding shall
constitute a land disturbance permit. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-13: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT:
The land disturbance permit holder and contractor and their agents shall carry
out the proposed land disturbance activities in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications, the conditions of the land disturbance permit, and
the requirements of this title and all other applicable ordinances, rules,
regulations and standards of the city. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-14: PROTECTIVE DEVICES:
The land disturbance permit holder and contractor and their agents shall
maintain all required protective devices and temporary drainage during the
progress of the land disturbance activities and shall be responsible for the
observance of the hours of work, dust control, methods of hauling, and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-15: MAINTENANCE OF SITE:
The land disturbance permit holder and contractor and their agents shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the site and the removal of all debris
during the term of the permit. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-16: ACCESS AND HAUL ROUTES:
Temporary construction entrance and exit routes shall be provided by the permit
holder in accordance with the approved plans and permit at key access points to
the site or project to eliminate the problem of tracking mud and debris from
the construction site onto private or public streets. The city engineer may
impose conditions to the land disturbance permit with respect to access or haul
routes to and from land disturbance activity sites, the hours of work, methods
of controlling dust, and safety precautions involving pedestrian or vehicular
traffic as determined required in the interest of the public health, safety and
welfare. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-17: CONSENT OF ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS:
If any land disturbance activity requires entry onto adjacent property for any
reason, the land disturbance permit applicant shall obtain the written consent
of the adjacent property owner or their authorized representative and shall
file a copy of such consent with the city engineer before a land disturbance
permit may be issued. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-18: CUTS AND FILLS:
   A.   Height: Except as otherwise provided herein, no finished fill slope
shall exceed a vertical height of twenty five feet (25'). The city engineer may
approve, in writing, a fill slope in excess of twenty five feet (25') as deemed
appropriate in his or her sole discretion based upon the circumstances and
conditions of the proposed site and fill. Any fill slope proposed in excess of
twenty five feet (25') shall be supported by documentation and a report
prepared and signed by a professional engineering geologist and geotechnical
engineer attesting to the appropriateness, safety and stability of the proposed
fill slope. Such documentation and report shall be prepared at the applicant's
expense and shall address the need for and design of intervening terraces or
other necessary measures to provide for the safety and stability of the
proposed slope.
   B.   Slope: Except as otherwise provided herein, no cut or fill shall exceed
a slope of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1). The city engineer may approve,
in writing, a cut or fill slope in excess of two horizontal to one vertical (2:
1) as deemed appropriate in his or her sole discretion based upon the
circumstances and conditions of the proposed site and the cut or fill. Any cut
or fill slope proposed in excess of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) shall
be supported by documentation and a report prepared and signed by a
professional engineering geologist and geotechnical engineer attesting to the
appropriateness, safety and stability of the proposed cut or fill slope. Such
documentation and report shall be prepared at the applicant's expense and shall
address the need for and design of necessary measures to provide for the safety
and stability of the proposed cut or fill slope.
   C.   Unstable Material: The city engineer may require, in writing any cut or
fill to be constructed with an exposed surface flatter than two horizontal to
one vertical (2:1) when, in the city engineer's opinion, under the particular
conditions, such flatter surface is deemed necessary for stability or safety.
   D.   Intervening Terraces: When intervening terraces are used on slopes two
horizontal to one vertical (2:1), terraces shall be finished using materials as
approved by the city and shall have a minimum width of six feet (6'). Terraces
shall be extensively landscaped in accordance with an approved landscaping
plan. Terraces shall be spaced at vertical intervals of twenty five feet (25');
provided, however, for slopes less than forty feet (40') in vertical height,
terraces shall be approximately at mid height. For slopes flatter than two
horizontal to one vertical (2:1), where soil conditions require, intervening
terraces may also be required.
   E.   Compaction: All fills shall be placed, compacted, inspected, and tested
in accordance with the provisions of this title and any other city construction
standards. If the strict enforcement of the compaction provisions of this
section is determined by the city engineer to be unnecessary because of the
proposed or probable use of the land, the city engineer may waive the
requirements. The requirements of this section shall not be waived when
structures are to be supported by the fill, the fills are being placed in areas
to be designated as hillside, or where the fills are necessary as a safety
measure to aid in preventing the saturation, settling, slipping, or erosion of
the fill.
   F.   Fills Toeing Out On Natural Slopes: Except as otherwise provided
herein, no fills toeing out on natural slopes which are steeper than two
horizontal to one vertical (2:1) shall be permitted. The city engineer may
approve such fills toeing out on natural slopes which are steeper than two
horizontal to one vertical (2:1) as deemed appropriate in his or her sole
discretion based upon the circumstances and conditions of the proposed site and
fill. Any fill slope proposed to toe out on natural slopes which are steeper
than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) shall be supported by documentation
and a report prepared and signed by a professional engineering geologist and
geotechnical engineer attesting to the appropriateness, safety and stability of
the proposed fill. Such documentation and report shall be prepared at the
applicant's expense and shall address the need for and design of necessary
measures to provide for the safety and stability of the proposed fill.
   G.   Combined Cut And Fill Slopes: Combined cut and fill slopes shall meet
the requirements of this section insofar as steepness, height, and benching are
concerned except that, where the slope exceeds twenty five feet (25') in
height, the required drainage bench shall be placed at the top of the cut
slope.
   H.   Setback: Fill placed on or above the top of an existing or proposed cut
or natural slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical (3:1) shall be
set back from the top of the slope a minimum distance as required by the
international building code, as adopted by the city, or as approved by the city
engineer based upon submitted reports and documentation for the project.
   I.   Existing Fills: All existing manmade fills on any and all sites shall
be properly evaluated by a soils engineer. If deficiencies exist,
recommendations and design criteria for corrective measures shall be included
within the soils engineering report.
   J.   Measure Of Settlement: The city engineer or the building official may
require, in writing, the determination of the settlement characteristics of any
fills to establish that any movements have substantially ceased. In such cases,
a system of bench marks shall be installed by a civil engineer or land surveyor
at critical points on the fill, and accurate measurements of both horizontal
and vertical movements shall be taken and evaluated by the geotechnical
engineer for a period of time sufficient to define the settlement behavior. The
evaluation period shall be monitored in accordance with the approved
geotechnical report for the project.
   K.   Buttress Fills: All buttress fills shall be designed in accordance with
the city's construction standards and the recommendations and design criteria,
including the subdrain system, submitted by the geotechnical engineer or
engineering geologist with the approval of the city engineer.
   L.   Limitations: For all lots created after the adoption of this chapter,
the following limitations shall apply: Toes of fill slopes shall not be made
nearer to a rear property boundary line than seven feet (7'). (Ord. 2015-16,
10-20-2015)
10-12-19: EROSION CONTROL AND DRAINAGE DEVICES:
Best Management Practices, such as, but not limited to, intervening terraces,
diverter terraces, vee channels, runoff computations, drainage dispersal walls,
subdrains and site drainage, shall be provided and designed in accordance with
this chapter and any other applicable City ordinances. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-
2015)
10-12-20: AREAS SUBJECT TO SLIDES AND UNSTABLE SOIL:
A detailed evaluation shall be completed for all areas subject to slides or
unstable soils by a geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist including
design criteria for corrective measures. Exploratory work or reports are
required for such conditions in accordance with geologic hazard investigation
permit requirements set forth in section
10-12-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-21: PLANTING AND IRRIGATION OF CUT AND FILL SLOPES:
All manufactured cut and fill slopes shall be planted and maintained until
established. Temporary irrigation may be required in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and any other applicable City ordinances. The
developer is responsible for operating and maintaining the irrigation system
until such time as the planted material is well established as determined, in
writing, by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-22: LOT STANDARDS AND IDENTIFICATION OF BUILDING ENVELOPE:
In order to facilitate the preservation of slopes, natural terrain and
vegetation, or avoidance of geologic hazards, the minimum depth of a lot in
feet, as regulated in this title may be modified by the City Council upon
recommendation by the Planning Commission. The resulting area must contain a
"buildable area" as defined by section
10-1-47 of this title.
The developer shall indicate on the site plan and subdivision plat for the site
or project, the maximum building envelope, or area of ultimate land/vegetation
disturbance, including designation of the building envelope's distance from the
lot or site boundary lines, which will be caused by the proposed structure and
its appurtenances. Prior to the beginning of any type of land disturbance or
construction on a given lot, the contractor performing the work is responsible
for identifying the building envelope in the field by marking of the building
envelope perimeter. The building official may require markers to be surveyed
when deemed necessary or appropriate. Marking of the building envelope shall be
inspected by the City's building division prior to commencement of any land
disturbance activity on the lot. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-23: PROPERTY LINE AND CORNER MARKERS:
The developer shall ensure that property lines and corner survey markers are
installed for the site or project. These markers are to include rebar placed at
the back corners of each lot and markers placed on the curb for locating the
side property lines. If curb and gutter do not exist, the front markers are to
be placed in the road pavement. Additional survey markers may be required on
property lines as deemed necessary by the building official. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-
20-2015)
10-12-24: SLOPE PROTECTION EASEMENTS:
The developer shall provide slope protection easements for all critical slopes
(native or constructed) as part of the project. Critical slopes shall include
slopes which average thirty percent (30%) or higher for an elevation change
five feet (5') or greater. The City Engineer may declare in writing other
slopes less than thirty percent (30%) as critical slopes due to geologic
hazard, soil stability, drainage flows, vegetation conditions or designated
open space. Slope protection easements shall be provided by both indicating
them on the final plat and by separate recordable easement for each individual
lot where the easements are located. Such individual easements shall be
accompanied by a map indicating areas where land disturbance is prohibited.
Easements for individual lots shall be recorded simultaneously with the
recordation of the final subdivision plat. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-25: MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN REQUIRED:
A master drainage plan shall be designed for all proposed development. At a
minimum the plan shall address the following items:
   A.   Master Drainage Plan Design:
      1.   Drainage Plan: Applications for development shall include a plan
indicating how proposed lots will be graded and drained. This plan shall be of
sufficient detail to demonstrate how surface runoff will typically be managed
on all lots within the proposed project, including possible locations of swales
and detention or retention facilities that will be utilized to control runoff.
      2.   Notice Of Drainage Easements: A notice of drainage easements shall
be recorded on the subdivision plat for the project. The easement shall specify
that nothing may be placed within a swale easement that would diminish or
reduce functionality of the swale.
      3.   Swales: Any swale located in rear or side yards shall be designed
with materials approved by the city that will prevent erosion, and shall become
a permanent feature of the lot. The swale systems shall be shown in a drainage
easement on the site plan and final plat for the project.
      4.   Underground Facilities: The developer may select the option of
designing underground drainage facilities to replace aboveground drainage
swales if these facilities meet certain city requirements. These requirements
include the design being approved in writing by the city engineer, inclusion of
these facilities within city approved drainage easements, maintenance of the
system by a homeowners' association, and other requirements as may be deemed
necessary by the city.
      5.   Lots Graded Toward Street For Drainage: Except as otherwise provided
herein, stormwater runoff from individual lots shall be directed toward the
streets at a minimum slope of two percent (2%) for the first twenty five feet
(25') from the structure. For homes that are set back more than twenty five
feet (25') from the front property line, property may be reduced to a one
percent (1%) slope for all areas at least twenty five feet (25') from the
structure. Exceptions may be granted by the city engineer in writing, when
deemed appropriate and necessary, in accordance with the provisions of this
section. Aesthetic reasons such as the creation of view lots shall not
constitute sufficient reason for granting an exception.
      6.   Lots Which Cannot Be Graded Toward The Street; Approval Required:
Lots that cannot be drained toward the street may be allowed to drain a portion
of their stormwater runoff toward the rear of the yard after review and
approval in writing by the city engineer. Prior to obtaining this approval, the
developer shall prepare a drainage plan, which indicates how the stormwater
will be disposed of from the lot, to either a city owned storm drain, a natural
stream or channel, a manmade channel, a lower elevation lot or other city
approved facility or retained on site. Such disposal is to be protected by a
drainage easement, as described in section
10-12-27 of this chapter, dedicated for this purpose and the facilities are to
be bonded for. Drainage easements shall be maintained by the homeowners'
association, where applicable, or by individual lot owners.
In the case where stormwater flow is allowed to flow from a higher lot to a
lower lot, in elevation, sufficient energy dissipation shall be designed and
constructed to reduce the water velocity to an acceptable level to prevent
erosion. The design and construction of these energy dissipation structures
shall be approved by the engineering department in conjunction with the review
and approval of the drainage plan for the project.
   B.   Conformance To Master Drainage Plan:
      1.   Applications: Individual applications for building permits shall
include lot specific drainage plans which indicate how surface runoff will be
managed in conformance with the master drainage plan. Modifications to the
design specified in the master drainage plan shall require approval by the city
engineer.
      2.   Installation: Installation of required lot drainage improvements
shall be completed and approved prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
      3.   Maintenance: Individual lot owners shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all lot drainage improvements. Nothing may be placed within
drainage easements that would diminish or reduce functionality of the drainage
system.
      4.   Notice: The developer shall notify the homebuilders and homeowners
of the required lot drainage improvements and the homeowner's obligation to
maintain such improvements in perpetuity. The method of notice shall be
approved by the city. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-26: LANDSCAPING OF CERTAIN LOTS FOR EROSION CONTROL:
The city reserves the right to require that the lots be revegetated or
stabilized upon completion of subdivision improvements or that lots be fully
landscaped prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy as part of the
requirements of the project. The purpose of this requirement is to ensure that
for certain areas in the city which have soils susceptible to severe erosion,
the erosion is controlled. The criteria to be used by the city are the size of
the lot and sizes of adjacent lots, elevation differences between lots, level
of disturbance to native soils and vegetation, the type of soils in the
project, and any other relevant factors. See Title 10, Chapter 22, Water
Efficient Landscape Standards for soil erosion requirements. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-
20-2015; amd. Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-12-27: EROSION CONTROL AND REVEGETATION:
The developer is to indicate erosion control and revegetation best management
practice (BMP) to be used for the project on the project drawings and as part
of the project descriptions included with the application. Erosion and
sedimentation control measures will be inspected prior to commencement of
construction, during construction of the subdivision, and once the subdivision
construction is complete. The engineering department will be responsible for
these inspections. Once the subdivision level construction is complete and
improvement work begins on individual lots, erosion and sedimentation control
BMP will be the responsibility of the lot owner and will be inspected prior to
any lot disturbance, during construction and once lot level construction is
complete. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-28: WET WEATHER PLAN:
The city engineer may require that land disturbance activities and erosion
control or revegetation plans be modified, if unforeseen delays occur due to
weather generated problems not considered at the time the land disturbance
permit was issued, including submission and approval of a wet weather plan.
(Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-29: DISCLOSURE WHEN A GEOLOGIC HAZARD REPORT IS REQUIRED:
   A.   Whenever a geologic hazards report is required under this chapter, the
owner of the parcel shall record a notice running with the land in a form
satisfactory to the city of North Salt Lake prior to the approval of any
development or subdivision of such parcel. Disclosure shall include signing a
disclosure and acknowledgment form provided by the city, which includes:
      1.   Notice that the parcel is located within a geologic hazards study
area as shown on the geologic hazards study area map or as otherwise defined in
this chapter; and
      2.   Notice that a geologic hazards report was prepared and is available
for public inspection in the city's files.
   B.   Where geologic hazards and related setbacks are delineated in a
subdivision, the owner shall also place additional notification on the plat
stating the above information prior to final approval of the plat. (Ord. 2015-
16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-30: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER:
The geologic hazards ordinance and sensitive lands overlay area map may be
amended as new information becomes available pursuant to procedures set forth
in this title. The provisions of this chapter do not in any way assure or imply
that areas outside the sensitive lands overlay maps boundary are free from the
possible adverse effects of geologic hazards. It is the responsibility of the
applicant's geotechnical consultants to employ outside research and data to
discover and establish the locations and boundaries of any known and potential
geologic hazards. This chapter shall not create any liability on the part of
the city of North Salt Lake, or any officer, reviewer, or employee thereof for
any damages from geologic hazards that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative requirement or decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2015-
16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-31: CHANGE OF USE:
No change in use which results in the conversion of a building or structure
from one not used for human occupancy to one that is so used shall be permitted
unless the building or structure complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-32: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
In cases of conflict between the provisions of existing zoning classifications,
building code, subdivision ordinance, or any other ordinance of the city of
North Salt Lake and the sensitive area and geologic hazards ordinance codified
in this chapter, the most restrictive provision shall apply. (Ord. 2015-16, 10-
20-2015)
10-12-33: APPENDICES:
10-12-33-1: APPENDIX A, MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SURFACE FAULT RUPTURE HAZARD
STUDIES:
1.0 Introduction.
The Wasatch Fault zone (WFZ) is a major tectonic feature in the western United
States, extending for about 230 miles from near Fayette, Utah at the south to
near Malad, Idaho at the north. Surface faulting has occurred along the WFZ in
northern Utah throughout late Pleistocene and Holocene time (Lund, 1990; Black
and others, 2003). "Surface faulting" is fault- related offset or displacement
of the ground surface that may occur in an earthquake.
The WFZ consists of a series of normal-slip fault segments with relative
movement down to the west and up to the east. Ten major fault segments are
recognized along the WFZ (Machette and others, 1992), which are believed to be
independent in regard to their potential for surface faulting. These segments
have distinct geomorphic expression and are clearly visible on aerial
photographs.
If a fault were to break the ground surface beneath a building, significant
damage could occur, perhaps resulting in injuries or loss of life. To ensure
that buildings are not sited across Holocene-age (active) faults, the city of
North Salt Lake municipal code, title 10, chapter 12: sensitive area & geologic
hazards ordinance requires a site-specific geologic investigation of property
situated within the sensitive lands overlay zone and any other areas that may
be subject to the presence of fault lines. The primary purposes of the geologic
investigation are to assess the surface fault rupture potential of the property
and to assess the suitability of the property for the proposed development from
the standpoint of surface fault rupture. If a fault is discovered and
determined (or presumed) to have moved during the Holocene-age ("active"),
appropriate building setbacks from the fault are required such that structures
are not located astride the fault trace. Building setbacks must be established
prior to development of sites located within the surface-fault-rupture special
study area.
A site-specific surface-fault-rupture-hazard study includes a field
investigation (usually involving the excavation and geologic documentation of a
trench) and report. This appendix describes the minimum standards required by
the city for surface-fault-rupture-hazard studies.
The purpose of establishing minimum standards for surface fault rupture hazard
studies is to:
      (a) Protect the health, safety, welfare, and property of the public by
minimizing the potentially adverse effects of surface fault rupture and related
hazards;
      (b) Assist property owners and land developers in conducting reasonable
and adequate studies;
      (c) Provide consulting engineering geologists with a common basis for
preparing proposals, conducting investigations, and recommending building
setbacks; and,
      (d) Provide an objective framework for review of fault study reports.
The procedures outlined herein are intended to provide the developer,
consulting engineers, geologists and geotechnical engineers with an outline of
appropriate exploration methods, standardized report information, and
expectations for the report.
These standards constitute the minimum level of effort required in conducting
surface-fault-rupture-hazard studies in the city. Considering the complexity of
evaluating surface and near-surface faults, additional effort beyond the
minimum standards may be required at some sites to adequately address the fault
hazard. The information presented herein does not relieve the engineering
geologist from his/her duty to perform additional geologic or engineering
services he/she believes are necessary to assess the fault rupture potential at
a site.
1.2 Properties Requiring A Fault Investigation.
A fault study is required, prior to approval of any land use for properties
identified in
10-12-3 of the city of North Salt Lake municipal code. Submittal and review of
a site-specific fault study prior to receiving a land use or building permit
from the city is required for said areas. It is the responsibility of the
applicant to retain a qualified professionals to perform the fault study and to
use the latest available data in preparing the required study.
In addition, a fault investigation may be required if on site or nearby fault-
related features are identified during the course of other geologic or
geotechnical studies performed on or near the site or during construction.
2.0 Minimum Standards For Fault Studies.
Following are the minimum standards for a comprehensive fault investigation.
Fault investigations may be reported in conjunction with other geological and
geotechnical investigations, or may be submitted separately. In addition to
these standards, all fault investigations, reports and recommendations shall
follow the latest adopted guidelines published by the Utah geological survey.
2.1 Scoping Meeting.
The developer's consultant must schedule a scoping meeting with the city to
evaluate the investigation approach. At this meeting, the consultant should
present a site plan that includes: proposed building locations (if known);
fault location(s) and orientation; and the proposed trench locations,
orientation, length, and depth (see section 2.3, fault investigation method).
The investigative approach should allow for flexibility due to unexpected site
conditions; field findings may require modifications to the work plan.
2.2 Fault Investigation Method.
Inherent in fault study methods is the assumption that future faulting will
recur along pre-existing faults and in a manner consistent with past
displacement. The focus of fault investigations is therefore to accurately
locate existing faults. If faults are documented, the investigation shall also
1) evaluate the age(s) of movement along the fault trace(s), and 2) estimate
amounts of past displacement(s), which is required in order to derive building
setbacks.
2.2.1 Previous Studies And Aerial Photograph Review.
A fault investigation shall include, at a minimum, a review of available
literature pertinent to the site and vicinity, including previous published and
unpublished geologic/soils reports, and interpretation of available stereo-
paired aerial photographs. The photographs reviewed should include more than
one set and should include pre-urbanization aerial photographs, if available.
Efforts must be made to accurately plot the locations of mapped or inferred
fault traces on the property as shown by previous studies in the area.
2.2.2 Exploration Methods.
Subsurface exploration consisting of trenching is required. The engineering
geologist shall clean and document ("log") trench exposures as described in
section 2.3.5. Existing faults may also be identified and mapped in the field
by direct observation of young, fault-related geomorphic features, and by
examination of aerial photographs. When trenching is not feasible (i.e., the
presence of shallow ground water, excessive thickness of fill, etc.),
supplemental methods such as closely spaced cone penetration test (CPT)
soundings may be employed. Such supplemental methods must be discussed with the
city prior to implementation and should be clearly described in the report.
In lieu of conventional trenching or the CPT method, an alternative subsurface
exploration program may be acceptable, depending upon site conditions. Such a
program may consist of a sufficient number of closely spaced downhole-logged
bucket- auger borings, geophysical exploration techniques, or a combination of
techniques.
When an alternative exploration program is proposed, a written description of
the proposed exploration program along with an exploration plan should be
submitted to the city for review, prior to the exploration. The plan must
include, at a minimum, a map of suitable scale showing the site limits, surface
geologic conditions within several thousand feet of the site boundary, the
location and type of the proposed alternative subsurface exploration, and the
anticipated earth materials present at depth on the site.
The actual subsurface exploration program to be used on any specific parcel
will be determined on an individual basis using the current state of technical
knowledge about the fault zone and information gained from previous exploration
on adjacent or nearby parcels. At all times, consideration must be given to
safety, and trenching should comply with all applicable safety regulations.
2.2.3 Trench Siting.
Exploratory trenches must be oriented approximately perpendicular to the
anticipated trend of known fault traces. The trenches shall provide the minimum
footage of trenching necessary to explore the portion of the property situated
in the surface-fault-rupture hazard study area, such that the potential for
surface fault rupture may be adequately assessed. When trenching to determine
if faults might affect a proposed building site, the trench should extend
beyond the building footprint at least the minimum setback distance for the
building type (see table A-1).
Test pits or potholes alone are neither adequate nor acceptable. In some
instances more than one trench may be required to cover the entire building
area, particularly if the proposed development involves more than one building.
Where feasible, trenches shall be located outside the proposed building
footprint, as the trench is generally backfilled without compaction, which
could lead to differential settlement beneath the footings. Supplemental
trenching may be required in order to: 1) further refine fault locations (or
the absence thereof); 2) accurately define building restriction areas, and/or;
3) provide additional exposures for evaluating the age of movement along the
faults.
2.2.4 Location Determination.
All trenches and fault locations must be surveyed by a registered professional
land surveyor. Fault locations should be surveyed with an accuracy of about 0.1
foot or better, so that structural setbacks can be developed.
2.2.5 Depth Of Excavation.
The depth of the trenches will ultimately depend on the trench location,
occurrence of ground water, stability of subsurface deposits, and the geologic
age of the subsurface geologic units. As a minimum, however, trenches shall
extend substantially below the A and B soil horizons and well into distinctly
bedded Pleistocene-age materials, if possible. Where possible, the trenches
should extend below Holocene deposits and should expose contacts between
Holocene materials and the underlying older materials.
Appropriate safety measures pertaining to trench safety for ingress, egress,
and working in or in the vicinity of the trench must be implemented and
maintained. It is the responsibility of the person in the field directing
trench excavation to ensure that fault trenches are excavated in compliance
with current occupational safety and health administration excavation safety
regulations.
Trench backfilling methods and procedures should be documented in order to
establish whether additional corrective excavation, backfilling, and compaction
should be performed at the time of site grading.
In cases where Holocene (i.e., active) faults may be present, but pre-Holocene
deposits are below the practical limit of excavation, the trenches must extend
at least through sediments that are clearly older than several fault recurrence
intervals. The practical limitations of the trenching must be acknowledged in
the report and recommendations must reflect resulting uncertainties.
2.2.6 Documenting Trench Exposures.
Trench walls shall be cleaned of debris and backhoe smear prior to
documentation. Trench logs shall be carefully drawn in the field at a minimum
scale of 1-inch equals 5-feet (1:60) following standard and accepted fault
trench investigation practices. Vertical and horizontal control must be used
and shown on trench logs. Trench logs must document all significant geologic
information from the trench and should graphically represent the geologic units
observed; see section 2.6.3(e). The strike, dip, and net vertical displacement
(s) (or minimum displacement(s)) of faults must be noted. Photographs with
appropriate scale information must be included in the trench documentation.
2.2.7 Age Dating.
The geologist shall interpret the ages of geologic units exposed in the trench.
When necessary, radiocarbon or other age determinations methods shall be used.
If evidence of faulting is documented, efforts shall be made to date the time
of latest movement (to determine whether recent (Holocene) displacement has
occurred) using appropriate geologic and/or soil stratigraphic dating
techniques. If soil stratigraphic dating techniques are used, a geologist
experienced in using the techniques and soil-development rates in the area
shall perform them.
Many of the surficial deposits within Salt Lake Valley area were deposited
during the last pluvial lake cycle, referred to as the Bonneville lake cycle.
Although late-stage Bonneville lake cycle sediments do not correspond to the
Pleistocene- Holocene boundary (i.e., Bonneville lake cycle deposits are older
than 10,000 years old), for purposes of evaluating fault activity, these
deposits provide a useful regional datum (particularly so when the entire
Holocene sequence of sediments is not present).
For practical purposes, and due to documented Holocene displacement along the
Salt Lake segment of the Wasatch fault, any fault which displaces late-stage
Bonneville lake cycle deposits should be considered active unless the
Bonneville deposits are overlain by clearly unfaulted early Holocene-age
deposits. Conversely, the presence of demonstrably unbroken, undeformed, and
stratigraphically continuous Bonneville sediments constitutes reasonable
geologic evidence for the absence of active faulting.
2.3 Field Review.
A field review by the city is required during exploratory trenching. The
applicant must provide a minimum of 48-hours notice to schedule the field
review with the city. The trenches should be open, safe, cleaned, and a
preliminary log completed at the time of the review. The field review allows
the city to evaluate the subsurface data (i.e., age, type of sediments;
presence/absence of faulting, etc.) with the consultant. Discussions about
questionable features or an appropriate setback distance are encouraged, but
the city will not help log the trench, explain the stratigraphy, or give verbal
approval of the proposed development during the field review.
2.4 Recommendations For Fault Setbacks.
To address wide discrepancies in fault setback recommendations, the city has
adopted the fault setback calculation methodology for normal faults of
Christenson and others (2003). The consultant should use this method to
establish the recommended fault setback for critical facilities and structures
designed for human occupancy. If another fault setback method is used, the
consultant must provide justification in the report for the method used. Faults
and fault setbacks must be clearly identified on site plans and maps.
Minimum setbacks are based on the type and occupancy of the proposed structures
(see table A-1). A setback should be calculated using the formulas presented
below, and then compared to the minimum setback established in table A-1. The
greater of the two shall be used as the setback. Minimum setbacks apply to both
the hanging wall and footwall blocks.
Top of slope and/or toe of slope setbacks required by the local building code
must also be considered; again, the greater setback must be used.
Downthrown Fault Block (Hanging Wall)
The fault setback for the downthrown block will be calculated using the
following formula: S = U (2D + F/tan.) where:
 
S    = Setback within which structures for human occupancy are not permitted
U    = Criticality factor, based on the proposed occupancy of the structure
       (see table A-1)
D    = Expected fault displacement per event (assumed to be equal to the net
       vertical displacement measured for each past event)
F    = Maximum depth of footing or subgrade portion of the building
tan. = Dip of the fault (degrees)
 
Upthrown Fault Block (Footwall)
The dip of the fault and depth of the subgrade portion of the structure are
irrelevant in calculating the setback on the upthrown fault block. Therefore,
the setback for the upthrown side of the fault will be calculated as:
S = U x 2D
The setback is measured from the portion of the building closest to the fault,
whether subgrade or above grade. Minimum setbacks apply as discussed above.
2.5 Small Displacement Faults.
Small-displacement faults are not categorically exempt from setback
requirements. Some faults having less than 4 inches (100 mm) of displacement
("small displacement faults") may be exempt from setback requirements.
Specific structural risk-reduction options such as foundation reinforcement may
be acceptable for some small-displacement faults in lieu of setbacks.
Structural options must minimize structural damage.
Fault studies must still identify faults and fault displacements (both net
vertical displacements and horizontal extension across the fault or fault
zone), and consider the possibility that future displacement amounts may exceed
past amounts. If structural risk-reduction measures are proposed for small
displacement faults, the following criteria must be addressed:
      (a) Reasonable geologic data indicating that future surface displacement
along the particular fault will not exceed 4 inches.
      (b) Specific structural mitigation to minimize structural damage.
      (c) A structural engineer must provide appropriate designs and the city
shall review the designs.
2.6 Required Outline For Surface Fault Rupture Hazard Studies.
The information described herein may be presented as a separate surface-fault-
rupture-potential report or it may be incorporated within other geology or
engineering reports that may be required for the property.
The report shall contain a conclusion regarding the potential risk of surface
fault rupture on the subject property and a statement addressing the
suitability of the proposed development from a surface-fault-rupture-hazard
perspective. If exploration determines that there is a potential for surface
rupture due to faulting, or if gradational contacts or other uncertainties
associated with the exploration methods preclude the determination of absence
of small fault offsets, the report should provide estimates of the amplitude of
fault offsets that might affect habitable structures.
Surface-fault-rupture-hazard reports submitted to the city are expected to
follow the outline and address the subjects presented below. However,
variations in site conditions may require that additional items be addressed,
or permit some of the subjects to be omitted (except as noted).
2.6.1 Report.
      (a) Purpose And Scope Of Work: The report shall contain a clear and
concise statement of the purpose of the investigation and the scope of work
performed for the investigation.
      (b) Geologic And Tectonic Setting: The report shall contain a clear and
concise statement of the general geologic and tectonic setting of the site
vicinity. The section should include a discussion of active faults in the area,
paleoseismicity of the relevant fault system(s), and should reference relevant
published and unpublished geologic literature.
      (c) Site Description And Conditions: The report shall include information
on geologic units, graded and filled areas, vegetation, existing structures,
and other factors that may affect site development, choice of investigative
methods, and the interpretation of data.
      (d) Methods Of Investigation:
         (1)   Review of published and unpublished maps, literature and records
concerning geologic units, faults, surface and ground water, and other factors.
         (2)   Stereoscopic interpretation of aerial photographs to detect
fault-related topography, vegetation or soil contrasts, and other lineaments of
possible fault origin. Reference the photograph source, date, flightline
numbers, roll, frame numbers and scale.
         (3)   Observations of surface features, both on-site and off site,
including mapping of geologic and soil units; geomorphic features such as
scarps, springs, and seeps (aligned or not); faceted spurs, offset ridges or
drainages; and geologic structures. Locations and relative ages of other
possible earthquake-induced features such as sand blows, lateral spreads,
liquefaction, and ground settlement should be mapped and described. Slope
failures, although they may not be conclusively tied to earthquake causes,
should also be noted.
         (4)   Subsurface investigations: The report shall include a
description of the program of subsurface exploration, including trench logs,
purpose of trench locations, and a summary of trenching or other detailed,
direct observation of continuously exposed geologic units, soils, and geologic
structures. All trench logs shall be at a scale of at least 1-inch equals five-
feet.
The report must describe the criteria used to evaluate the ages of the deposits
encountered in the trench, and clearly evaluate the presence or absence of
active (Holocene) faulting.
      (e) Conclusions: Conclusions must be supported by adequate data and shall
contain, at a minimum:
         (1)   Summary of data upon which conclusions are based.
         (2)   Location of active faults, including orientation and geometry of
faults, amount of net slip along faults, anticipated future offset, and
delineation of setback areas.
         (3)   Degree of confidence in and limitations of data and conclusions.
      (f) Recommendations: Recommendations must be supported by adequate
geologic data and appropriate reasoning behind each statement. Minimum
recommendations shall include:
         (1)   Recommended setback distances per section 2.5. Supporting
calculations must be included. Faults and setbacks must be shown on site maps
and final recorded plat maps.
         (2)   Other recommended building restrictions or use limitations
(i.e., placement of detached garages, swimming pools, or other non-habitable
structures).
         (3)   Need for additional or future studies to confirm buildings are
not sited across active faults, such as inspection of building footing or
foundation excavations.
         (4)   An inspection of the foundation excavation shall be performed to
confirm the lack of faulting at the building site.
2.6.2 Report References.
Reports must include citations of literature and records used in the study,
referenced aerial photographs or images interpreted (air-photo source, date and
flight number, scale), and any other sources of data and information, including
well logs, personal communications, etc.
2.6.3 Illustrations.
At a minimum, reports must include the following illustrations:
      (a) Location Map: A site location map depicting topographic and
geographic features and other pertinent data. Generally a 1:24,000-scale USGS
topographic base map will suffice.
      (b) Geologic Map: A regional-scale map (1:24,000 to 1:50,000 scale) is
generally adequate. Depending on site complexity, a site-scale geologic map (1
inch = 200 ft or more detailed) may also be necessary. The map should show
Quaternary and bedrock geologic units, faults, seeps or springs, soil or
bedrock slumps, and other geologic and soil features existing on and adjacent
to the project site. Geologic cross-sections may be included as needed to
illustrate 3-dimensional relationships.
      (c) Site Plan: A detailed site plan is required. The site plan should be
at a scale of at least 1 inch = 200 feet (or more detailed) and should clearly
show site boundaries, proposed building footprints, existing structures,
streets, slopes, drainages, exploratory trenches, boreholes, test pits,
geophysical traverses, and any other pertinent data.
      (d) Site Specific Fault Map: If faulting is documented at a parcel, the
report shall include a site-specific fault map. The fault map should be at a
scale of at least 1 inch = 200 feet and should clearly show the surveyed
locations of trenches (and any other exploratory techniques), surveyed location
(s) of faults documented in the trenches, inferred location of the faults
between trenches, recommended fault setback distance on each side of the
faults, topographic contours, and proposed building locations, if known.
      (e) Exploratory Trench Logs: Trench logs are required for each trench
excavated as part of the study. Trench logs shall accurately depict all
observed geologic features and conditions. Trench logs shall not be generalized
or diagrammatic. The minimum scale is 1 inch = 5 feet (1:60) with no vertical
exaggeration. Trench logs must accurately reflect the features observed in the
trench (see section 2.3.6).
Trench logs shall include: trench orientation and indication of which trench
wall was logged; trench top and bottom; stratigraphic contacts; stratigraphic
unit descriptions including lithology, USGS soil classification, genesis
(geologic origin), age, and contact descriptions; soil (pedogenic) horizons;
marker beds; and deformation or offset of sediments, faults, and fissures.
Other features of tectonic significance such as buried scarp free-faces,
colluvial wedges, in-filled soil cracks, drag folds, rotated clasts,
lineations, and liquefaction features including dikes, sand blows, etc. should
also be shown. Interpretations of the age and origin of the deposits and any
faulting or deformation must be included, based on depositional sequence. Fault
orientation and geometry (strike and dip), and amount of net displacement must
be measured and noted.
      (f) Exploratory Boreholes And CPT Soundings: Should boreholes or CPT
soundings be utilized as part of the investigation, reports shall include the
logs of the borings/soundings. Borehole logs must include lithology
descriptions, interpretations of geologic origin, USGS soil classification or
other standardized engineering soil classification (include an explanation of
the classification scheme), sample intervals, penetrative resistance values,
static ground-water depths and dates measured, total depth of borehole, and
identity of the person logging the borehole. Electronic copies of CPT data
files should be provided to the city's reviewer, upon request.
      (g) Geophysical Data: All geophysical data, showing stratigraphic
interpretations and fault locations, must be included in the report, along with
correlations to trench or borehole logs to confirm interpretations.
      (h) Photographs: Photographs of scarps, trench walls, or other features
that enhance understanding of site conditions and fault-related conditions
shall be included. Composited, rectified digital photographs of trench walls
may be used as background for trench logs, but features as outlined in section
(e) above must still be delineated.
TABLE A-1
SETBACK RECOMMENDATIONS AND CRITICALITY FACTORS (U) FOR IBC OCCUPANCY CLASSES
(International Code Council, 2003)
Class (IBC) Occupancy Group Criticality U Minimum Setback
Class (IBC) Occupancy Group                   Criticality U   Minimum Setback
A           Assembly                          2           2.0 25 feet
B           Business                          2           2.0 20 feet
E           Educational                       1           3.0 50 feet
F           Factory/industrial                2           2.0 20 feet
H           High hazard                       1           3.0 50 feet
I           Institutional                     1           3.0 50 feet
M           Mercantile                        2           2.0 20 feet
R           Residential (R-1, R-2, R-4)       2           2.0 20 feet
R-3         Residential (R-3, includes single 3           1.5 15 feet
            family homes)
S           Storage                           -           1   0
U           Utility and misc.                 -           1   0
            Table A-2                         1           3.0 50 feet
 
TABLE A-2
ADDITIONAL STRUCTURES REQUIRING GEOLOGIC INVESTIGATION
Buildings and other structures that represent a substantial hazard to human
life in the event of failure, but not limited to:
      1.   Buildings and other structures where more than 300 people congregate
in one area.
      2.   Buildings and other structures with elementary school, secondary
school or day care facilities with occupancy greater than 250.
      3.   Buildings and other structures with occupancy greater than 500 for
colleges or adult education facilities.
      4.   Health care facilities with occupancy greater than 50 or more
resident patients but not having surgery or emergency treatment facilities.
      5.   Jails and detention facilities.
      6.   Any other occupancy with occupancy greater than 1000.
      7.   Power generating stations, water treatment or storage for potable
water, waste water treatment facilities and other public utility facilities.
      8.   Buildings and other structures containing sufficient quantities of
toxic or explosive substances to be dangerous to the public if released.
Buildings and other structures designed as essential facilities including, but
not limited to:
      1.   Hospitals and other care facilities having surgery or emergency
treatment facilities.
      2.   Fire, rescue and police stations and emergency vehicle garages and
fueling facilities.
      3.   Designated emergency shelters.
      4.   Designated emergency preparedness, communications, and operation
centers and other facilities required for emergency response.
      5.   Power-generating stations and other public utility facilities
required as emergency backup facilities for facilities and structures included
in this table.
      6.   Structures containing highly toxic materials as defined by the most
recently adopted version of the IBC where the quantity of the material exceeds
the maximum allowable quantities defined by the most recently adopted version
of the IBC.
      7.   Aviation control towers, air traffic centers and emergency aircraft
hangars.
      8.   Buildings and other structures having critical national defense
functions.
      9.   Water treatment and storage facilities required to maintain water
pressure for fire suppression.
(Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-33-2: APPENDIX B, MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SLOPE STABILITY ANALYSIS:
1.0 Introduction.
The procedures outlined herein are intended to provide consultants with a
general outline for performing quantitative slope stability analyses and to
clarify the expectations of the city of North Salt Lake. These standards
constitute the minimum level of effort required in conducting quantitative
slope stability analyses in the city of North Salt Lake. Considering the
complexity inherent in performing slope stability analyses, additional effort
beyond the minimum standards presented herein may be required at some sites to
adequately address slope stability. The information presented herein does not
relieve consultants of their duty to perform additional geologic or engineering
analyses they believe are necessary to assess the stability of slopes at a
site.
The evaluation of landslides generally requires quantitative slope stability
analyses. Therefore, the standards presented herein are directly applicable to
landslide investigations, and also constitute the minimum level of effort when
performing landslide investigations.
The purposes for establishing minimum standards for slope stability analyses
are to:
      (a) Protect the health, safety, welfare, and property of the public by
minimizing the potentially adverse effects of unstable slopes and related
hazards;
      (b) Assist property owners and land developers in conducting reasonable
and adequate studies;
      (c) Provide consulting geologists and geotechnical engineers with a
common basis for preparing proposals, conducting investigations, and
mitigation; and,
      (d) Provide an objective framework for regulatory review of slope
stability reports.
1.2 Areas Requiring Slope Stability Analyses.
Slope stability analyses shall be performed for all sites located within the
sensitive lands overlay zone and for all slopes that may be affected by the
proposed development which meet the following criteria:
      (a) Cut and/or fill slopes steeper than about 2 horizontal (h) to 1
vertical (v).
      (b) Natural slopes steeper than or equal to 3 horizontal (h) to 1
vertical (v).
      (c) Natural and cut slopes with potentially adverse geologic conditions
(e.g., bedding, foliation, or other structural features that are potentially
adverse to the stability of the slope).
      (d) Natural and cut slopes which include a geologic hazard such as a
landslide, irrespective of the slope height or slope gradient.
      (e) Buttresses and stability fills.
      (f) Cut, fill, or natural slopes of water-retention basins or flood-
control channels.
      (g) In hillside areas, investigations shall address the potential for
surficial instability, debris/mudflows, rock falls, and soil creep on all
slopes that may affect the proposed development or be affected by the proposed
development.
      (h) When evaluating site conditions to determine the need for slope
stability analyses, off-property conditions shall be considered (both up-slope
to the top(s) of adjacent ascending slopes and down-slope to and beyond the toe
(s) of adjacent descending slopes). Also, the consultant shall demonstrate that
the proposed hillside development will not affect adjacent sites or limit
adjacent property owners' ability to develop their sites.
1.3 Roles Of Geologist And Engineering Consultant.
The investigation of the static and seismic stability of slopes is an
interdisciplinary practice. To provide greater assurance that the hazards are
properly identified, assessed, and mitigated, involvement of both a geologist
and geotechnical engineer is required. Analyses shall be performed only by or
under the direct supervision of licensed professionals, qualified and competent
in their respective area of practice. A geologist shall provide appropriate
input to the geotechnical engineer with respect to the potential impact of the
geology, stratigraphy, and hydrologic conditions on the stability of the slope.
The shear strength and other geotechnical earth material properties shall be
evaluated by the geotechnical engineer. Qualified geologists, geological
engineers and geotechnical engineers may assess and quantitatively evaluate
slope stability. However, the geotechnical engineer shall perform all design
stability calculations. Ground motion parameters for use in seismic stability
analysis may be provided by either an engineering geologist or geotechnical
engineer.
1.4 Minimum Qualifications Of The Licensed Professional.
Slope stability analyses must be performed by qualified geologists and
qualified geotechnical engineers (see sections
10-12-5 and
10-12-6 of the city of North Salt Lake municipal code).
2.0 General Requirements.
Except for the derivation of the input ground motion for pseudostatic and
seismic deformation analyses (see section 12), slope stability analyses and
evaluations should be performed in general accordance with the latest version
of Recommended Procedures For Implementation Of DMG Special Publication 117,
Guidelines For Analyzing And Mitigating Landslide Hazards In California (Blake
et al., 2002). In addition to these standards, all slope stability analyses,
reports and recommendations shall follow the latest adopted guidelines
published by the Utah geological survey. Procedures for developing input ground
motions to be used in the city of North Salt Lake are described in section
12.1. See title 10, chapter 12 of the city of North Salt Lake municipal code,
sensitive area district & geologic hazards ordinance, for supplemental
requirements.
3.0 Submittals.
Submittals for review shall include boring logs; geologic cross sections;
trench and test pit logs; laboratory data (particularly shear strength test
results, including individual stress-deformation plots from direct shear
tests); discussions pertaining to how idealized subsurface conditions and shear
strength parameters used for analyses were developed; analytical results,
including computer output files (if requested); and summaries of the slope
stability analyses and conclusions regarding slope stability.
Subsurface geologic and groundwater conditions must be illustrated on geologic
cross sections and must be utilized by the geotechnical engineer for the slope
stability analyses. If on-site sewage or storm water disposal exists or is
proposed, the slope stability analyses shall include the effects of the
effluent plume on slope stability.
The results of any slope stability analyses must be submitted with pertinent
backup documentation (i.e., calculations, computer output, etc.). Printouts of
input data, output data (if requested), and graphical plots must be submitted
for each computer-aided slope stability analysis. In addition, data files,
recorded on diskettes, CDs, or other electronic media may be requested to
facilitate the city's review.
4.0 Factors Of Safety.
The minimum acceptable static factor of safety is 1.5 for both gross and
surficial slope stability. The minimum acceptable factor of safety for a
calibrated pseudostatic analysis is 1.0 using the method of Stewart and others
(2003) (see section 12.2).
5.0 Landslides.
The evaluation of landslides generally requires quantitative slope stability
analyses. Therefore, the standards presented herein are directly applicable to
landslide investigation, and also constitute the minimum level of effort when
performing landslide investigations. Evaluation of landslides shall be
performed in the preliminary phase of hillside developments. Where landslides
are present or suspected, sufficient subsurface exploration will be required to
determine the basic geometry and stability of the landslide mass and the
required stabilization measures. The depth of geologic exploration shall
consider the regional geologic structure, the likely failure mode of the
suspected failure, and past geomorphic conditions.
6.0 Site Investigation And Geologic Studies.
Adequate evaluation of slope stability for a given site requires thorough and
comprehensive geologic and geotechnical engineering studies. These studies are
a crucial component in the evaluation of slope stability. Geologic mapping and
subsurface exploration are normal parts of field investigation. Samples of
earth materials are routinely obtained during subsurface exploration for
geotechnical testing in the laboratory to determine the shear strength
parameters and other pertinent engineering properties.
In general, geologic studies for slope stability consist of the following
fundamental phases:
      (a) Study and review of published and unpublished geologic information
(both regional and site specific).
      (b) Review and interpretation of available stereoscopic and oblique
aerial photographs, DEMs, and LiDAR.
      (c) Geologic field mapping, including, but not necessarily limited to,
measurement of bedding, foliation, fracture, and fault attitudes and other
parameters.
      (d) Documentation and evaluation of subsurface groundwater conditions
(including effects of seasonal and longer-term natural fluctuations as well as
landscape irrigation), surface water, on-site sewage disposal, and/or storm
water disposal.
      (e) Subsurface exploration.
      (f) Analysis of the geologic failure mechanisms that could occur at the
site (e.g., mode of failure and construction of the critical geologic cross
sections).
      (g) Presentation and analysis of the data, including an evaluation of the
potential impact of geologic conditions on the project.
      (h) Installation of piezometers in all borings to define the depth to
groundwater. The groundwater regime shall be defined geologically.
Geologic/geotechnical reports shall demonstrate that each of these phases has
been adequately performed and that the information obtained has been considered
and logically evaluated for quality and applicability to the study. Minimum
criteria for the performance of each phase are described and discussed in Blake
and others (2002).
7.0 Subsurface Exploration.
The purpose of subsurface exploration is to identify potentially significant
geologic materials, structures and hydrologic conditions at a site and to
provide samples for detailed laboratory characterization of materials from
potentially critical zones. Subsurface exploration is almost always required
and may be performed by a number of widely known techniques such as bucket-
auger borings, conventional small-diameter borings, cone penetration testing
(CPT), test pits, trenches, and/or geophysical techniques (see section 4.2 of
Blake et al., 2002). A discussion of the applicability of some subsurface
exploration techniques follows.
7.1 Trenching.
Subsurface exploration consisting of trenching has proven, in some cases, to be
necessary when uncertainty exists regarding whether or not a particular
landform is a landslide. Care must be exercised with this exploration method
because landslides characteristically contain relatively large blocks of intact
geologic units, which in a trench exposure could give the false impression that
the geologic unit is "in-place." Although limited to a depth of about 15 feet
below existing grades, trenching has also proven to be a useful technique for
verifying margins of landslides, although the geometry of a landslide can
generally be readily determined from evaluation of stereoscopic aerial
photographs. Once a landslide is identified, conventional subsurface
exploration drilling techniques will be required (see section 7.2 and 7.3).
Slope stability analyses based solely on data obtained from trenches will not
be accepted.
7.2 Methods For Bedded Formations.
Conventional subsurface exploration techniques involving continuous core
drilling with an oriented core barrel, test pits, and deep bucket-auger borings
may be used to assess the subsurface soil and geologic conditions, particularly
for geologic units with inclined bedding that includes weak layers.
Particular attention must be paid to the presence or absence of weak layers
(e.g., clay, claystone, silt, shale, or siltstone units) during the
exploration. Unless adequately demonstrated (through comprehensive and detailed
subsurface exploration) that weak (clay, claystone, silt, shale, or siltstone)
layers (even as thin as 1/16-inch or less) are not present, a weak layer shall
be assumed to possibly occur anywhere in the stratigraphic profile (i.e.,
ubiquitous weak clay beds).
The depth of the subsurface exploration must be sufficient to assess the
conditions at or below the level of the deepest potential failure surface
possessing a factor of 1.5 or less. A preliminary slope stability analysis may
need to be performed to assist in the planning of the subsurface exploration
program.
7.3 Other Geologic Units.
For alluvium, fill materials, or other soil units that do not contain weak
interbeds, other exploration methods such as small-diameter borings (e.g.,
rotary wash or hollow-stem- auger) or cone penetration testing may be suitable.
8.0 Soil Parameters.
Soil properties, including unit weight and shear strength parameters (cohesion
and friction angle), may be based on conventional field and laboratory tests as
well as on field performance. Where appropriate (i.e., for landslide slip
surfaces, along bedding planes, for surficial stability analyses, etc.),
laboratory tests for saturated, residual shear strengths must be performed.
Estimation of the shear resistance along bedding (or landslide) planes normally
requires an evaluation of saturated residual along-bedding- strength values of
the weakest interbedded (or slide-plane) material encountered during the
subsurface exploration, or in the absence of sufficient exploration, the
weakest material that may be present, consistent with site geologic conditions.
Strength parameters derived solely from CPT data may not be appropriate for
slope-stability analysis in some cases, particularly for strengths along
existing slip surfaces where residual strengths have developed. Additional
guidance on the selection of strength parameters for slope stability analyses
is contained in Blake et al. (2002).
8.1 Residual Shear Strength Parameters.
Residual strength parameters may be determined using the direct shear or ring
shear testing apparatus; however ring shear tests are preferred. If performed
properly, direct shear test results may approach ring-shear test results. The
soil specimen must be subjected to a sufficient amount of deformation (e.g., a
significant number of shearing cycles in the direct shear test or a significant
amount of rotation in the ring shear test) to assure that residual strength has
been developed. In the direct-shear and ring-shear tests, stress- deformation
curves can be used to determine when a sufficient number of cycles of shearing
have been performed by showing that no further significant drop in shear
strength results with the addition of more cycles or more rotation. The stress-
deformation curves obtained during the shear tests must be submitted with the
other laboratory test results. It shall be recognized that for most clayey
soils, the residual shear strength envelope is curved and passes through the
origin (i.e., at zero normal stress there is zero shear strength). Any
"apparent shear strength" increases resulting from a non- horizontal shear
surface (i.e., ramping) or "bulldozing" in residual direct shear tests shall be
discounted in the interpretation of the strength parameters.
8.2 Interpretation.
The consultant will need to use considerable judgment in the selection of
appropriate shear test methods and in the interpretation of the results to
develop shear strength parameters commensurate with slope stability conditions
to be evaluated. Scatter plots of shear strength data may need to be presented
to allow for assessment of idealized parameters. The report shall summarize
shear strength parameters used for slope stability analyses and describe the
methodology used to interpret test results and estimate those parameters.
Peak shear strengths may be used to represent across-bedding failure surfaces
or compacted fill, in situations where strength degradations are not expected
to occur (see guidelines in Blake et al., 2002). Where peak strengths cannot be
relied upon, fully softened (or lower) strengths shall be used.
Ultimate shear strength parameters shall be used in static slope stability
analyses when there has not been past deformation. Residual shear strength
parameters shall be used in static slope stability analyses when there has been
past deformation.
Averaged strength parameters may be appropriate for some across-bedding
conditions, if sufficient representative samples have been carefully tested.
Analyses for along-bedding or along-existing-landslide slip surfaces shall be
based on lower-bound interpretations of residual shear strength parameters and
comparison of those results to correlations, such as those of Stark and others
(2005).
8.3 Default Soil Parameters.
Failure surfaces for known landslides commonly occur within Tertiary volcanics.
Those failure surfaces typically are along clay layers formed by the in situ
alteration of volcanic tuff deposits. In cases when the failure surface has
been sampled and tested, relatively low residual-shear-strength values have
been obtained; these values are cohesion equal to 0 psf and a friction angles
equal to 11 to 12 degrees.
To assist in understanding shear strengths of these materials, the following
shear strength parameters for landslide failure surfaces and along weak layers
within the Tertiary volcanics shall be used; cohesion equal to 0 psf and a
friction angle equal to 11 degrees, unless otherwise demonstrated. Similar
values have been reported from the Springhill landslide in North Salt Lake that
is in a similar tuffaceous volcanic formation of Tertiary age. If site-specific
testing produces lower residual shear strength than these values, the site-
specific test results should be used. If site-specific testing produces higher
values, documentation must be provided to demonstrate that the weakest
materials were retrieved and tested and that the materials retrieved truly
represent the basal landslide slip surface.
9.0 Soil Creep.
The potential effects of soil creep shall be addressed where any proposed
structure is planned in close proximity to an existing fill slope or natural
slope. The potential effects on the proposed development shall be evaluated and
mitigation measures proposed, including appropriate setback recommendations.
Setback recommendations shall consider the potential effects of creep forces.
All reports in hillside areas shall address the potential for surficial
instability, and soil creep on all slopes that may affect the proposed
development or be affected by the proposed development. Stability of slopes
along planned or existing access roads shall be addressed.
10.0 Gross Static Stability.
Gross stability includes rotational and translational deep- seated failures of
slopes or portions of slopes existing within or outside of but potentially
affecting the proposed development. The following guidelines, in addition to
those in the Blake and others (2002) document, shall be followed when
evaluating slope stability:
      (a) Stability shall be analyzed along cross sections depicting the most
adverse conditions (e.g., highest slope, most adverse bedding planes,
shallowest likely ground water table, and steepest slope). Often analyses are
required for different conditions and for more than one cross section to
demonstrate which condition is most adverse. When evaluating the stability of
an existing landslide, analyses must also address the potential for partial
reactivation. Inclinometers may be used to help determine critical failure
surfaces and, along with high-resolution GPS, the state of activity of existing
landslides. The critical failure surfaces on each cross- section shall be
identified, evaluated, and plotted on the large-scale cross section.
      (b) If the long-term, static factor of safety is less than 1.5,
mitigation measures will be required to bring the factor of safety up to the
required level or the project may be redesigned to achieve a minimum factor of
safety of 1.5.
      (c) The temporary stability of excavations shall be evaluated and
mitigation measures shall be recommended as necessary to obtain a minimum
factor of safety of 1.3.
      (d) Long-term stability shall be analyzed using the highest known or
anticipated groundwater level based upon a groundwater assessment performed
under the requirements of section 6.0.
      (e) Where back-calculation is appropriate, shear strengths utilized for
design shall be no higher than the lowest strength computed using back
calculation. If a consultant proposes to use shear strengths higher than the
lowest back- calculated value, justification shall be required. Assumptions
used in back-calculations regarding pre-sliding topography and groundwater
conditions at failure must be discussed and justified.
      (f) Reports shall describe how the shear strength testing methods used
are appropriate in modeling field conditions and long-term performance of the
subject slope. The utilized design shear strength values shall be justified
with laboratory test data and geologic descriptions and history, along with
past performance history, if available, of similar materials.
      (g) Reports shall include shear strength test plots consisting of normal
stress versus shear resistance (failure envelope). Plots of shear resistance
versus displacement shall be provided for all residual and fully softened
(ultimate) shear tests.
      (h) The degree of saturation for all test specimens shall be reported.
Direct shear tests on partially saturated samples may grossly overestimate the
cohesion that can be mobilized when the material becomes saturated in the
field. This potential shall be considered when selecting shear strength
parameters. If the rate of shear displacement exceeds 0.005 inches per minute,
the consultant shall provide data to demonstrate that the rate is sufficiently
slow for drained conditions.
      (i) Shear strength values higher than those obtained through site-
specific laboratory tests generally will not be accepted.
      (j) If direct shear or triaxial shear testing is not appropriate to model
the strength of highly jointed and fractured rock masses, the design strengths
shall be evaluated in a manner that considers overall rock mass quality and be
consistent with rock mechanics practice.
      (k) Shear strengths used in slope stability analyses shall be evaluated
considering the natural variability of engineering characteristics inherent in
earth materials. Multiple shear tests on each site material are likely to be
required.
      (l) Direct shear tests do not always provide realistic strength values
(Watry and Lade, 2000). Correlations between liquid limit, percent clay
fraction, and strength (fully softened and residual) with published data (e.g.,
Stark and McCone, 2002) shall be performed to verify tested shear strength
parameters. Strength values used in analyses that exceed those obtained by the
correlation must be appropriately justified.
      (m) Shear strengths for proposed fill slopes shall be evaluated using
samples mixed and remolded to represent anticipated field conditions.
Confirming strength testing may be required during grading.
      (n) Where bedding planes are laterally unsupported on slopes, potential
failures along the unsupported bedding planes shall be analyzed. Similarly,
stability analyses shall be performed where bedding planes form a dip-slope or
near-dip-slope using composite potential failure surfaces that consist of
potential slip surfaces along bedding planes in the upper portions of the slope
in combination with slip surfaces across bedding planes in the lower portions
of the slope.
      (o) The stability analysis shall include the effect of expected maximum
moisture conditions on soil unit weight.
      (p) For effective stress analyses, measured groundwater conditions must
be adjusted to consider likely unfavorable conditions with respect to
anticipated future groundwater levels, seepage, or pore pressure and included
in the slope stability analyses.
      (q) Tension crack development shall be considered in the analyses of
potential failure surfaces. The height and location of the tension crack shall
be determined by searching.
      (r) Anticipated surcharge loads as well as external boundary pressures
from water shall be included in the slope stability evaluations, as deemed
appropriate.
      (s) Analytical chart solutions may be used provided they were developed
for conditions similar to those being analyzed. Generally though, computer-
aided searching techniques shall be used, so that the potential failure surface
with the lowest factor of safety can be located. Examples of typical searching
techniques are illustrated on figures 9.1a through 9.1f in Blake and others
(2002). However, verification of the reasonableness of the analytical results
is the responsibility of the geotechnical engineer and/or engineering
geologist.
      (t) The critical potential failure surface used in the analysis may be
composed of circles, wedges, planes, or other shapes considered to yield the
minimum factor of safety most appropriate for the geologic site conditions. The
critical potential failure surface having the lowest factor of safety with
respect to shearing resistance must be sought. Both the lowest factor of safety
and the critical failure surface shall be documented.
11.0 Surficial Stability Of Slopes.
Surficial slope stability refers to slumping and sliding of near-surface
sediments and is most critical during the snowmelt and rainy season or when
excessive landscape water is applied. The assessment of surficial slope
stability shall be based on analysis procedures for stability of an infinite
slope with seepage parallel to the slope surface or an alternate failure mode
that would produce the minimum factor of safety. The minimum acceptable depth
of saturation for surficial stability evaluation shall be four feet.
11.1 Applicability And Procedures.
Conclusions shall be substantiated with appropriate data and analyses. Residual
shear strengths comparable to actual field conditions shall be used in
completing surficial stability analyses. Surficial stability analyses shall be
performed under rapid draw-down conditions where appropriate (e.g., for debris
and detention basins).
Where 2:1 or steeper slopes have soil conditions that can result in the
development of an infinite slope with parallel seepage, calculations shall be
performed to demonstrate that the slope has a minimum static factor of safety
of 1.5, assuming a fully saturated 4-foot thickness. If conditions will not
allow the development of a slope with parallel seepage, surficial slope
stability analyses may not be required (provided the geologic/geotechnical
reviewer concurs).
Surficial slope stability analyses shall be performed for fill, cut, and
natural slopes assuming an infinite slope with seepage parallel to the slope
surface or other failure mode that would yield the minimum factor of safety
against failure. A suggested procedure for evaluating surficial slope stability
is presented in Blake et al. (2002).
11.2 Soil Properties.
Soil properties used in surficial stability analyses shall be determined as
noted in section 8.1. Residual shear strength parameters for surficial slope
stability analyses shall be developed for a stress range that is consistent
with the near- surface conditions being modeled. As indicated in section 8.1,
it shall be recognized that for most clayey soils, the residual shear strength
envelope is curved and passes through the origin (i.e., at zero normal stress
there is zero shear strength). For sites with deep slip surfaces, the
guidelines given by Blake and others (2002) should be followed.
11.3 Seepage Conditions.
The minimum acceptable vertical depth for which seepage parallel to the slope
shall be applied is four feet for cut or fill slopes. Greater depths may be
necessary when analyzing natural slopes that have significant thicknesses of
loose surficial material.
12.0 Seismic Slope Stability.
In addition to static slope stability analyses, slopes shall be evaluated for
seismic slope stability as well. Acceptable methods for evaluating seismic
slope stability using calibrated pseudo-static limit-equilibrium procedures and
simplified methods (e.g., those based on Newmark, 1965) to estimate permanent
seismic slope movements are summarized in Blake and others (2002) also Bray,
J.D. and Travasarou, T. (2007) "Simplified Procedure For Estimating Earthquake
Induced Deviatoric Slope Displacements" Journal Of Geotechnical And
Geoenvironmental Engineering, April 2007, vol. 133, no. 4, pp. 381-392.
Nonlinear, dynamic finite element/finite difference numerical methods also may
be used to evaluate slope movements resulting from seismic events as long as
the procedures, input data, and results are thoroughly documented, and deemed
acceptable by the city.
12.1 Ground Motion For Pseudostatic And Seismic Deformation Analyses.
In regards to defining ground accelerations for seismic slope- stability
analyses, the city of North Salt Lake prefers a probabilistic approach to
determining the likelihood that different levels of ground motion will be
exceeded at a particular site within a given time period. In order to more
closely represent the seismic characteristics of the WFZ and better capture
this possible high likelihood of a surface- faulting earthquake, design ground
motion parameters for seismic slope stability analyses shall be based on the
peak accelerations with a 3.5 percent probability in 50 years (1,400-year
recurrence interval). Peak bedrock ground motions can be readily obtained via
the internet from the United States geological survey (USGS) national seismic
hazard maps, data and documentation web page (USGS, 2002), which is based on
Frankel and others (2002). PGAs obtained from the USGS (2002) web page should
be adjusted for effects of soil/rock (site-class) conditions in accordance with
Seed and others (2001). Site specific response analysis may also be used to
develop PGA values as long as the procedures, input data, and results are
thoroughly documented, and deemed acceptable by the city.
12.2 Pseudo-Static Evaluations.
Pseudo-static methods for evaluating seismic slope stability are acceptable as
long as minimum factors of safety are satisfied, and due consideration is given
in the selection of the seismic coefficient, kh, reduction in material shear
strengths, and the factor of safety for pseudo-static conditions.
Pseudo-static seismic slope stability analyses can be performed using the
"screening analysis" procedure described in Blake et al. (2002). For that
procedure a kh-value is selected from seismic source characteristics (modal
magnitude, modal distance, and firm rock peak ground acceleration) and an
acceptable level of deformation (5 cm) is specified. For that procedure, a
factor of safety of 1.0 or greater is considered acceptable; otherwise, an
analysis of permanent seismic slope deformation shall be performed.
12.3 Permanent Seismic Slope Deformation.
For seismic slope stability analyses, estimates of permanent seismic
displacement are preferred and may be performed using the procedures outlined
in Blake and others (2002). It should be noted that Bray and Rathje (1998),
referenced in Blake and others (2002), has been updated and superseded by Bray
and Travasarou (2007), which is the city's currently preferred method. For
those analyses, calculated seismic displacements shall be 5 cm or less, or
mitigation measures shall be proposed to limit calculated displacements to 5 cm
or less.
For specific projects, different levels of tolerable displacement may be
possible, but site-specific conditions, which shall include the following, must
be considered:
      (a) The extent to which the displacements are localized or broadly
distributed - broadly distributed shear deformations would generally be less
damaging and more displacement could be allowed.
      (b) The displacement tolerance of the foundation system - stiff, well-
reinforced foundations with lateral continuity of vertical support elements
would be more resistant to damage (and hence could potentially tolerate larger
displacements) than typical slabs-on-grade or foundation systems with
individual spread footings.
      (c) The potential of the foundation soils to experience strain softening
- slopes composed of soils likely to experience strain softening should be
designed for relatively low displacements if peak strengths are used in the
evaluation of ky due to the potential for progressive failure, which could
involve very large displacements following strain softening.
In order to consider a threshold larger than 5 cm, the project consultant shall
provide prior, acceptable justification to the city and obtain the city's
approval. Such justification shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
city, that the proposed project will achieve acceptable performance.
13.0 Water Retention Basins And Flood Control Channels.
For cut, fill, or natural slopes containing or proposed to contain water-
retention basins or flood-control channels, slope stability analyses shall be
performed. In addition to analyzing typical static and seismic slope stability,
those analyses shall consider the effects of rapid drawdown, if such a
condition could develop.
14.0 Mitigation.
When slope stability hazards are determined to exist on a project, measures to
mitigate impacts from those hazards shall be implemented. Some guidance
regarding mitigation measures is provided in Blake et al. (2002). Slope
stability mitigation methods include 1) hazard avoidance, 2) grading to improve
slope stability, 3) reinforcement of the slope or improvement of the soil
within the slope, and 4) reinforcement of the structure built on the slope to
tolerate anticipated slope displacements.
Where mitigation measures that are intended to add stabilizing forces to the
slope are to be implemented, consideration may need to be given to strain
compatibility. For example, if a compacted fill buttress is proposed to
stabilize laterally unsupported bedding or a landslide, the amount of
deformation needed to mobilize the recommended shear strength in the buttress
shall be considered to confirm that it will not result in adverse movements of
the upslope bedding or landslide deposits. Similarly, if a series of drilled
soldier piers is to be used to support a potentially unstable slope and a
residential structure will be built on the piers, pier deformations resulting
from movements needed to mobilize the soil's shear strength shall be compared
to tolerable deflections in the supported structure.
14.1 Full Mitigation.
Full mitigation of slope stability hazards shall be performed for developments
in the city, except as defined in section 14.2. Remedial measures that produce
static factors of safety in excess of 1.5 and acceptable seismic displacement
estimates shall be implemented as needed.
14.2 Partial Mitigation For Seismic Displacement Hazards.
On some projects or portions thereof (such as small structural additions,
residential "infill projects", non-habitable structures, and non-structural
natural-slope areas), full mitigation of seismic slope displacements may not be
possible, due to physical or economic constraints. In those cases, partial
mitigation, to the extent that it prevents structural collapse, injury, and
loss of life, may be possible if it can be provided consistent with IBC
philosophies, and if it is approved by the city of North Salt Lake. The
applicability of partial mitigations to specific projects will be evaluated on
a case-by-case basis.
15.0 Notice Of Geologic Hazard And Waiver Of Liability.
For developments where full mitigation of seismic slope displacements is not
implemented, a notice of geologic hazard shall be recorded with the proposed
development describing the displacement hazard at issue and the partial
mitigation employed. The notice shall clearly state that the seismic
displacement hazard at the site has been reduced by the partial mitigation, but
not totally eliminated.
In addition, the owner shall assume all risks, waive all claims against the
city and its consultants, and indemnify and hold the city and its consultants
harmless from any and all claims arising from the partial mitigation of the
seismic displacement hazard.
(Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
10-12-33-3: APPENDIX C, MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIQUEFACTION INVESTIGATIONS AND
EVALUATIONS:
1.0 Introduction.
The procedures and standards outlined herein are intended to provide
consultants with a general outline for performing liquefaction investigations
and to specify the expectations of the city of North Salt Lake. The standards
constitute the minimum level of effort required in conducting liquefaction
investigations in the city. Considering the complexity inherent in performing
liquefaction investigations, additional effort beyond the minimum standards
presented herein may be required at some sites to adequately address
liquefaction potential at the site. The information presented herein does not
relieve consultants of their duty to perform additional geologic or
geotechnical engineering analyses they believe are necessary to adequately
assess the liquefaction potential at a site.
The purpose of establishing minimum standards for liquefaction investigations
is to:
(a) Protect the health, safety, welfare, and property of the public by
minimizing the potentially adverse effects of liquefaction and related hazards;
(b) Assist property owners and land developers in conducting reasonable and
adequate studies;
(c) Provide consulting geologists and geotechnical engineers with a common
basis for preparing proposals, conducting investigations, and mitigation; and,
(d) Provide an objective framework for regulatory review of liquefaction
investigation reports.
1.1 Properties Requiring Liquefaction Analyses.
(Figure 1.1)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2084.png]
Figure 1.1 depicts generalized liquefaction susceptibility for the city, and
shall be used to determine whether or not a site-specific liquefaction
assessment is required for a particular project.
The liquefaction-potential map is based on a regional-scale investigation of
Davis County. These maps may not identify all areas that have potential for
liquefaction; a site located outside of a zone of required investigation is not
necessarily free from liquefaction hazard. The zone does not always include
lateral spread run-out areas. The liquefaction- potential map for Davis County,
UT complete technical report is available from the Davis County community
development department.
Title 10, chapter 12 of the city of North Salt Lake municipal code, sensitive
area district & geologic hazards ordinance requires a site-specific
liquefaction investigation to be performed prior to approval of a project based
on the land- use/liquefaction potential matrix shown in the following table.
 
Type Of Facility           High Potential    Acceptable Factor Of Safety
                           Liquefaction Area
Critical facilities
(essential facilities,
hazardous facilities, and
special occupancy
structures) as defined in  Yes               1.3
section
10-12-2 of the city of
North Salt Lake municipal
code
Category III and IV in
table 1604.58 of the most  Yes               1.3
recently adopted edition
of the IBC
Industrial and commercial  Yes               1.25
buildings
Residential structures and No
subdivisions
 
1.2 Roles Of Engineering Geology And Geotechnical Engineering.
The investigation of liquefaction hazard is an interdisciplinary practice. The
site investigation report must be prepared by a qualified geologist or
geotechnical engineer, who must have competence in the field of seismic hazard
evaluation and mitigation, and be reviewed by a qualified geologist and
geotechnical engineer, also competent in the field of seismic hazard evaluation
and mitigation.
Because of the differing expertise and abilities of qualified geologists and
geotechnical engineers, the scope of the site investigation report for the
project may require that both types of professionals prepare and review the
report, each practicing in the area of their expertise. Involvement of both a
qualified geologist and geotechnical engineer will generally provide greater
assurance that the hazard is properly identified, assessed, and mitigated.
Liquefaction analyses are the responsibility of the geotechnical engineer,
although the geologist should be involved in the application of screening
criteria (section 3.0, steps 1 and 2) and general geologic site evaluation
(section 4.1) to map the likely extent of liquefiable deposits and shallow
groundwater. Engineering properties of earth material shall be evaluated by the
geotechnical engineer. The performance of the quantitative liquefaction
analysis resulting in a numerical factor of safety and quantitative assessment
of settlement and liquefaction-induced permanent ground displacement shall be
performed by geotechnical engineers.
The geotechnical and civil engineers shall develop all mitigation and design
recommendations. Ground motion parameters for use in quantitative liquefaction
analyses may be provided by either the geologist or geotechnical engineer.
1.3 Minimum Qualifications Of The Licensed Professional.
Liquefaction analyses must be performed by qualified geologists and qualified
geotechnical engineers (see sections
10-12-5 and
10-12-6 of the city of North Salt Lake municipal code).
2.0 General Requirements.
Except for the derivation of input ground motion (see section 5.0),
liquefaction investigations should be performed in general accordance with the
latest version of Recommended Procedures For Implementation Of DMG Special
Publication 117, Guidelines For Analyzing And Mitigating Liquefaction In
California (Martin and Lew, 1999). Additional protocol for liquefaction
investigations is provided in Youd and Idriss (1997). In addition to these
standards, all liquefaction analyses, reports and recommendations shall follow
the latest adopted guidelines published by the Utah geological survey. See
title 10, chapter 12 of the city of North Salt Lake municipal code, sensitive
area district & geologic hazards ordinance for supplemental requirements.
Acceptable factors of safety are shown on the table in section 1.2.
3.0 Preliminary Screening For Liquefaction.
The liquefaction study area map is based on broad regional studies and does not
replace site-specific studies. The fact that a site is located within a
liquefaction study area does not mean that there is a significant liquefaction
potential at the site, only that a study shall be performed to determine if
there is.
Soil liquefaction is caused by strong seismic ground shaking where saturated,
cohesionless, granular soil undergoes a significant loss in shear strength that
can result in settlement and permanent ground displacement. Surface effects of
liquefaction include: settlement, bearing capacity failure, ground
oscillations, lateral spread and flow failure. It has been well documented that
soil liquefaction may occur in clean sands, silty sands, and sandy silt, non-
plastic silts and gravelly soils. The following conditions must be present for
liquefaction to occur:
      (a) Soils must be submerged below the water table;
      (b) Soils must be loose to moderately dense;
      (c) Ground shaking must be relatively intense; and
      (d) The duration of ground shaking must be sufficient for the soils to
generate seismically-induced excess pore water pressure and lose their shearing
resistance.
The following screening criteria may be applied to determine if further
quantitative evaluation of liquefaction hazard is required:
      (a) If the estimated maximum past-, current-, and maximum- future-
groundwater-levels (i.e., the highest groundwater level applicable for
liquefaction analyses) are determined to be deeper than 50 feet below the
existing ground surface or proposed finished grade (whichever is deeper),
liquefaction assessments are not required. For soil materials that are located
above the level of the groundwater, a quantitative assessment of seismically
induced settlement is required.
      (b) If "bedrock" or similar lithified formational material underlies the
site, those materials need not be considered liquefiable and no analysis of
their liquefaction potential is necessary.
      (c) If the corrected standard penetration blow count, (N1)60, is greater
than or equal to 33 in all samples with a sufficient number of tests,
liquefaction assessments are not required. If cone penetration test soundings
are made, the corrected cone penetration test tip resistance, qc1N, should be
greater than or equal to 180 in all soundings in sand materials, otherwise
liquefaction assessments are needed. All SPT measurements shall be made with
calibrated hammers, where the hammer efficiency is known, and values can be
adjusted to (N1)60 for calculations, as needed.
If plastic soil (PI . 20) materials are encountered during site exploration,
those materials may be considered non- liquefiable. Additional acceptable
screening criteria regarding the effects of plasticity on liquefaction
susceptibility are presented in Boulanger and Idriss (2004), Bray and Sancio
(2006), and Seed and others (2003).
If the screening investigation clearly demonstrates the absence of liquefaction
hazards at a project site and the city concurs, the screening investigation
will satisfy the site investigation report requirement for liquefaction
hazards. If not, a quantitative evaluation is required to assess the
liquefaction hazards.
4.0 Field Investigations.
Geotechnical field investigations are routinely performed for new projects as
part of the normal development and design process. Geologic reconnaissance and
subsurface explorations are normally performed as part of the field exploration
program even when liquefaction does not need to be investigated.
4.1 Geologic Reconnaissance.
Geologic research and reconnaissance are important to provide information to
define the extent of unconsolidated deposits that may be prone to liquefaction.
Such information should be presented on geologic maps and cross sections and
provide a description of the formations present at the site that includes the
nature, thickness, and origin of Quaternary deposits with liquefaction
potential. There also should be an analysis of groundwater conditions at the
site that includes the highest recorded water level and the highest water level
likely to occur under the most adverse foreseeable conditions in the future.
Shallow groundwater may exist for a variety of reasons, some of which are of
natural and or manmade origin. Landscape irrigation, on-site sewage disposal,
and unlined manmade lakes reservoirs, and storm-water detention basins may
create a shallow groundwater table in sediments that were previously
unsaturated.
During the field investigation, the geologist should map the limits of
unconsolidated deposits with liquefaction potential. Liquefaction typically
occurs in cohesionless silt, sand, and fine-grained gravel deposits of Holocene
to late Pleistocene age in areas where groundwater is shallower than about 50
feet.
4.2 Subsurface Explorations.
Subsurface explorations shall consist of drilled-borings and/or cone
penetration tests (CPTs). The exploration program shall be planned to determine
the soil stratigraphy, groundwater level, and indices that could be used to
evaluate the potential for liquefaction by either in situ testing or by
laboratory testing of soil samples. Borings and CPT soundings must penetrate a
minimum of 50 feet below final ground surface. If a standard penetration test
(SPT) is used, sampling intervals shall not exceed 2.5 feet.
For saturated cohesionless soils where the SPT (N1)60 values are less than 15,
or where CPT tip resistances are below 60 tsf, grain-size analyses, hydrometer
tests, and Atterberg Limits tests shall be performed on these soils to further
evaluate their potential for permanent ground displacement (Youd et al., 2002)
and other forms of liquefaction-induced ground failure and settlement.
Where a structure may have subterranean construction or deep foundations (e.g.,
caissons or piles), the depth of investigation should extend to a depth that is
a minimum of 20 feet (6 m) below the lowest expected foundation level (e.g.,
caisson bottom or pile tip) or 50 feet (15 m) below the existing ground surface
or lowest proposed finished grade, whichever is deeper. If, during the
investigation, the indices to evaluate liquefaction indicate that the
liquefaction potential may extend below that depth, the exploration should be
continued until a significant thickness (at least 10 feet or 3 m, to the extent
possible) of nonliquefiable soils are encountered.
5.0 Ground Motion For Liquefaction Susceptibility And Ground Deformation
Analyses.
In regards to design ground accelerations for liquefaction analyses, the city
of North Salt Lake prefers a probabilistic approach to determining the
likelihood that different levels of ground motion will be exceeded at a
particular site within a given time period. In order to more closely represent
the seismic characteristics of the WFZ and better capture this possible high
likelihood of a surface-faulting earthquake on the Salt Lake City segment,
design ground motion parameters for liquefaction analyses shall be based on the
peak accelerations with a 3.5 percent probability in 50 years (1,400-year
recurrence interval). Peak bedrock ground motions can be readily obtained via
the internet from the United States geological survey (USGS) national seismic
hazard maps, data and documentation web page (USGS, 2002), which is based on
Frankel and others (2002). PGAs obtained from the USGS (2002) web page should
be adjusted for effects of soil/rock (site-class) conditions in accordance with
Seed and others (2001) or other appropriate methods that consider the site-
specific soil conditions and their potential for amplification/deamplification
of the high frequency strong motion.
6.0 Remedial Design.
Sites, facilities, buildings, structures and utilities that are founded on or
traverse liquefiable soils may require further remedial design and/or
relocation to avoid liquefaction-induced damage. These should be investigated
and evaluated on a site-specific basis with sufficient geologic and
geotechnical evaluations to support the remedial design or mitigative plan.
This design or plan may include: changes/modifications to the soil, foundation
system, structural frame or support of the building, etc. and shall be reviewed
and approved by the city.
7.0 Submittals.
Submittals for review shall include: boring logs; geologic cross-sections;
laboratory data; discussions pertaining to how idealized subsurface conditions
and parameters used for analyses were developed; analytical results, including
computer output files (on request); and summaries of the liquefaction analyses
and conclusions regarding liquefaction potential and likely types and amounts
of ground failure.
Subsurface geologic and groundwater conditions must be illustrated on geologic
cross-sections and must be utilized by the geotechnical engineer for the
liquefaction analyses. If on-site sewage or storm-water disposal exists or is
proposed, the liquefaction analyses shall include the effects of the effluent
plume on liquefaction potential.
The results of any liquefaction analyses must be submitted with pertinent
backup documentation (i.e., calculations, computer output, etc.). Printouts of
input data, output data (on request), and graphical plots must be submitted for
each computer-aided liquefaction analysis. In addition, data files, recorded on
diskettes, CDs, or other electronic media, may be requested to facilitate the
city's review.
(Ord. 2015-16, 10-20-2015)
CHAPTER 13
PLANNED DISTRICT (P)
SECTION:
10-13-1: Purposes
10-13-2: Standards And Requirements
10-13-3: Step 1 - General Development Plan And P-District Application
10-13-4: Step 2 - Final Rezone Approval
10-13-5: Development Plan And Agreement To Constitute Planned District
Requirements
10-13-6: Conditions Under Which Planned District May Revert To Original Zoning
10-13-1: PURPOSES:
The purposes of the Planned District are:
   A.   To encourage and provide a means for effectuating desirable development
through the use of flexibility in siting, mixed land uses and/or varied
dwellings or other buildings.
   B.   To preserve the amenities and compatibility of P Districts by adoption
of a general development plan showing proper orientation, desirable design
character and compatible land uses.
   C.   To provide for orderly preplanning and long term development or
redevelopment of properties with a mixture of land uses; supports the
consolidation of properties into a unified ownership or development control;
and ensures the creation of a cohesive development plan that will be
economically viable, sustainable, and implements the goals and objectives of
the North Salt Lake General Plan, Town Center Plan, redevelopment areas, or
other area plans as adopted.
   D.   To give the developer reasonable assurance that phased development
plans prepared in accordance with an approved general development plan will be
acceptable to the City.
   E.   To enable the adoption of measures providing for development of the
surrounding area in character compatible with the Planned District. (Ord. 2018-
11, 10-2-2018)
10-13-2: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The following provisions shall apply in a P District, which district shall also
be subject to other provisions of this title, except that where conflict in
regulations occurs, the regulations specified in this chapter, or on a general
development plan approved pursuant to this chapter, shall apply:
   A.   P Districts may be established on parcels of land which are suitable
for, and of sufficient size, to be planned and developed in a manner consistent
with the purposes and objectives of this chapter, the North Salt Lake General
Plan, the Town Center Master Plan, redevelopment areas, or other area plans as
adopted. Having considered recommendation from the Planning Commission, the
City Council may deny General Development Plan approval and P-District rezone
of projects that do not adequately consolidate sufficient property to address
the goals and objectives of the General Plan, Town Center Master Plan,
Redevelopment District or that may impede future development on parcels in the
planning area.
   B.   No ordinance establishing a P District shall be adopted unless and
until there is on file with the City written consent of every property owner
within such district at the time of adoption of the ordinance, agreeing:
      1.   That the owner(s) will be bound by their conditions and regulations
adopted and which will be effective within the district; and
      2.   To record such written agreement with the Davis County Recorder.
   C.   Before detailed studies of any P District development plans shall be
undertaken by the planning staff or the Planning Commission, there shall be on
file with the City the written request of all property owners within the
proposed district that such detailed studies be made.
   D.   The applicable zoning regulations in a Planned District shall be
established by development agreement and may include:
      1.   Permitted or conditional permitted land uses, including accessory
uses;
      2.   Minimum development area or lot size;
      3.   Maximum building height;
      4.   Landscaping;
      5.   Fencing;
      6.   Signage;
      7.   Parking;
      8.   Required amenities, private or public;
      9.   Circulation: pedestrian and vehicular;
      10.   Building design standards, including, but not limited to
architectural theme, materials and colors;
      11.   Other site specific regulations as deemed appropriate.
   E.   Planned District regulations, which are inconsistent with zoning
regulations in this title, shall have precedence with the exception of
subdivision processes, standards for public improvements, and Building Codes,
including plumbing, mechanical, and electrical regulations. For those
regulations not specifically addressed in the development agreement, adopted
ordinances and regulations shall apply. (Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018)
10-13-3: STEP 1 - GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND P-DISTRICT APPLICATION:
   A.   An application for General Development Plan (GDP) and P-District rezone
review shall be submitted by the property owner or an authorized
representative. All plans shall be prepared by a licensed/certified
professional, such as an architect, landscape architect, planner, engineer,
surveyor, etc. The requirements for a complete site plan review application
are:
      1.   Conceptual Site Plan, including a current survey and legal
description, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, proposed building placement,
setbacks, streetscape, parking, fire protection, fencing, and signage
locations, plus any other information required for conceptual site plan review;
      2.   Conceptual Landscape Plan, including open space, recreation
equipment, and other proposed community amenities; and
      3.   Conceptual Building Plan(s), including elevations, height,
materials, and proposed colors.
   B.   Upon receipt of a complete application to the Community Development
Department, the application shall be reviewed by the Development Review
Committee (DRC). The DRC shall provide written comments to the applicant
regarding the proposed General Development Plan within fourteen (14) days of
receipt. The applicant may request a meeting with the DRC or staff to discuss
the comments. Upon receipt of a written response to the comments and any
revised submittal, the DRC shall review the resubmittal and make a
recommendation on the application to the Planning Commission. Once a
recommendation has been made by the DRC, the Community Development Department
shall schedule a public hearing before the Planning Commission and provide
written notice to property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the
boundary of the proposed project, as required by Utah State Code 10-9a-502.
   C.   The Community Development Department shall provide to the Planning
Commission copies of all pertinent documents, plans, and maps related to the
project, along with a draft of the proposed land use regulations to be
contained within the final development agreement and rezone ordinance.
   D.   After conclusion of the public hearing the Planning Commission may
recommend to the City Council the approval of a General Development Plan,
subject to final review and approval of the rezone request and development
agreement.
   E.   Upon receipt of the recommended general development plan, the City
Council may accept or modify the proposed general development plan, subject to
final review and approval of the rezone request and development agreement.
   F.   Phased development plans shall include subdivision plans and/or planned
unit development plans which shall become part of the general development plan.
(Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018)
10-13-4: STEP 2 - FINAL REZONE APPROVAL:
   A.   Upon approval of the General Development Plan by the City Council, the
applicant shall submit application for concurrent review either a preliminary
subdivision plan or a final site plan application, as applicable. Applications
shall address any issues or concerns raised by the City Council at General
Development Plan approval along with any conditions of said approval.
   B.   Upon receipt of complete preliminary subdivision plan or site plan
application, the application shall be reviewed by the Development Review
Committee (DRC). The DRC shall provide written comments to the applicant within
fourteen (14) days of receipt. The applicant may request a meeting with the DRC
or staff to discuss the comments. Upon receipt of a written response to the
comments and any revised submittal, the DRC shall review the resubmittal and
make a recommendation on the application to the Planning Commission.
   C.   Once a recommendation has been made by the DRC, the Community
Development Department shall schedule a public meeting before the Planning
Commission for review of the application and final recommendation on the final
P-District rezone request, including the proposed P-District land use
regulations to be contained within the development agreement.
   D.   The Community Development Department shall provide to the Planning
Commission copies of all pertinent documents, plans, and maps related to the
project, along with the proposed P-District land use regulations to be
contained within the final development agreement and rezone ordinance.
   E.   At the public meeting the Planning Commission may recommend to the City
Council the approval of a P-District rezone request and proposed P-District
land use regulations to be contained within the final development agreement and
rezone ordinance.
   F.   In a separate motion the Planning Commission may recommend to the City
Council approval of the proposed preliminary subdivision plan or site plan, as
applicable, or may table action on the proposed preliminary subdivision plan or
site plan, pending final action on the rezone request by the City Council.
   G.   Upon receipt of the recommended P-District rezone request and P-
District land use regulations, the City Council may by ordinance establish a P
District; provided, that it finds that the facts submitted with the application
(s) and presented at the public meetings establish that:
      1.   The proposed P District, or the primary phase(s) thereof, can be
substantially completed within two (2) years of the establishment of the P
District.
      2.   The primary phase of the development, as well as the total
development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating an
environment of sustained desirability and stability, or that adequate assurance
will be provided that such objective will be attained; and that the uses
proposed will not be detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but
will have a beneficial effect which could not be achieved under other zoning
districts.
      3.   The streets proposed are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated
traffic, and increased densities will not generate traffic in such amounts as
to overload the street network outside the P District.
      4.   Commercial development can be justified economically at the
locations proposed, if any, to provide commercial facilities.
      5.   The area surrounding said development can be planned and zoned in
coordination and substantial compatibility with the proposed development.
      6.   Any exception from standard ordinance requirements is warranted by
the design and amenities incorporated into the final plan.
      7.   The P District is in conformance with the City general land use
plan.
      8.   Existing or proposed utility services are adequate for the
population and use densities proposed. (Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018)
10-13-5: DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND AGREEMENT TO CONSTITUTE PLANNED DISTRICT
REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   At the time of adoption of any ordinance establishing a P District, the
City and the developer shall enter into a development agreement to define the
development, its uses, street pattern, public and private improvements, open
spaces, public dedications and grants of easements, and any other specifics
about the project deemed necessary for the overall project. The development
agreement shall include a list of all permitted and conditional uses in the
project and building standards, to include setbacks, building height, lot
coverage, and other regulations related to the siting of buildings.
   B.   The development agreement shall include the general development plan
which shall guide all development within the specific project being approved.
The general development plan shall consist of a site plan and landscape plan
containing the following: survey and legal description, vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, proposed building placement, setbacks, streetscape,
parking, fire protection, fencing, signage locations, open space/parks,
streetscape and building setback diagrams, along with conceptual building
elevations and design schemes, plus any other information required for
preliminary site plan approval. If, in the course of developing the project,
changes are to be made to the general development plan which are substantially
different from the general development plan, a new general development plan
shall be considered for recommendation by the Planning Commission and adopted
by the City Council and a new public hearing held. "Substantially different"
means any increase in the gross residential density, an increase or decrease in
use greater than ten percent (10%) of the total project floor area, a twenty
percent (20%) or greater change in the gross floor area of a project or a
change in specific use, commercial or residential. Realignment of streets or
utility improvements when no change in overall use occurs shall not be
considered "substantially different".
   C.   The approved general development plan shall be considered an integral
part of the land use regulations for the area being approved and developed.
Substantial variation between the general development plan and any phased
development plans shall require review and recommendation from the Planning
Commission and approval from the City Council, and a new public hearing.
"Substantial variation" means any increase in gross residential density, and
increase or decrease in use greater than ten percent (10%) of the total project
floor area, or any addition, modification or alteration to a building or site
plan that exceeds twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area. Modifications
to street alignments, when the uses contained on those streets do not change,
shall not constitute a "substantial variation" under this subsection. All
modifications must meet the minimum standards set forth in the development
agreement and by this title.
   D.   Upon approval of the development agreement, which shall include the
general development plan, and the zoning map amendment, all approved uses shall
be processed based on the standards approved in the development agreement.
(Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018)
10-13-6: CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PLANNED DISTRICT MAY REVERT TO ORIGINAL ZONING:
   A.   If no development has occurred to effectuate a P District development
within two (2) years after the district is created, the City Council may direct
the Planning Commission to schedule a public hearing to determine whether or
not it is in the public interest to rezone the P-District to the previous zone
or another appropriate zone. If the Planning Commission so recommends, the City
Council may repeal the original P-District ordinance or adopt a new ordinance
rezoning the property to an appropriate zone.
   B.   If the land within a P District is sold to a new owner, the City
Council shall require the new owner to accept in writing all obligations and
guarantees required by the development agreement of the original owner. In the
event that such written agreement is not provided, the City Council may direct
the Planning Commission to schedule a public hearing to determine whether or
not it is in the public interest to rezone the P-District to the previous zone
or another appropriate zone. If the Planning Commission so recommends, the City
Council may repeal the original P-District ordinance or adopt a new ordinance.
   C.   If the owner or developer of the P District is unwilling or unable to
carry out the requirements of the development agreement because claimed
adequate water supplies, wastewater disposal, streets or other major elements
of approval cannot or will not be provided as required, the City Council may
stop all development in the district until such failure has been remedied or
may initiate a rezoning of the property to the original zoning which existed
prior to creation of the P District, in the manner described above, without
waiting for the two (2) year period provided above. (Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018)
CHAPTER 14
REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE (R)
SECTION:
10-14-1: Purpose
10-14-2: Permitted Uses
10-14-3: Conditional Uses
10-14-4: Special Provisions
10-14-5: Area, Width, Frontage, Yard, Coverage, Height Regulations
10-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to provide for flexible utilization of land in the
old downtown area where some of the established land patterns and uses are
nonconforming with respect to basic community standards adopted in this title.
When it is determined to be in the interests of the community to foster
appropriate utilization of existing facilities, undersized lots or redevelop
blighted areas, a conditional use permit may be used to reduce parking
requirements or otherwise modify requirements for uses that will be beneficial
to the area and harmonious with the surroundings. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-
15-1993)
10-14-2: PERMITTED USES:
None. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-14-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
All uses located within the limits of the redevelopment overlay zone are
conditional uses and require issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 93-5,
7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-14-4: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Uses may be continued or changed.
   B.   Buildings may be altered to accommodate new uses.
   C.   Uses and buildings may be limited as to scope or length of time.
   D.   Every conditional use permit and each approval shall be based primarily
on how the development, as proposed in the application, will contribute to
economic activity, compatibility, mutual private and public benefit from
existing, proposed or potential buildings and uses in the area; the efficient,
effective, economic and aesthetic use of land, buildings, landscaping and
amenities; and the improvements to be made in land utilization, building
construction and appearance, traffic safety and control, landscaping and
drainage.
   E.   Conditional use permit approval process requires timely notification of
the municipal redevelopment agency to allow for analysis and input to the
process. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-14-5: AREA, WIDTH, FRONTAGE, YARD, COVERAGE, HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
The area, width, frontage, yard, coverage and height regulations are the same
as in the underlying zone, except as may be modified by conditional use permit
after public hearing by the planning commission. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-
15-1993; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 15
AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE (AOZ)
SECTION:
10-15-1: Purpose
10-15-2: Definitions
10-15-3: Airport Zones
10-15-4: Utility Runway Visual Approach Zones
10-15-5: Runway Larger Than Utility With Visibility Minimum As Low As Three-
Fourths Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zones
10-15-6: Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zones
10-15-7: Transitional Zones
10-15-8: Horizontal Zones
10-15-9: Conical Zones
10-15-10: Airport Zone Height Limitations
10-15-11: Use Restrictions
10-15-12: Nonconforming Uses
10-15-13: Permits
10-15-14: Hazard Marking And Lighting
10-15-15: Conflicting Regulations
10-15-16: Airport Layout Plan Provisions
10-15-1: PURPOSE:
It is hereby determined that an airport hazard endangers the lives and property
of users of airports and property or occupants of land in its vicinity and,
also, if of the obstruction type, in effect reduces the size of the area
available for landing, take off and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to
destroy or impair the utility of airports and the public investment therein.
Accordingly, it is hereby declared that:
   A.   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance
and an injury to the region served by airports;
   B.   It is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety and
general welfare that the creation or establishment of airport hazards be
prevented; and
   C.   The prevention of these hazards should be accomplished, to the extent
legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation.
(Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall
have the meanings as hereinafter defined:
AIRPORT: Any landing area, runway or other facility designed, used or intended
to be used either publicly or by any person or persons for the landing or
taking off of aircraft, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and
tie down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces as
permitted by local zoning ordinances.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The highest point of the airport's usable landing area
measured in feet from mean sea level.
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or object or natural growth located on or in the
vicinity of the airport, or any use of land near the airport, which obstructs
the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or take off at the
airport, or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or take off of aircraft.
AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT: The point established as the approximate geographic
center of the airport landing area and so designated.
FAA: The federal aviation administration.
HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth
in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall mean sea level
elevation unless otherwise specified.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any preexisting structure, tree or use of land which is
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an amendment thereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance or
area type navigation equipment for which straight-in nonprecision instrument
approach procedure has been approved or planned and for which no precision
approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning document.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association or governmental entity. It includes a trustee,
receiver, assignee or similar representative of any of the foregoing.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY: A runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach
radar (PAR). It shall also mean a runway for which a precision approach system
is planned and is so indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan or any
other FAA approved planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway
has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred
feet (200') beyond each end of such runway; but when the runway has no
specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface
ends at each end of such runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway
will be that width prescribed in part 77, section 77.25 of the federal aviation
regulations (FAR), which is hereby incorporated by reference and made a part
hereof, for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of
that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as
the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
RUNWAY: A defined area on the airport prepared for landing and take off of
aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE: An object constructed or installed by man, including, but without
limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead
transmission lines.
TREE: Any object of nature growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds'
maximum gross weight or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using
visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure
and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan
or on any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority. (Ord.
93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-15-3: AIRPORT ZONES:
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created
and established certain overlay zones which may include all of the land lying
within the approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones and conical
zones. Such zones shall be effective only to the extent shown on the airport
zoning map on file in the office of the planning commission as the same appears
as of the effective date hereof, and as amended from time to time hereafter to
reflect the changes made thereon by ordinances adopted by the city council, and
said map by ordinances adopted by the city council and said map and all
references, notations and other information shown therein are hereby made a
part of this chapter to the same extent as if said map and the information
thereon where fully described and set forth herein. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff.
7-15-1993)
10-15-4: UTILITY RUNWAY VISUAL APPROACH ZONES:
Utility runway visual approach zones are hereby established with the inner edge
coinciding with the width of the primary surface and being two hundred fifty
feet (250') wide. The approach zone expands outward, uniformly, to a width of
one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') at a horizontal distance of five
thousand feet (5,000') from the primary surface, its centerline being the
continuation of the centerline of the runway. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-
1993)
10-15-5: RUNWAY LARGER THAN UTILITY WITH VISIBILITY MINIMUM AS LOW AS THREE-
FOURTHS MILE NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT APPROACH ZONES:
Runways larger than utility with a visible minimum as low as three-fourths (3/
4) mile nonprecision instrument approach zones are hereby established with the
inner edge of this approach zone coinciding with the width of the primary zone
and are one thousand feet (1,000') wide. The approach zone expands outward,
uniformly to a width of sixteen thousand feet (16,000') at a horizontal
distance of fifty thousand feet (50,000') from the primary surface, its
centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. (Ord. 93-5,
7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-15-6: PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY APPROACH ZONES:
Precision instrument runway approach zones are hereby established with the
inner edge of this approach zone coinciding with the width of the primary
surface and is one thousand feet (1,000') wide. The approach zone expands
outward, uniformly, to a width of sixteen thousand feet (16,000') at a
horizontal distance of fifty thousand feet (50,000') from the primary surface,
its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. (Ord.
93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-15-7: TRANSITIONAL ZONES:
Transitional zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional
surfaces. The surfaces extend outward and upward to ninety degree (90°) angles
to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended, at a slope of
seven feet (7') horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the
primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and
conical surfaces. Transitional zones for these portions of the precision
approach zones which project through and beyond the limits of the conical
surface extend a distance of five thousand feet (5,000') measured horizontally
from the edge of the approach zones and at a ninety degree (90°) angle to the
extended runway centerline. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-15-8: HORIZONTAL ZONES:
   A.   Horizontal zones are hereby established as that area, the perimeter of
which is constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii, from a point on the
centerline and two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of each runway and
connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
   B.   The radius of each arc is five thousand feet (5,000') for all runways
designated as utility or visual and ten thousand feet (10,000') for all other
runways. The radius of the arc specified for each end of a runway will have the
same arithmetical value. That value will be the highest determined for either
end of the runway. When a five thousand foot (5,000') arc is encompassed by
tangents connecting two (2) adjacent ten thousand foot (10,000') arcs, the five
thousand foot (5,000') arc shall be disregarded in determining the horizontal
zone. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones.
(Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-15-9: CONICAL ZONES:
Conical zones are hereby established as the area that commences at the
periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal
distance of four thousand feet (4,000'). The conical zone does not include the
precision instrument approach zones and transitional zones. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-
1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-15-10: AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Conformance Required: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no
structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or be maintained
in any zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable
height limit herein established for such zone.
   B.   Height Limitations Permitted: Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or
structure to a height consistent with the terms of this chapter.
   C.   Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone: The height limitation in a utility
runway visual approach zone slopes upward twenty feet (20') horizontally, for
each foot vertically, beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extends to a horizontal distance of five thousand feet
(5,000') along the extended runway centerline.
   D.   Runway Larger Than Utility With Visibility Minimum As Low As Three-
Fourths Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach: The height limitation in a
runway larger than utility with a visual minimum as low as three-fourths (3/4)
mile nonprecision instrument zone slopes upward one hundred feet (100')
horizontally, for each foot vertically, beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extends to a horizontal distance of ten
thousand feet (10,000') along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes
upward forty feet (40') horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional
horizontal distance of forty thousand feet (40,000') along the extended runway
centerline.
   E.   Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zones: The height limitation in a
precision runway approach zone slopes upward one hundred feet (100')
horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extends to a horizontal distance of ten
thousand feet (10,000') along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes
upward forty feet (40') horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional
distance of forty thousand feet (40,000') along the extended runway centerline.
   F.   Transitional Zones: The height limitation in a transitional zone slopes
upward and outward seven feet (7') horizontally for each foot vertically
beginning at the side of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
the approach zones, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty feet (150')
above the airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are
established height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet (7')
horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same
elevation of the approach zones and extending to where they intersect the
conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects
beyond the conical zone height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet
(7') horizontally for each foot vertically shall be maintained beginning at the
sides of and at the same elevation as precision instrument runway approach
surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand feet (5,000')
measured at a ninety degree (90°) angle to the extended runway centerline.
   G.   Horizontal Zone: The height limitation in a horizontal zone shall be
one hundred fifty feet (150') above the airport elevation.
   H.   Conical Zone: The height limitation of the conical zone slope upward
and outward twenty feet (20') horizontally for each foot vertically beginning
at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty feet (150')
above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty
feet (350') above the airport elevation. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-15-11: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no use may be made of land
or water within the city that will create any electrical interference with
navigational signals for radio communication between the airport and the
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish airport lights from
others, result in glare in the eyes of the pilots using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise in any way create a
hazard or endanger the landing, take off or maneuvering of aircraft intending
to use the airport. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-15-12: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Regulations Not Retroactive: The regulations prescribed in this chapter
shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or
alterations in any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of
the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a
nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration which was begun prior to the effective date hereof and is diligently
prosecuted.
   B.   Marking And Lighting: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of
this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is
hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon
of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport manager
to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the
presence of such airport hazards. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
   C.   Abandoned Or Destroyed Nonconforming Uses: Whenever the building
official determines that a nonconforming structure has been abandoned for a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months, or "physically deteriorated", as
defined in the international building code, no permit shall be granted that
would allow such structure to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise
deviate from the zoning regulations. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd.
2012 Code)
10-15-13: PERMITS:
   A.   Required: All users shall obtain permits before construction or
installation as required by other city ordinances.
   B.   Existing Uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of any airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use
or structure to be made or become higher or become a greater hazard to air
navigation than it was on the effective date hereof, or any amendment thereto,
or than it is when the application for a permit is made. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993,
eff. 7-15-1993)
10-15-14: HAZARD MARKING AND LIGHTING:
Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to
effectuate the purpose of this chapter and be reasonable in the circumstances,
be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question
to permit the property owner at his own expense to install, operate and
maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to
fliers the presence of an airport hazard. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-15-15: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, including land use zoning, whether the conflict be with respect to the
height of structure or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more
stringent limitation or requirements shall govern and prevail. Also, where an
area is covered by more than one height limitation described in this chapter,
the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-
1993)
10-15-16: AIRPORT LAYOUT PLAN PROVISIONS:
Airport types and airport heights provisions for an airport shall be determined
by and based on an airport layout plan and airport zoning map approved by the
city council and on file with the planning commission. Any such maps so
approved and recorded at the time and passage of this chapter shall be deemed
to be as much a part of this chapter by this reference as if fully prescribed
and detailed herein. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
CHAPTER 16
AIRPORT ENVIRONS OVERLAY ZONE (AE)
SECTION:
10-16-1: Purpose
10-16-2: Regulations
10-16-3: Location Of Airport Environs Overlay Zone
10-16-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of the airport environs overlay zone to notify and assure
landowners and airport users that the city intends to plan the development
around the airport for safe and appropriate use. Since it is unlikely the
airport will ever be relocated from this area of the city, and is considered to
be a great asset to the city and future economic development, the airport
should be protected and maintained to conserve its value. It is believed that
through negotiations between the various landowners and the planning commission
that proper, safe development will occur. Therefore, all uses located within
the boundaries of this overlay zone are made conditional to assure early
consultation with the planning commission so that developers will be made aware
of the constraints to development around the airport. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993,
eff. 7-15-1993)
10-16-2: REGULATIONS:
All uses permitted or conditional in an underlying zoning district are
conditional uses when included in an airport environs overlay zone, and thus
require conditional use permits. Such uses shall conform to both the general
plan and specific plans adopted for either the airport or its environs by the
planning commission. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
10-16-3: LOCATION OF AIRPORT ENVIRONS OVERLAY ZONE:
All land within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the sides of existing or planned
runways and within one mile of the ends of such runways is included in the
airport environs overlay zone. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993)
CHAPTER 17
SPECIAL USE RESTRICTED ZONE (SR)
SECTION:
10-17-1: Purpose
10-17-2: Permitted Uses
10-17-3: Conditional Uses
10-17-4: Residential Uses
10-17-5: Commercial Uses
10-17-6: Sand And Gravel Operations
10-17-7: Appendix SR-17
10-17-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   These areas are unique because of their proximity to prime access, high
visibility and special developmental problems. To define the land use in these
areas within the existing developmental parameters, strict residential zoning
might prove to be too limiting. These areas may change with current economic
and social growth.
   B.   To assure safe and pleasing development within the special use zone,
and to ensure the close interaction of activities, some uses are excluded or
allowed only upon conditional use review as set forth in chapter 7 of this
title. Public safety, traffic circulation, existing uses of the property,
compatibility with surrounding existing and proposed land uses, architectural
character, impact on existing services and tax base, and sensitivity to
neighboring landowner's feelings are critical factors in the review process.
   C.   It is intended that the creation of the special use designation will
increase the control of the Planning Commission and City Council in using the
remaining developable land for the most appropriate use. (Ord. 97-4, 9-16-1997)
10-17-2: PERMITTED USES:
   Agricultural.
   Golf course.
   Parks.
   Public utility and services.
   Single-family dwelling. (Ord. 97-4, 9-16-1997)
10-17-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Uses enumerated hereunder are principal uses. All other uses in the SR Zone are
conditional and, as determined by the Planning Commission, may require a public
hearing prior to consideration. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the
location of the conditional uses shall further be subject to review and
approval by the Planning Commission as provided in this title; provided,
however, that conditional use applications for sand and gravel quarrying and
related industrial services and land excavations shall be reviewed in
accordance with the conditional use standards and provisions set forth in
section
7-5A-14 of this Code, and not in accordance with chapter 7 of this title or
title 7, chapter 5, article B of this Code.
   Offices, business and professional.
   Public facilities and public service facilities.
   Quasi-public uses.
   Reception center and related businesses.
   Residential facility for elderly persons.
   Restaurant (traditional sit down).
   Sand and gravel quarrying and related industrial services and land
excavations. (Ord. 97-4, 9-16-1997; amd. Ord. 02-3, 1-15-2002; 2012 Code)
10-17-4: RESIDENTIAL USES:
The following limitations and additional requirements shall apply to all
residential uses in this zone:
   A.   Site Plan Review: The placement of any residential structure in this
zone shall be subject to a site plan review by the planning commission.
   B.   Off Street Parking: All parking in the SR zone shall be off street.
   C.   Permitted Structures: All accessory structures necessary for the
operation of a permitted or conditional use may be allowed, subject to the
following limitations:
      1.   Garage; Carport: One private garage or carport designed for not more
than two (2) vehicles not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet of floor
area. Space for more than two (2) vehicles, or greater floor area, may be
approved by the planning commission.
      2.   Storage Building: One storage building attached to or made a part of
the private garage for the storage of household goods and materials commonly
used around the home, not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor area.
      3.   Ornamental Structures: Arbors, fences, ornamental structures and
other structures incidental to the proper and customary use of a dwelling.
      4.   Building Lot: Required for all buildings:
         a.   Lot width:
            (1)   Noncorner lots: Minimum of sixty feet (60').
            (2)   Corner lots: Minimum of seventy feet (70').
         b.   Lot area: A minimum of eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
      5.   Location Of Structures: All buildings and structures shall be
located as follows:
         a.   Front setback: Thirty feet (30') from all front lot lines.
         b.   Side setback: Eight feet (8') minimum one side; total twenty feet
(20') both sides.
         c.   Rear setback: Thirty feet (30'); may be reduced to twenty feet
(20') on corner lots.
      6.   Height Of Structures:
         a.   Main buildings and structures: Two (2) stories, not to exceed
thirty feet (30').
         b.   Accessory and temporary structures: One story, not to exceed
fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 97-4, 9-16-1997)
10-17-5: COMMERCIAL USES:
   A.   Lot And Yard Regulations: The following regulations shall apply to
development for all commercial uses located within this zone:
      1.   Lot size: No restriction (nonresidential uses).
      2.   Front yard setback: All buildings shall be set back at least twenty
feet (20') from the right of way line.
      3.   Side yard: Property owners in a special use restricted zone are
encouraged to develop side yards conjointly with abutting conforming uses.
Where a special use restricted zone abuts a residential district, all buildings
shall be sited no closer than twenty feet (20') to the abutting property line.
      4.   Rear yard: All buildings shall be set back at least ten feet (10')
from the rear property line. On corner lots, the requirement shall apply to the
side of the building on which a separate service entry, loading dock or waste
disposal facility is located.
   B.   Height Of Structures: The maximum height allowed for all buildings is
thirty six feet (36').
   C.   Landscaping, General: Fifteen percent (15%) of the gross area of a lot
shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, lawn or other similar landscaping
elements as follows:
      1.   The use of turf, sod, or lawn area shall be limited to a maximum of
five percent (5%) of the total lot or five thousand (5,000) square feet,
whichever is less, and shall be in conformance with Title 10, Chapter 22, Water
Efficient Landscape Standards.
      2.   Front Yard:
         a.   A minimum of ten feet (10') of landscaping shall be provided,
measured from the property line to the public street. Highway frontages shall
be planted with trees (as specified by the city street tree planting guide) of
at least fifteen (15) gallons or two inch (2") caliper in size at intervals of
twenty five feet (25').
         b.   The planning commission may approve the elimination of the park
strip, allowing the sidewalk to be placed against the curb and gutter. If the
elimination of the park strip is approved by the planning commission, the
sidewalk shall be increased to five feet (5'). In addition, the front
landscaping area shall be increased to fifteen feet (15').
      3.   Side And Rear Yards: There shall be a minimum of three feet (3') of
landscaping between parking areas on the lot and side or rear property lines.
There shall be a minimum of three feet (3') of landscaping between an access
driveway and a side or rear property line, unless the driveway is to be used
for common access by an adjacent lot. Other side and rear setback areas that
are open to view from public rights of way or from residential property shall
have a minimum of five feet (5') of landscaping.
      4.   Parking In Landscaped Area: Parking within any required landscaped
area is prohibited.
      5.   Curbing: All landscaped areas abutting any paved parking area shall
be curbed.
      6.   Intersections: At any intersection of streets, driveways or other
vehicular right of way, landscaping shall be limited to a height of not more
than two and one-half feet (21/2') above street level within the area required
for minimum sight distances as specified in the geometric design code (AASHTO)
for local roads and streets.
      7.   Maintenance: The property owner shall guarantee to the planning
commission an adequate sprinkling or irrigation system to maintain all
landscaping. The plan for sprinkling or irrigation shall be subject to the
approval of the planning commission at site plan review.
      8.   Landscaping Of Parking Areas:
         a.   Landscaping planters or raised sidewalks serving parking lots
shall be installed along buildings and any paved areas to provide safety to
pedestrians and protect the structure.
         b.   Any traffic channelization island in a parking lot shall be fully
landscaped.
         c.   A minimum three foot (3') wide landscaped buffer area shall be
required around all structures where they abut a parking area.
      9.   Unpaved Areas: All unpaved areas not utilized for parking, access or
storage, shall be landscaped utilizing ground cover, shrub and tree materials
and/or dry landscape materials (but not to exceed more than 10 percent dry
landscaping). Undeveloped areas proposed for future expansion shall be
maintained free of weeds and trash.
      10.   Landscaping Berms And Buffers: In addition to the side yard and
rear yard footage requirements set forth herein, there shall be a buffer zone
between any nonresidential and residential use of not less than twenty feet
(20'). All buffer zones must address noise, sight, vibration, architectural and
aesthetic compatibility of the surrounding commercial and residential
developments. This can be accomplished by the use of landscaping, berms, walls,
change in elevation, etc. Driveways and parking are prohibited in buffer zones.
Plans for each buffer zone must be submitted at the preliminary approval
submission and reviewed by the planning commission.
   D.   Parking Lots And Loading:
      1.   General: Minimum off street parking space with provision for ingress
and egress by standard sized automobiles shall be provided at the time of
erection of any main building or at the time any main building is enlarged or
increased in capacity.
      2.   Development And Maintenance: Every parcel of land hereafter used as
a public or private parking area, including a commercial parking lot or an
automobile, farm equipment or other open air sales lot, shall be developed and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
         a.   Curb And Gutter: The perimeter of the paved surface shall be
finished with concrete curb and gutter.
         b.   Surfacing: Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public
parking area shall be paved with an asphaltic or concrete surfacing, and shall
be so arranged with markings as to provide the orderly and safe loading or
unloading and parking storage of vehicles.
      3.   Off Street Loading:
         a.   For every building or part thereof having a gross floor area of
ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied by a
commercial or industrial use, to or from which delivery of materials or
merchandise are regularly made by motor vehicle, there shall be provided and
maintained, on the same lot with such building, at least one off street loading
space, plus one for each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, or
major fraction thereof.
         b.   Each loading space shall be not less than fourteen feet (14') in
width and twenty three feet (23') in length.
         c.   The space may occupy the rear or side yard, except that it shall
be located no closer than thirty feet (30') to any R district and shall be
enclosed by a brick or stone wall or landscaping that is six feet (6') in
height. Loading areas shall be screened from view from public streets. (Ord.
97-4, 9-16-1997)
   E.   Storage, Trash And Mechanical Equipment: Storage areas which do or do
not contain garbage or rubbish containers (dumpsters) shall be screened with
landscaping or view obscuring fencing. The height of such screening shall be
appropriate to the nature and size of the equipment or trash to be stored. The
screening shall be approved by the Planning Commission at site plan review.
   F.   Lighting: Reflectors, spotlights, floodlights and other sources of
illumination may be used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs, parking
and loading areas, provided they are equipped with proper lenses or other
devices concentrating the illumination upon the building, landscaping, signs,
parking and loading areas, and preventing any bright, direct illumination upon
adjacent property or any public right-of-way. No unshielded white lights,
reflectors, spotlights, strobe lights or searchlights shall be so located that
they are pointed toward or are directly visible from frequently traveled public
rights-of-way or adjacent properties.
   G.   Signs: Signs are permitted subject to the provisions of chapter 4 of
this title, except that no pole signs shall be permitted in the Special Use
Restricted Zone. All signs shall be low profile type signs and must be located
on landscaping berms or attached to a building. Any lighted signs may not be
illuminated between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock
(5:00) A.M. (Ord. 97-4, 9-16-1997; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-17-6: SAND AND GRAVEL OPERATIONS:
See section
7-5A-14 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-04, 4-17-2018)
10-17-7: APPENDIX SR-17:
   A.   Criteria: Every proposed mining operation in the Special Use Restricted
Zone shall meet the following criteria:
      1.   The site lies within the Special Use Restricted Zone;
      2.   The applicant has presented an accurate site plan that shows
generally the topography of the overall site, as well as the proposed
extraction site, utilities, roads and major structures to be located on the
site;
      3.   The applicant has presented a reclamation plan for the site which
identifies the steps to be taken in reclaiming the site in accordance with
subsection B9 of this section, following the termination of mining operations;
and
      4.   Except for the setback requirements listed in subsection B1 of this
section, there shall be no limits as to the area or portion of the site that
may be utilized for mining operations; provided, however, that all disturbed
areas pursuant to a conditional use permit shall be located in the Special Use
Restricted Zone or in areas that are valid nonconforming uses.
   B.   Conditions: Every conditional use permit for a mining operation in the
Special Use Restricted Zone shall contain the following conditions:
      1.   Buffer Distances:
         a.   All extractive operations, roads, machinery, equipment and
stockpiles (excluding topsoil used for reclamation and screening and rock
crushing) shall be kept at least one hundred feet (100') horizontal distance
from any other property owner, except as may be reduced by the Planning
Commission, or in the event that the City Council approves such an exception.
         b.   All rock crushing operations shall be conducted at least four
hundred feet (400') horizontal distance from any other property owner who is
not engaged in mining operations (except as may be reduced by the Planning
Commission), but in no event shall the operation be closer than fifty feet
(50') from such other property owner.
         c.   All excavations shall be kept at least fifty feet (50') from a
public road except where the Planning Commission determines the excavations may
be moved closer if it will not endanger the users of the road.
      2.   Fencing And Berming: Areas of excavation with serious or hazardous
conditions shall be reasonably fenced, except where in the determination of the
planning commission other suitable devices may be used, e.g., earthen berms,
etc.
      3.   Grading: All grading to include specifications for slope
stabilization shall be done in accordance with the latest reclamation plans and
consistent with industry standards.
      4.   Air And Water Quality: All air and water quality related plans and
actions shall be monitored and approved as required by applicable rules of the
Davis County environmental health division and the state division of air
quality.
      5.   Hours Of Operation: All operation, crushing, screening and hauling
shall be confined to the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M., except as approved as a variance or waiver under the noise
ordinances of the city and except that the maintenance and repairs of vehicles
and equipment shall not be restricted by these periods. Operations which are
required as a result of public emergency demands as determined by the planning
commission or the city council shall also be excluded from these restrictions.
(Ord. 97-4, 9-16-1997)
      6.   Noise, Vibration: All equipment on site and off site utilized in the
extraction and processing of native natural resources shall be operated and
maintained so as to minimize the emanation of noise and vibration beyond the
property boundary. Soil berming and other techniques should be used to
accomplish the objective of reducing the impact of noise and vibration on
adjacent property.
      7.   Roads: All permanent haul roads within one hundred feet (100') of
public streets shall be regularly surfaced with asphalt or oil, and all
roadways shall be regularly watered, swept or surfaced so as to minimize loose
gravel, sand and soils from being carried onto the public streets. (Ord. 97-4,
9-16-1997; amd. 2012 Code)
      8.   Identification: Monuments or other means of identification shall be
placed and maintained around the perimeter of the excavation site so as to
enable reasonable identification of the property line separating the excavation
property from adjoining landowners.
      9.   Reclamation:
         a.   Objectives: The objectives of excavation reclamation shall be:
            (1)   To return the land, concurrently with the mining operation or
within a reasonable amount of time thereafter, to a predetermined condition
defined by the reclamation plan as submitted and approved, compatible with
planned, past, present or probable future land uses.
            (2)   To minimize or prevent present and future on site or off site
environmental degradations to the ecologic and hydrologic regimes caused by
mining operations, and to meet other pertinent state and federal regulations
regarding air and water quality standards and health and safety criteria.
            (3)   To minimize or prevent present and future hazards to public
safety and welfare.
         b.   Rehabilitation Standards: Following the termination of mining
operations, the site shall be reclaimed in accordance with the following
standards:
            (1)   The side walls of any pit or mound located on the site shall
be smoothed and evenly contoured, and the floor of the pit or top of a mound
shall be flattened and leveled;
            (2)   Mounds of fill shall not remain after reclamation of an
extraction operation;
            (3)   No slope shall be steeper than the critical angle of repose
for the material as required by applicable MHSA/OSHA standards (e.g., 33
degrees for gravel deposits);
            (4)   All areas shall be covered with a one inch (1") or thicker
layer of topsoil and reseeded with a hardy plant material having a sufficient
concentration to screen at least twenty five percent (25%) of the exposed
surface from view. Exceptions: Areas which naturally lack or have minimal soil
or vegetation shall be restored to a surface that corresponds with the native
condition of such an area rather than adding soil and/or reseeding.
   C.   Provision Of Surety:
      1.   Provision Of Surety Before Operations Begin: After receiving
notification that the conditional use permit has been approved by the planning
commission, but prior to the commencement of operation, the operator shall
provide reclamation surety to the city, in the form and amount to be reasonably
determined by the planning commission in consultation with the city engineer
and city council. (Ord. 97-4, 9-16-1997)
      2.   Amount Of Surety: In determining the amount of surety to be
provided, the planning commission shall consider factual information as to the
magnitude, type and costs of approved reclamation activities planned for the
land affected and the nature, extent and duration of operations under the
approved notice. The planning commission shall fix the amount of the bond
reasonably related thereto, to protect the city and ensure compliance with the
reclamation requirements of the conditional use permit; however, the amount of
the bond shall not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of
rehabilitating the excavation. The bond shall be periodically reviewed to
ensure that the amount of the bond is capable of providing for the required
reclamation. (Ord. 97-4, 9-16-1997; amd. 2012 Code)
      3.   Form Of Surety: In determining the form of surety to be provided by
the operator, the planning commission may approve a method acceptable and
consistent with the requirements of this chapter which may be one or a
combination of corporate surety bond, land, cash or other deposited securities.
Such surety may also be in the form of a corporate undertaking by the operator
or any other entity that has assets or net worth reasonably adequate to ensure
the reclamation of the site as required by the conditional use permit.
      4.   Release Of Surety: The liability under surety provisions shall
continue until such time as released as to part, or in its entirety, by the
city council.
      5.   Forfeiture Of Surety: If the operator fails or refuses to carry out
the necessary land reclamation as outlined in the approved reclamation plan,
the planning commission may, after notice and hearing, declare any surety filed
for this purpose forfeited, or in case of a corporate bond, file suit against
the operator and its bonding company. The city shall also have the right to
file suit against the defaulting permittee for costs of required reclamation
and reasonable attorney fees.
   D.   Inspections: An annual on site investigation and report will be
conducted by the public works department to determine whether the terms of the
grading plan and reclamation plan are being met; provided, however, that the
reasonable modifications of the site plan may be made by the applicant or
operator of the mining operations in so far as such modifications are required
in connection with the development of the site and the subsurface conditions
discovered pursuant to the mining operations.
   E.   Not A Nuisance: The mining operations shall not constitute a nuisance
pursuant to any ordinance of the city; provided, that parties locating
residences within the vicinity of the mining operations subsequent to approval
of the conditional use permit shall be deemed to have "come to the nuisance".
(Ord. 97-4, 9-16-1997)
CHAPTER 18
NATURAL OPEN SPACE ZONE (NOS)
SECTION:
10-18-1: Purpose
10-18-2: Uses
10-18-3: Permitted Uses
10-18-4: Conditional Uses
10-18-5: Minimum Lot Size
10-18-6: Maximum Building Height
10-18-7: Minimum Yard Requirements
10-18-8: Landscape Statement
10-18-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the natural open space zone (NOS) is to preserve and protect
areas of open space and exert a greater level of control over any potential
developments of existing natural open space areas. (Ord. 01-05, 4-3-2001)
10-18-2: USES:
Uses in the natural open space zone are shown below. If a use is not listed, it
is not allowed. (Ord. 01-05, 4-3-2001)
10-18-3: PERMITTED USES:
   Agricultural uses.
   Educational demonstration project.
   Natural open space and conservation areas.
   Natural preserves.
   Park.
   Pedestrian pathways and trails.
   Wetlands bank. (Ord. 01-05, 4-3-2001)
10-18-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
   Public or private recreational facilities.
   Public or private utility buildings and structures.
   Public or private utility transmission wires, lines, pipes and poles
(excluding cellular towers).
   Public wastewater treatment plant.
   Zoological park. (Ord. 01-05, 4-3-2001)
10-18-5: MINIMUM LOT SIZE:
   A.   Minimum lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   B.   Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 01-05, 4-3-2001)
10-18-6: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT:
Building height shall be limited to thirty five feet (35'); provided, that for
each foot of height in excess of twenty feet (20'), each required yard and
landscaped yard shall be increased one foot (1'). (Ord. 01-05, 4-3-2001)
10-18-7: MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front yard: Thirty feet (30').
   B.   Corner side yard: Thirty feet (30').
   C.   Interior side yard: Twenty feet (20').
   D.   Rear yard: Thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 01-05, 4-3-2001)
10-18-8: LANDSCAPE STATEMENT:
Landscaping should be a blend of the natural vegetation native to the area in
the natural open space zone. (Ord. 01-05, 4-3-2001)
CHAPTER 19
SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
10-19-1: Specific Use Standards
10-19-2: Applicability
10-19-3: Accessory Uses
10-19-4: Agricultural Uses
10-19-5: Automotive
10-19-6: Banking
10-19-7: Building, Contracting, And Suppliers
10-19-8: Education, Schools, And Training
10-19-9: Entertainment
10-19-10: General Office
10-19-11: Healthcare
10-19-12: Hospitality
10-19-13: Manufacturing And Assembly
10-19-14: Mining And Support Activities
10-19-15: Personal Services
10-19-16: Religious, Grant Making, Civic, Professional, And Similar
Organizations
10-19-17: Residential
10-19-18: Retail Trade
10-19-19: Social Services
10-19-20: Temporary Uses
10-19-21: Transportation And Freight
10-19-22: Utilities, Public Services, Waste Management, And Remediation
Services
10-19-23: Warehousing And Wholesale Trade
10-19-24: Warehousing, Storage Facilities
10-19-1: SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS:
Purpose and Intent: The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide
regulations for specific permitted or conditionally permitted land uses which
will ensure compatibility with surrounding conditions to mitigate potential
negative impacts associated with such uses. (Ord. 2024-07, 10-1-2024)
10-19-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This chapter contains the specific and additional regulations for
permitted and conditional uses identified in the land use tables for each of
the zones established within the City. Any use not listed as permitted or
conditional in the applicable zone shall be prohibited.
   B.   Compliance with specific use standards, as applicable, as well as all
other requirements of this Ordinance, all other Land Use Ordinances, and all
other Federal, State, and Local regulations are required for Land Use
Application approval, permit, or license required by City Ordinance.
   C.   The specific use standards provided in this chapter shall apply in
addition to those listed elsewhere in this code including parking, signage,
landscaping, site planning, and zone specific regulations. Where standards
identified for a specific use conflict with standards otherwise listed in this
Title, the standards herein shall apply to that use. (Ord. 2024-07, 10-1-2024;
amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-3: ACCESSORY USES:
   A.   Accessory Caretaker Residence (ACR): Where specifically allowed as an
accessory use to a commercial or industrial use in the applicable zone, are
subject to the following standards:
      1.   No more than one (1) ACR may be permitted on a parcel; where two or
more contiguous parcels are held in one ownership and utilized for the primary
land use, said contiguous parcels shall constitute only one (1) parcel for
purposes of this section.
      2.   The ACR shall be subordinate and clearly incidental to an approved
and functioning principal use;
      3.   For properties less than five (5) acres, the ACR shall be located
within the principal building on the site as a part of and in harmony with the
architecture of the main building(s) on the subject property;
      4.   For properties greater than five (5) acres in size the ACR may be
permitted within an accessory structure with the following:
         a.   The structure is located on the same property as the principal
use;
         b.   The structure, if visible from any public right of way, meets the
minimum architectural design standards provided in section
10-1-38, and in harmony with the architecture, materials, and finishes of the
primary structures on the property;
         c.   The structure meets all applicable requirements of the
International Building Code as adopted.
         d.   Recreational vehicles and mobile homes shall not be permitted as
caretaker dwellings:
         e.   Tiny homes shall be permitted when properly connected to water
and sewer facilities and skirted.
         f.   Separate utility connections shall be provided when required by
the applicable agency;
      5.   The ACR must meet all applicable requirements of the International
Building, Energy and Fire Codes as adopted, including requirements for fire
wall separations and fire sprinkling as applicable.
      6.   Each ACR shall have a kitchen suitable for cooking and preparing
meals, a bathroom with a shower or bathing facilities, living space, and
sleeping area;
      7.   Permits for an ACR shall be assessed appropriate utility connection
fees and applicable impact fees.
      8.   The ACR shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square
feet of occupied floor area;
      9.   A minimum of one (1) parking space shall be provided for the ACR in
addition to any parking spaces required for the principal uses on the property;
      10.   The ACR shall be occupied by only one (1) family;
      11.   The ACR shall be occupied or rented only by the property owner or
by an employee or subcontractor of the legal entity which owns the principal
use being cared for (with or without family members). Any person occupying an
ACR shall submit evidence of compliance with this Section upon request of the
City.
      12.   The property owners shall execute and record a covenant and
agreement with the jurisdiction to revert the property to a commercial or
industrial use without an ACR, including the removal of the kitchen facilities
of any permanent addition that does not meet the requirements of the zone in
which the use is located, after the expiration of any associated permit granted
or the termination of the business.
   B.   ATM, Kiosk, Vending Machine (Self-Service, Interactive, Outdoors): This
Use shall be located in a manner that does not interfere with or cause
difficulty in the safe movement of pedestrians. Machines and kiosks shall be
located:
      1.   Next to a main building on the property; and
      2.   In a manner that will not:
         a.   Reduce required landscaped areas;
         b.   Cause customers to wait in vehicle drive aisles or parking areas;
or
         c.   Create a public nuisance or a hazard to public safety.
   C.   Contractors Yard, Construction Site or New Subdivision:
      1.   Review: The applicant shall submit a site plan and written narrative
that clearly identifies and explains the location and size of all proposed
structures, parking areas, and outdoor storage areas.
      2.   Disturbance Area: The maximum disturbance area of a Contractor's
Yard shall be two (2) acres.
      3.   Buffer: The Contractor's Yard shall be located a minimum distance of
three hundred feet from any residence.
      4.   Screening: All outdoor storage and vehicle parking areas shall be
screened from view from adjacent properties. Appropriate screening may include
fencing, berms, or vegetation.
      5.   Dust/Mud: The applicant shall submit a dust and erosion control plan
that demonstrates no migration of soil beyond the subject property boundary, as
well as mitigation to prevent vehicles from tracking mud onto the right-of-way.
      6.   Maintenance Pad: The applicant shall install an impervious pad with
containment borders and a filtration system to address run off for the storage
and maintenance of vehicles/equipment.
      7.   Office: The contractor's business office may be an accessory use to
a Contractor's Yard.
      8.   Employee Parking: All employee parking, including any ADA spaces,
shall be onsite.
      9.   Lighting: Safety lighting which is shielded and prevents light from
spilling onto adjacent properties is allowed. Parking lot lighting, and flood
lighting are prohibited.
      10.   Prohibitions: The following shall be prohibited:
         a.   Location: The placement of a Contractor's Yard within a platted
residential subdivision.
         b.   Waste/Debris: The disposal of construction waste or vegetation.
         c.   Burning: The burning of vegetation from construction sites or
construction waste.
         d.   Hazardous Fluids: The storage of hazardous materials (gas, oil,
etc.) exceeding levels established in Table 307.1(1) of the International
Building Code.
         e.   Contaminated Soils: The dumping or storage of contaminated soils
or materials for any reason.
         f.   Parking Within the Setback: The parking of vehicles or machinery
within the building setback lines of the zone.
         g.   Fill: The use of a Contractor's Yard as a repository for excess
soils or materials from other work sites, whether they be from the applicant or
from other contractors.
         h.   Mining of Earth: Excavation or mining of earth.
         i.   Retail Sales: Retail sales of products to customers.
   D.   Outdoor Display:
      1.   The outdoor display of merchandise for sale is allowed as an
accessory use to the main use on the same lot or tract of land.
      2.   The outdoor display of goods for sale incidental to a retail use,
plant nursery, sales and rental of motor vehicles, mobile homes, boats or
trailers, or the outdoor display of automobile-related merchandise for sale
incidental to a gasoline filling station shall not be required to be screened.
      3.   In all districts where outdoor display of goods is permitted, such
display shall conform to all of the following requirements:
         a.   All outdoor display shall conform to the use-specific
requirements of that particular use.
         b.   No outdoor display area shall be located in a required landscaped
area.
         c.   Outdoor display areas shall meet all landscaping requirements.
         d.   No portion of the right-of-way shall be used for any type of
display.
         e.   No outdoor display area shall be permitted to obstruct a
pedestrian walkway.
         f.   In no instance shall outdoor display of merchandise be located
within, nor encroach upon, a fire lane, maneuvering aisle, or a parking space
necessary to meet the minimum parking requirements of the other use(s) of the
lot or parcel.
         g.   Outdoor display shall be situated so as not to create a
visibility obstruction within a parking area or adjacent public street.
         h.   All portions of outdoor display areas shall have adequate grading
and drainage and shall be continuously maintained.
   E.   Outdoor Storage: No yard or other open space shall be used for the
storage of junk, debris or obsolete vehicles; and no land shall be used for
such purposes, except as specifically permitted herein and as permitted in a
zone district.
      1.   Existing Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage lawfully existing or
permitted prior to the effective date hereof (March 6, 2018), shall not be
enlarged, extended or replaced, except in strict compliance with all the
requirements of this title. Non-conforming property owners shall only be
required to comply with provisions contained herein, upon application for site
plan amendment, conditional use permit expansion, change of primary use of the
property, or subdivision.
      2.   Noncomplying Site Element: A noncomplying wall or landscaping
element or related site feature shall be considered a noncomplying site element
and shall not be reconstructed, except as permitted under the procedures of
noncomplying sites as set forth in this title.
      3.   Location: No outdoor storage shall be located in a required front
yard setback.
      4.   Surface Material: Outdoor storage yards shall be hard surfaced with
asphalt, concrete, or other dustless material, such as washed gravel, recycled
asphalt, or permeable surface treatment.
      5.   Screening:
         a.   All outdoor storage shall be screened from the view of any
adjacent public street or adjacent residential land use or zone district by a
decorative solid wall constructed of masonry or concrete tilt up panels which
are similarly finished to match or complement the main building material on
site. Outdoor storage walls shall be a minimum six feet (6') in height and a
maximum twelve feet (12') in height measured at the highest finished grade.
         b.   A chain link fence with slat inserts shall not constitute an
acceptable screening device to satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
Chain link gates may only be used in conjunction with outdoor storage under the
following circumstance:
            (1)   They are not located on property lines adjacent to City
streets (Center Street, Redwood Road, Cutler Drive, and 1100 North).
            (2)   They are screened with a vinyl or fabric mesh screen. Vinyl
slats are not permitted as a screening method.
         c.   All portions of outdoor storage areas shall have adequate grading
and drainage and shall be continuously maintained.
         d.   Outdoor storage areas shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet
(20') from the street right-of-way.
         e.   Outdoor storage areas shall be buffered between the screening
wall and the adjacent street with improved vegetated landscaping. The buffer
area shall be comprised of a mixture of evergreens and deciduous trees, shrubs,
lawn, or other vegetative ground cover, or up to fifty percent (50%) non-
vegetative mulch. The minimum tree size shall be two inch (2") caliper for
ornamental and shade trees and six foot (6') height for coniferous trees. Trees
shall be planted with a maximum separation of twenty five feet (25') on center.
Woody shrubs shall be a minimum two (2) gallon size container.
      6.   Materials And Equipment Storage General Commercial (C-G) Zone:
         a.   Materials stored behind any screening wall shall be stacked no
higher than the top of the screening wall, unless set back from the wall a
minimum of twenty feet (20'). The maximum height of outdoor storage materials
shall be sixteen feet (16').
         b.   Heavy equipment or vehicles which are taller than the screening
wall adjacent to a residential use or a residentially zoned property, shall be
set back from the wall a minimum of two feet (2') for every one foot (1') of
equipment height above the height of the screening wall or a minimum of twenty
feet (20'), whichever is greater.
      7.   Manufacturing Distribution (M-D) Zone:
         a.   Storage yards with frontage on Center Street, Redwood Road, or
1100 North: Materials stored behind any screening wall shall be stacked no
higher than the top of the wall adjacent to the street, unless set back from
the wall a minimum of twenty feet (20'). The maximum height of outdoor storage
materials shall be sixteen feet (16').
         b.   Storage yards with frontage on other City streets: Materials
stored behind any screening wall shall be stacked no higher than the top of the
wall, unless set back from the wall a minimum of twenty feet (20'). The maximum
height of outdoor storage materials shall be twenty feet (20').
         c.   Heavy equipment or vehicles which are taller than the screening
wall adjacent to a residential use or a residentially zoned property shall be
set back from the wall a minimum of two feet (2') for every one foot (1') of
equipment height above the height of the screening wall or a minimum of twenty
feet (20'), whichever is greater.
         d.   Heavy equipment or vehicles which are taller than the screening
wall adjacent to Center Street, Redwood Road, or 1100 North shall be set back
from the wall one foot (1') for every foot of equipment height above the top of
the wall.
      8.   Dumpsters And Refuse Containers For New Or Expanded Uses In All
Zones:
         a.   Construction: Enclosures shall be a solid, opaque enclosure
constructed of brick, masonry, or concrete wall panels of at least six feet
(6') in height measured at the highest finished grade.
         b.   Placement: Placement of dumpsters and enclosures shall be planned
and constructed in a manner that allows unobstructed access to each dumpster
and the unobstructed opening of the gates during the emptying process.
Dumpsters shall not be located in such a manner that the service vehicle will
block any street intersection, nor shall they be located within a required
front setback area.
         c.   Gates: All enclosures shall have service access gates and their
construction shall be of sturdy metal frame and hinges with an opaque non-see-
through facing material. Service gates shall be attached to post not connected
to the enclosure. Enclosures with gates that swing out from the dumpster shall
be set back from the property line at least a distance equal to the width of
the gate. Hinge assemblies shall be strong and durable so access and servicing
gates function properly and do not sag.
   F.   Temporary Portable Storage Containers: Placement and use of temporary
portable storage container(s) are subject to the following conditions and
limitations:
      1.   Shall only be used for storage of goods and materials.
      2.   Storage of hazardous, toxic, or explosive substances, or any other
substance requiring a 704 placard is prohibited.
      3.   Commercial, wholesale or retail sales, flea markets, peddling,
garage sales or other similar types of activities is prohibited.
      4.   Habitation of storage units by humans or animals is prohibited.
      5.   Any property is limited to one temporary portable container at any
given time.
      6.   Duration of use.
         a.   Shipping containers can be allowed in the C-G zone as long as
they are buffered from public view, no time limit.
         b.   Shipping containers may be used for material and equipment
storage upon active construction sites so long as they are under an active
building or land use permit.
         c.   Smaller containers, such as "PODS," may be utilized in the
residential zones for up to three months within a calendar year, unless they
are under an active building permit at which time as this period may be
extended for up to an additional six months. (Ord. 2024-07, 10-1-2024; amd.
Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-4: AGRICULTURAL USES:
   A.   Community and Urban Gardens:
      1.   Community and urban gardens shall comply with the minimum lot size
and width in the district in which it is located, except within residential
zones.
      2.   Community and urban gardens shall not be permitted on sites with
known or possible contamination from previous commercial or industrial uses
unless soil samples have been tested and deemed safe by the appropriate state
or federal authority who holds jurisdiction over such matters.
      3.   Accessory Building standards:
         a.   Only one accessory building shall be permitted per acre of lot
size.
         b.   Setbacks: All accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of
twenty feet (20') from the front property line and five feet (5') from all
other property lines.
         c.   Height: All accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum
wall height of fourteen feet (14') and twenty feet (20') to the roof peak.
         d.   Size: All accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum
footprint of four hundred (400) sq. ft.
      4.   Parking:
         a.   Off-street parking shall be provided and may be paved or unpaved
with a dustless gravel surface.
         b.   A minimum of one (1) space per eight (8) individually plotted
cultivated areas within the garden shall be provided.
         c.    Signage may include one (1) sign per road frontage, no larger
than thirty-two (32) sq. ft.
      5.   Composting:
         a.   Any compost container or pile must be located within an enclose
structure or located at least twenty feet (20') from any property line.
         b.   Compost materials shall be stored or screened in a manner that is
not visible from adjacent residential properties or residential zoning
district.
         c.   Composting areas shall be maintained in a manner that protects
adjacent properties from nuisance odors, the attraction of rodents or other
pests, and runoff onto adjacent properties.
      6.   Animals: the keeping of animals or livestock in a community garden
shall be prohibited.
      7.   Beekeeping: all beekeeping facilities shall be in accordance with
the State of Utah, Department of Agriculture regulations.
      8.   Storage Requirements: All flammables, pesticides and fertilizers
shall be stored in accordance with the regulations of the uniform fire code and
Utah state department of agriculture or successor agency. At a minimum, any
area where such materials are stored shall have a continuous concrete floor and
lip which is tall enough to contain one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
volume of all the materials stored in the area. No pesticides, chemical
fertilizers or other hazardous materials shall be stored outside of buildings.
      9.   Disposal Requirements: All flammables, pesticides, fertilizers and
other hazardous wastes should be disposed of according to federal and state
requirements.
      10.   Hours Of Operation: shall be limited from dawn until dusk and
protect neighbors from light, noise, disturbance or interruption.
      11.   Large Vehicles: No vehicles shall be kept or stored on the
property, except that such vehicles may be on the property as necessary for
completion of grading performed in accordance with a grading permit.
      12.   Irrigation: Sufficient irrigation shall be provided to cover all
needs of the community garden. Irrigation systems designed for water
conservation such as, but not limited to, hand watering, and drip irrigation
are strongly encouraged.
      13.   On Site Sales And Events: Owners and producers associated with
community gardens may conduct educational or promotional events, and sell
locally grown products on site provided the following requirements are met:
         a.   The sale or event is directly linked to the community garden. No
external events such as a reception or sales of products and goods not
generally associated with a community garden are allowed, unless the event is
otherwise allowed in the zone by the zoning ordinance.
         b.   Signs are allowed as temporary portable signs subject to the
regulations in section Chapter 6 of this title. Signs must be removed
immediately following the sale or event each day.
         c.   All required city business licenses and temporary permits shall
be obtained prior to the sale or event.
         d.   Sales stands and exhibits are not allowed within the public right
of way.
         e.   The sales stand and exhibits shall be nonpermanent structures and
must be removed immediately following the sale or event.
      14.   Fencing: All fencing shall comply with the standards in section
10-1-29, "Fences", of this title. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-5: AUTOMOTIVE:
   A.   Dealer, Passenger Vehicles, Recreation Vehicles, Motorcycles, And Boats
(Sale, Lease, Or Rent): The following site plan criteria shall apply to all new
dealerships as of the date of this ordinance and to any existing dealerships
subject to site a plan review for expansion, including remodels or additions,
or parking lot replacement/repavement greater than five thousand (5,000) sq.
ft. Operational standards shall apply to all existing and new dealers.
      1.   Site Plan Standards:
         a.   Landscaping shall be required along any street frontage at a
minimum of ten feet (10') and shall be subject to the water efficient landscape
standards of Chapter 22 of this Title.
         b.   Designated customer parking must be provided at a ratio of one
(1) space for every ten (10) vehicles displayed.
         c.   Employee parking shall be provided at a rate of one (1) space for
every two hundred (200) sq. ft. of sales office with a minimum of four (4)
employee parking stalls.
         d.   Off-Street customer and employee parking stalls must be
identified on the site plan and physically marked on the property. Customer
parking stalls shall not be provided behind the sales offices and shall be
located in a convenient manner to the main entrance of the sales office or
building.
         e.   All buildings and uses other than sales offices must provide
additional designated parking stalls at the ratio specified in Chapter 6 of
this Title.
         f.   Where adjacent to a residential use, a minimum twenty foot (20')
buffer between the residential use and the business shall be required. Walls,
landscaping, and setbacks, or a combination of these items must be used, to
mitigate the impact upon the adjacent residential use. The City shall consider
the visual appearance of the site, the traffic flows, noise, light and the size
and purpose of adjacent streets or alleys, the extent of the business
operations, and other factors in determining the buffer sufficiency.
         g.   The minimum lot area shall be at least one (1) acre. The required
display area shall be located in the front and side yard areas only. All
display areas shall be hard-surfaced with asphalt or concrete paving and shall
meet the minimum requirements within Chapter 6, for access, landscaping, and
circulation requirements.
         h.   The minimum lot frontage shall be one hundred feet (100') in
width. The frontage of corner lots shall be determined by the street on which
the property is addressed.
         i.   Dealerships are exempt from the minimum lot area and lot frontage
requirements of this section if all inventory is stored and displayed indoors.
Indoor-only dealerships are subject to all other applicable requirements of
this section, and the following additional standards:
            (1)   Sales of vehicles must be conducted entirely within a fully-
enclosed building consisting of a showroom with an area no smaller than three
thousand (3,000) square feet.
            (2)   Showroom spaces shall be visible from the exterior of the
building, through the use of windows, storefronts, or other architectural
elements.
            (3)   Outdoor sales, display, and storage is prohibited.
            (4)   Parking associated with indoor-only dealerships (sale, lease,
or rent) shall only be used for customers and employees.
      2.   Operational Standards:
         a.   Outside speakers, lighting which intrudes into adjacent
properties, deliveries before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m., repair work outside
of a building, and any other public nuisance conduct is prohibited.
         b.   Loading and unloading from a public street or public right of way
is strictly prohibited.
         c.   Storage (including temporary storage for the purpose of delivery
or reorganization of other vehicles upon the property) and display of vehicles
from a public street or public right of way is strictly prohibited.
         d.   All storage and display of vehicles shall be setback from a
public sidewalk a minimum of ten feet (10').
         e.   For the purposes of maintaining safe access and to promote
uncluttered and attractive displays, all outdoor displays must be done in a
manner consistent with parking lot standards contained within Chapter 6 of this
title, such that all individual units can be relocated without the necessity of
first relocating others.
         f.   All display vehicles shall meet all requirements of law at all
times, shall be in operating condition, shall not have flat tires or broken
windows, and shall be capable of being licensed and registered without
additional repair or alteration.
         g.   No part of any required landscaping area shall be used for
outdoor display.
      3.   Multi-tenant developments. Dealerships with no outdoor display may
be located within a multi-tenant development only if all requirements of this
title are met, including:
         a.   Parking requirements.
         b.   Site and landscaping requirements.
         c.   Ingress and egress points are provided for the other businesses.
         d.   Dealerships with onsite outdoor display are prohibited in multi-
tenant developments.
      4.   Rental and leasing dealers. Outdoor storage or display of vehicles
for rent or shall be prohibited for rental and leasing dealerships fronting
Center Street, Redwood Road, and 1100 North.
   B.   Dealer, Commercial Vehicles (Sale, Lease, Or Rent): All new commercial
vehicle dealerships, as of the date of this ordinance and to any existing
dealerships subject to site a plan review for expansion, including remodels or
additions, or parking lot replacement/repavement greater than five thousand
(5,000) sq. ft. shall comply with the standards set forth in section A above,
unless otherwise provided as follows:
      1.   Designated customer parking must be provided at a ratio of one (1)
space for every thirty (30) vehicles displayed.
      2.   Commercial vehicles sales shall be prohibited where adjacent to a
residential use.
      3.   The minimum lot area shall be at least two (2) acres. The required
display area shall be located in the front and side yard areas only. All
display areas shall be hard-surfaced with asphalt or concrete paving and shall
meet the minimum requirements within Chapter 6, for access, landscaping, and
circulation requirements.
   C.   Maintenance, Car Wash:
      1.   In order to preserve the water resources within the City, car washes
shall meet the following additional standards:
         a.   In addition to the applicable landscaping requirements of chapter
22 of this title, landscaping for all car washes include plantings which act as
a sound and visual barrier in areas adjacent to the stacking and drive-through
areas.
         b.   Car washes shall use façade materials that produce texture. Such
materials include, but are not limited to, split-face block, brick, or stucco
and shall utilize more than one such material. All colors shall be muted.
Bright or reflective colors shall not be allowed except as an accent, up to ten
percent (10%) of each façade. No long, continuous rooflines without a
horizontal break shall be permitted.
         c.   Sides of car wash bays or tunnels facing a residential use or
neighborhood zoning district shall be completely enclosed by a wall. Solid
windows that do not open, glass block, or other closed material may be used for
the wall.
         d.   Vacuum stations and related equipment shall comply with the
setbacks for the principal structure.
         e.   Vacuum stations and related equipment are prohibited along any
side of a building facing a residential use or residential zoning district.
         f.   Recycling of all water used in a car wash is encouraged to reduce
the amount of fresh culinary water used. All car washes must be plumbed at the
time of construction to provide for water recycling systems for both wash water
and reverse osmosis rinse water systems whether installed or not.
         g.   The site shall provide space sufficient to allow a minimum of
five (5) vehicles to stack while waiting to access the car wash prior to
reaching the payment area. All stacking shall be maintained on site and shall
not back onto any public right-of-way.
      2.   Water Limitations:
         a.   All car washes must install systems and equipment sufficient to
limit the amount of fresh culinary water used on a per-vehicle basis. No car
wash shall be permitted unless it can demonstrate that the system shall not use
more than an average of thirty-five (35) gallons of culinary water per car.
         b.   Systems which recycle water used for vehicle washing and recycle
reverse osmosis reject water are required to be installed and used in
perpetuity.
      3.   The use of recycling water systems and the disposal of water fluids
and solids shall comply with applicable state and federal laws, guidelines, and
standards. Larger storage tanks may be permitted on site in order to capture
and reuse water.
   D.   Maintenance And Repair, Automotive:
      1.   Minimum lot size shall be as required by the underlying zone.
      2.   All drives, parking, storage and maneuvering areas shall be paved
with concrete or asphalt.
      3.   Bay doors. No automobile repair or service facility shall be
permitted to have bay doors facing a residential district, nor fronting Center
Street, Redwood Road, or 1100 North.
      4.   Enclosed building. All repair or service activities shall be
contained within an enclosed building.
      5.   Uses fronting public street. No grease rack or lift, oil draining
pit, or any other visible appliance for such purposes used in or in conjunction
with a gasoline filling or service station, other than filling caps, shall be
located within twelve feet (12') of any street right-of-way line or within
twenty-five feet (25') of any street lot line, except where such appliance or
pit is within a building.
      6.   Parking.
         a.   A minimum of three (3) parking spaces shall be provided per
repair bay in addition to the required parking for office and sales spaces
required by Chapter 6, Parking.
         b.   Vehicles held awaiting service, parts, or inoperable vehicles
shall only be stored within an enclosed building. Outdoor storage shall only be
permitted in the MD or MG zone and shall be provided in the side or rear yards.
Outdoor storage shall be in accordance with the minimum standards contained
within Section
10-19-3(E).
         c.   All outside storage facilities shall be located on a properly
drained site that is graded to ensure rapid drainage and to ensure that the
site remains free from stagnant pools of water.
         d.   Stored vehicles shall be organized in a unified manner in Parking
Stalls (no double-stacking).
         e.   The use shall not add to the contamination of the soil, alter
ground water flow, create additional drainage runoff, or alter topography in
such a way that creates hazards to the proposed site, other properties, or the
City.
      7.   The Applicant shall provide the City with a drainage collection and
disposal plan for vehicle fluids that complies with all federal, state and
local standards.
   E.   Repair, Automotive Body, Paint, and Interior, Additional Standards:
      1.   All wrecked or inoperable vehicles must be stored within the main or
accessory structure. Only operable vehicles used by the business, customers,
and employees may be parked outdoors.
      2.   This use may use only high-volume, low-pressure, spray guns in
painting operations within an approved and permitted paint booth which has been
inspected by the South Davis Metro Fire District.
      3.   Within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential district,
hours of operation shall be limited to seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to eight
o’clock (8:00) P.M.
   F.   Repossession Services:
   1.   Repossessed vehicles shall only be stored within an approved motor
vehicle towing and impound lots which are in compliance with outdoor storage
regulations contained within Section
10-19-3(E).
   G.   Retail Sales, Automotive Parts And Accessories:
      1.   No outdoor storage or display shall be permitted.
   H.   Retail Sales, Tire And Wheel Installation:
      1.   Outdoor display of tires and wheels shall only be permitted during
operating hours of the business and shall be stored within an enclosed building
nightly.
      2.   Outdoor display shall not be permitted in required landscaping
areas, within an adjacent right of way, public sidewalk, or block pedestrian
pathways providing customer access from parking areas to building entrances.
   I.   Storage, Motor Vehicle Towing And Impound Lots:
      1.   All impound lots shall conform to the standards for impound lots
established by the State of Utah Division of Motor Vehicles.
      2.   All impound lots shall be hard surfaced with either asphalt or
concrete.
      3.   All impound lots shall be in conformance with the outdoor storage
regulations contained in Section
10-19-3(E).
      4.   No dismantling or demolition of automobiles or other vehicles shall
be conducted on the premises.
   J.   Wholesale, Automotive Parts And Supplies (New).
      1.   Outdoor storage prohibited.
   K.   Wholesale, Motor Vehicles:
      1.   Wholesale, motor vehicle dealers shall be prohibited on properties
which front Center Street, Redwood Road, and 1100 North.
      2.   All outdoor storage and display shall comply with Sections
10-19-3(E) and
10-19-3(D).
   L.   Wholesale, Tire And Tube:
      1.   Outdoor storage prohibited. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-6: BANKING:
   A.   Banks, Credit Unions, Mortgage Brokers, Financial Managers:
      1.   ATMs shall be located in accordance with
10-19-3(E).
      2.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with
10-6-5.
   B.   Pawn Shops:
      1.   All pawn shops shall conform to the business license standards
contained within Title 3, Chapter 7, Secondhand, Junk and Antique Dealers.
      2.   Outdoor storage or display of merchandise is prohibited. (Ord. 2025-
06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-7: BUILDING, CONTRACTING, AND SUPPLIERS:
   A.   All Building, Contracting, and Suppliers Uses:
      1.   For uses where outdoor display is permitted, all outdoor display
shall be in accordance with Section
10-19-3(D).
      2.   All outdoor storage areas shall be in accordance with Section
10-19-3(E) Outdoor Storage.
      3.   Storage of hazardous materials and chemicals shall be in accordance
with applicable state and federal regulations.
      4.   All manufacturing shall be done within an enclosed structure.
   B.   Retail, Construction Materials:
      1.   Home improvement, hardware, or landscaping stores shall be limited
in size to a maximum of fifteen thousand (15,000) sq. ft. in the C-S Zone.
(Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-8: EDUCATION, SCHOOLS, AND TRAINING:
   A.   Group Instruction, Martial Arts, Preschools, Sports, Dance and
Recreation:
      1.   Size shall be limited by the minimum lot size, coverage, parking and
landscaping requirements for the zone.
      2.   Required parking:
         a.   At least one space for each instructor, four (4) visitor spaces,
and four (4) queuing spaces for drop of and pick up;
         b.   An additional one (1) visitor space for every five (5) students
thereof allowed beyond the first twenty (20) students; and
         c.   If the proposed use includes recitals, performances, or programs
with audience attendance, the minimum visitor parking shall include sufficient
space to accommodate four (4) parking space for each 100 sq. ft. of viewing or
seating area.
      3.   An adequate off-street loading and unloading area shall be provided
to ensure vehicles are not queuing onto a public or private street.
   B.   Micro-Education Schools:
      1.   A micro-education entity may operate in a facility that meets Group
E Occupancy requirements as defined by the International Building Code (IBC),
subject to the following:
         a.   May have up to one hundred (100) students in the facility; and
         b.   Shall have enough space for at least twenty (20) net square feet
per student.
      2.   A micro-education entity may operate in a facility that is subject
to and complies with the same occupancy requirements as a Class B Occupancy as
defined by the IBC, if:
         a.   The facility has a code compliant fire alarm system and carbon
monoxide detection system:
            (1)   Each classroom in the facility has an exit directly to the
outside at the level of exit or discharge; or
            (2)   The structure has a code compliant fire sprinkler system;
         b.   The facility has an automatic fire sprinkler system in fire areas
of the facility that are greater than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
         c.   The facility has enough space for at least twenty (20) net square
feet per student.
      3.   A secure outdoor play area is required for all micro-education
facilities and shall comply with the following:
         a.   The play area shall be located a minimum of five feet (5') from
any vehicle parking, access, or circulation area.
         b.   The play area shall be secured by a well-maintained fence that is
at least six feet (6') in height with a self-latching gate.
         c.   The outdoor play area shall be maintained in good condition and
be finished and landscaped to include ground covers, paving, or other surfaces
commonly found in an outdoor play area and that do not pose a risk to children.
         d.   The outdoor play area shall not be used before eight o'clock (8:
00) A.M. or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
      4.   A minimum of one off-street accessible (ADA) passenger loading zone
shall be provided in accordance with ADA standards.
      5.   Off-street vehicle parking shall be provided in accordance with
Title 10, Chapter 6: Off Street Parking Requirements.
   C.   Professional CDL Driving Schools:
      1.   Vehicle storage shall not be permitted within the front yard area.
      2.   Practice areas or lots shall be provided in the side and rear yard
areas only. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-9: ENTERTAINMENT:
   A.   Amusement Centers and Arcades (Ax Throwing, Bowling, Go Carts, Mini
Golf, Skating):
      1.   All structures or outdoor recreation areas shall maintain a minimum
setback of one hundred feet (100') from any abutting residential zones.
      2.   Any outdoor event or activity center located adjacent to a
residential zone shall be limited to outside use only between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
      3.   Accessory uses include, but are not limited to: retail, equipment
rental; restaurant and drinking establishments may be allowed if designed to
serve patrons of the use only.
      4.   All outdoor public address systems shall be located a minimum five
hundred feet (500') from any residential zone.
      5.   Additional standards for swimming pool: Any outdoor swimming pool
shall be completely enclosed within a six foot (6') nonscalable fence that
meets the requirements of the Building Code.
      6.   Additional standards for outdoor stage or musical venue: Except for
City sponsored events, any use with a capacity of one hundred (100) seats or
more and within one thousand feet (1,000') of a residential zone shall be
subject to approval of a conditional use permit. This applies to one time and
seasonal events also.
      7.   Amusement facilities shall have adequate parking as per chapter 6 of
this title.
      8.   Amusement facilities shall have Health Department approval for
sanitary and washing provisions to meet all the needs of anticipated attendees.
      9.   Seasonal or one time events or concession stands not exceeding ten
(10) calendar days per event, or forty five (45) calendar days (within 1 year)
of intermittent use.
      10.   Miniature golf courses or other outdoor amusement facilities can be
seasonal in nature the following standards and conditions of this section have
been met and that the facility meets all the requirements imposed on it by this
chapter.
         a.   The course shall be screened from any major thoroughfare so as
not to be a distraction to traffic or endanger the traffic with activities.
         b.   Lighting will be pointed downward and away from the road and
shall not remain on after longer than thirty minutes (30) after closing.
Facilities within one thousand feet (1,000') of a residential zone shall cease
operations after 11:00 p.m.
         c.   Any music or other noise shall be buffered and controlled to
maintain an audible impact of less than fifty (50) dBA at the property line.
         d.   Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 6.
         e.   The course shall not incorporate any large theme park type
structures (i.e., dinosaurs, pirate ships, windmills and the like).
         f.   Trash receptacle(s) shall be located strategically throughout the
facility as to provide adequate refuse collection.
         g.   Landscaping shall be an integral part of the site plan to help
the facility blend in with the surrounding property and to serve as a natural
buffer, and in accordance with Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscape
Regulations.
         h.   Any outdoor storage shall be screened from public view.
      11.   Ax throwing or other activities which create unusual or excessive
waste or are dangerous shall be restricted to persons eighteen (18) years or
older unless supervised by a parent or legal guardian. Additional measures
shall be provided to accommodate proper disposal of said waste or e-waste in a
manner compliant with any local, county, state or federal regulations.
   B.   Athletic Club, Fitness and Recreational Sports (Tennis, Pickleball,
Volleyball, Swimming):
      1.   Size shall be limited by the minimum lot size, coverage, parking and
landscaping requirements for the zone.
      2.   Required parking:
         a.   At least one space for each employee, referee, coach or other
support persons on the highest shift.
         b.   For each pickleball or tennis court (or similar) a minimum of two
(2) parking spaces per court shall be provided.
         c.   For each volleyball or basketball court (used for multi-player
teams) a minimum of six (6) parking spaces per court shall be provided.
         d.   If the proposed use includes tournaments, performances, or
programs with audience attendance, the minimum visitor parking shall include
sufficient space to accommodate four (4) parking space for each one hundred
(100) sq. ft. of viewing or seating area.
      3.   An adequate off-street loading and unloading area shall be provided
to ensure vehicles are not queuing onto a public or private street.
      4.   Commercial outdoor recreation which generates potential noise
impacts and is located within three hundred feet (300') of a residential zone
or use shall be sufficiently located and buffered to ensure that noise
generation is limited to a maximum of fifty five (55) dBA at the property line,
or as otherwise regulated by Title 10, Chapter 4, Noise Control.
   C.   Production and Distribution, Motion Picture, Video, Television, Music,
Including Recording Studios:
      1.   No structure shall be located within thirty five feet (35') of any
lot line; unless sufficient sound buffering insulation is installed within the
building, in which case the minimum setback shall be ten feet (10').
      2.   Location in multi-tenant buildings shall not be permitted unless
adequate sound buffering insulation can be demonstrated an installed.
   D.   Promoters, Performing Arts, Sports or Similar Events with Facilities:
      1.   Such Uses shall not be located any closer to residential districts
than three hundred feet (300'), as measured at the closest Property Lines.
   E.   Single Individual Studios, Independent Artists, Writers, and
Performers:
      1.   Limited in size to a maximum five thousand (5,000) sq. ft. for
single individual studios and artists.
      2.   Sound proofing shall be required for those uses which will include
sound production.
   F.   Theater, Movie, Live Entertainment Venues, Performing Arts Companies,
Sports Teams:
      1.   Such Uses shall not be located any closer to residential districts
than three hundred feet (300'), as measured at the closest property lines.
      2.   All such uses shall include sound proofing insulation to be
installed.
      3.   Hours of operation shall be limited to nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. to
twelve o’clock (12:00) A.M. for commercial locations greater than one thousand
feet (1,000') from a residential use and nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. to ten
o’clock (10:00) P.M. for locations located less than one thousand feet (100')
from a residential use. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-10: GENERAL OFFICE:
   A.   Call Centers, Information Services, and Data Processing Services:
      1.   Parking shall be provided at a rate of one (1) space per employee
for the highest shift or one (1) space per fifty (50) sq. ft. of call center
floor area, whichever is greater; and
      2.   One (1) space per two hundred (200) sq. ft. of dedicated private
office space.
   B.   Employment Placement Agencies:
      1.   This Use is limited to the placement of patrons in "office-only"
jobs. Where the Use requires patrons to come to the location to view job
opportunities and/or receive wages, the following additional requirements
apply:
         a.   The Use must be located at least three hundred feet (300') away
from any Residential Use, as measured at the closest Property Lines.
         b.   An indoor waiting area, or sufficient size to accommodate all
patrons, must be provided.
   C.   Leasing And Rental, Office Machinery, and Equipment:
      1.   Outdoor storage prohibited. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-11: HEALTHCARE:
   A.   Outpatient Mental Health and Substance Abuse Centers:
      1.   Proof of state licensure shall be required with application for
licensure.
      2.   The proposed use must demonstrate compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
      3.   Hours of operation shall be limited to eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. to
nine o’clock (9:00) P.M.
      4.   A security plan shall be submitted with application for licensure.
   B.   Residential Care Facilities, Nursing Care and Assisted Living: All
instances of this use shall comply with and provide, as applicable, the
following:
      1.   Proof of state licensure for Assisted Living Facility.
      2.   A design, which is residential in character and architecturally
compatible with the neighborhood, that adequately screens the use from
neighboring lots, providing outdoor living space for the residents and complies
with Utah Department of Health standards.
      3.   All outdoor lighting shall be screened lighting to ensure that
lighting is contained within the property boundary.
      4.   Signage shall be limited to one sign per street frontage or entrance
and may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, each.
      5.   The use shall include a delivery, traffic, and parking plan which
adequately mitigates the adverse impacts of increased traffic generation on the
neighborhood in which the proposed use is located. The parking plan must
propose parking appropriate for the proposed use of the facility and meet the
minimum standards in Chapter 6, Parking Regulations. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-12: HOSPITALITY:
   A.   Alcoholic Beverages: All hospitality uses which permit the sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages shall comply with Title 3, Chapter 2
Alcoholic Beverages
   B.   Banquet and Reception Centers:
      1.   Shall be located and designed with full consideration of their
proximity and effect to adjacent use of property and the surrounding area, and
to the reduction of such nuisance factors as lights, traffic and noise.
      2.   Be adequately maintained with housekeeping practices to prevent the
creation of a nuisance, including sound proofing to limit the site noise to no
more than fifty five (55) dBA at the property line.
      3.   The facility shall be subject to the health authority requirements
for adequate lavatory and hand washing facilities based on the maximum number
of guests.
      4.   All food preparation and service on the premises will be subject to
health authority requirements.
      5.   Parking shall be required to be hard surfaced with adequate ingress
and egress in accordance with City Standards and Specifications and provided in
a quantity required by Section
10-6-5. Consideration shall be given for shared parking use with the provision
of cross access and parking easement agreement on adjacent properties and the
proposed operation hours of each use ensures that the minimum parking standard
is meet during operations for each business. Consideration for off premise
parking shall be given in the manner provided for in Section
10-6-13, which may include the use of valet parking or passenger shuttle
services.
   C.   Food Service Contractors, Caterers, Mobile Food Business, and
Commissaries: This use is limited to on-site food preparation for off-premise
consumption and sales.
      1.   A minor accessory onsite retail component is allowed.
      2.   A facility housing this use may be shared among various food
processors or food preparers.
      3.   Each instance of the use must have:
         a.   Designated parking stalls for all food trucks/food trailers
located to side or rear of building.
         b.   A maximum of fifteen (15) food truck/food trailer operators
working out of each location.
         c.   Outdoor electrical outlets (one (1) per food truck/food trailer)
located in landscaped area.
         d.   An onsite operator sign-in roster and require the use of such
sign-in roster.
         e.   A full commercial kitchen (no exceptions).
         f.   Use an in-ground grease trap system meeting City Engineering
Standards and South Davis Sewer District requirements, as applicable.
      4.   Food Truck/Food Trailer.
         a.   Food trucks and food trailers are prohibited from operation on
public property or public right of ways except during City sponsored or
licensed special events.
         b.   Special Events. Food trucks, food trailers, or food truck event
organizers, as applicable must have a city special event permit on file with
the city business license clerk.
         c.   Licensing. Food truck or food trailer vendors must meet all
applicable state and City Code licensing requirements.
         d.   Permitted Vehicles. All mobile food vending business shall take
place in either a food truck or a food trailer.
         e.   Food trucks or food trailers on private property:
            (1)   Food trucks or food trailers shall provide written
authorization of the property owner or designee, for operation on private
property.
            (2)   Food trucks or food trailers that are an accessory use shall
not utilize parking that is required to meet the minimum standard for the main
use during business hours.
            (3)   Excluding private events, food trucks or food trailers within
one hundred (100') feet of any residential zone are subject to the following:
               (A)   Hours of operation are limited to ten o’clock (10:00) A.M.
to ten o’clock (10:00) P.M.
               (B)   Lights attached to the food truck or food trailer or
portable lights must not allow light spillover onto abutting properties or the
public right of way.
            (4)   Food trucks or food trailers shall not be left overnight or
stored on the subject property or in a right of way.
            (5)   Mobility. All food trucks or food trailers shall be
constructed in a manner to be easily removed on a daily basis and must have
functioning wheels.
            (6)   Design. All food trucks or food trailers shall be kept in
good operating condition and shall not have a drive-through window unless the
site meets the minimum stacking standards for a drive-thru provided in Section
10-19-12(F)(7).
         f.   Limits by Location. To assure public safety and limit
restrictions or impediments to traffic or pedestrian access, food trucks or
food trailers are only allowed in areas specified in this section:
            (1)   All food trucks or food trailers must comply with clear view
area requirements.
            (2)   All food trucks or food trailers shall be parked on asphalt
or concrete.
            (3)   Umbrellas, Canopies and Other Coverings. Each food truck or
food trailer may have one (1) umbrella or canopy. Tents or other coverings with
opaque walls are not allowed. Alternate shading systems may be proposed to the
City and are subject to approval by the Community Development Department.
         g.   Food trucks and food trailers must comply with all Health
Department and Fire regulations.
         h.   Trash Receptacles. All food trucks or food trailers shall provide
at least one (1) trash receptacle meeting Davis County Health Department
standards. The trash receptacle shall be removed with the food truck or food
trailer on a daily basis.
         i.   Clean Area. All food trucks or food trailers are required to
clean the area occupied by the food truck or food trailer and the surrounding
fifty (50) foot area on a daily basis.
         j.   Generators: Only generators that produce a noise level less than
sixty five (65) dBA measured at thirty (30') feet shall be permitted.
         k.   Provisions. The sale of any products other than food and
beverages for human consumption is prohibited.
         l.   Signs and Advertising. Food truck or food trailer may have one
(1) temporary A-Frame/Post Style Sign with a maximum height of four feet (4')
and a maximum sign area of eight (8) square feet. The sign shall not be located
in a manner which impedes pedestrian traffic or poses a safety or traffic
hazard. Vinyl wraps on food trucks or food trailers shall be allowed without
restriction.
         m.   Lighting. Food trucks or food trailers operating in evening hours
may use battery-powered low voltage lighting systems for safety and
convenience. All lighting systems shall only be for the purpose of continued
operation. Moving, flashing, or other advertising-oriented lights are
prohibited.
         n.   Food Truck Parks.
            (1)   Food truck parks are allowed subject to infrastructure
improvements being completed, including paving, parking space striping,
drainage, landscaping, and lighting.
            (2)   All food trucks and food trailers must be separated by a
minimum of ten (10) feet between vendor walk up windows.
            (3)   All food trucks parks shall provide one (1) on-site parking
stall per food truck or food trailer for customer parking.
            (4)   Food truck parks shall provide electrical services for each
truck such that the use of generators for operations is not necessary, except
during temporary power outages.
         o.   Prohibited Activities. Any violation of the following activities
shall be subject to loss of City business license and other penalties of law.
            (1)   Amplified music and the use of any amplified sound system is
prohibited.
            (2)   Business operations shall not create any public nuisance,
including:
               (A)   Noises audible from within an enclosed vehicle or from
within an enclosed building.
               (B)   Accumulations of litter.
               (C)   Obstruction of pedestrian and vehicle access or travel
areas.
               (D)   Reduction in required parking stalls or other similar
activities.
               (E)   Any violation of City or state regulations.
         p.   Review Standards. The Community Development Department shall
apply the following review standards:
            (1)   The location of the food truck or food trailer shall not
impede access to buildings, parking areas, landscaping, or other facilities.
            (2)   Any reduction in parking stalls resulting in insufficient
spaces for existing businesses and the food truck or food trailer's customers
would result in the location being unsuitable.
   D.   Lodging, Hotel and Motel:
      1.   Accessory uses including, but not limited to, restaurants, retail,
drinking establishments, and personal services, may be allowed if such uses are
completely within the hotel or motel structure. Separate or concurrent approval
for sale of alcoholic beverages is required in accordance with the regulations
within of Title 3, Chapter 2 Alcoholic Beverages of this code.
      2.   Bed and breakfast establishments. Bed and breakfast establishments
shall be required to satisfy all of the following conditions:
         a.   Each premises must be occupied and operated by its owner.
         b.   The proposed use shall not cause a nuisance to adjoining
residences due to noise, odor, lighting or traffic.
         c.   No bed and breakfast sleeping room shall be permitted that does
not comply with the International Building Code.
         d.   No kitchen or other food preparation area or facilities shall be
provided in or available to the rooms in a bed and breakfast operation. Cooking
facilities in a dwelling containing a bed and breakfast operation shall be
limited to the residential kitchen.
         e.   Bed and breakfast bedrooms shall be a minimum of one hundred
twenty (120) square feet for the first two occupants and an additional thirty
(30) square feet for each additional occupant.
         f.   The stay of bed and breakfast occupants shall be no more than
fourteen (14) consecutive days and not more than thirty (30) days in any one
calendar year.
         g.   The operator of each facility shall keep a list of the names of
all persons staying at the bed and breakfast, which list shall be available for
inspection by the Building Inspector or village designee.
         h.   One bathroom for every three sleeping rooms shall be provided,
with a minimum of two bathrooms.
         i.   Every bed and breakfast bedroom shall contain a functional smoke
detector, and an approved fire extinguisher shall be located on each floor on
which such sleeping room is located.
         j.   One parking space shall be provided off-street in the side or
rear yard area for each bed and breakfast bedroom.
         k.   Meals or other services provided on the premises shall only be
available to residents, employees and overnight guests of the inn.
         l.   Maximum sign size shall be five square feet with a maximum height
of six feet. Sign materials are to be compatible with the architecture of the
building. Signs must meet setback standards for the district in which they are
located. Internal illumination is prohibited.
         m.   No exterior alterations to the structure shall be made which
would change the residential appearance of the structure.
         n.   The applicant shall comply with any fire and life safety
requirements imposed by the according to the Building or Fire Codes.
   E.   Lodging, Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds:
      1.   Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds shall meet the applicable
standards in Section
13-6-3 of this Code.
   F.   Restaurants and Coffee Shops:
      1.   Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet.
      2.   Road frontage and access. All vehicular access shall be directly
from an arterial road or collector road.
      3.   Setbacks. The following setbacks shall apply to structures,
excluding signs, walls and fences:
         a.   Structures shall be setback at least fifteen feet (15') from the
edge of any road right-of-way.
         b.   Structures shall be setback at least fifty feet (50') from any
lot line abutting a residential district or use.
         c.   Structures shall be setback from any lot line abutting a
nonresidential district and use as specified for permitted uses on the subject
site.
      4.   Enclosure and screening.
         a.   If the subject lot is adjacent to a residential zone or use, all
commercial activity shall be completely obscured from the residential zone or
use by means of a continuous solid wall or fence six feet in height and a
landscaped buffer area.
         b.   Outside dumpsters shall be completely enclosed and obscured by an
masonry wall and gate.
      5.   Fast food restaurants.
         a.   All patrons served in their vehicles via a drive-through facility
shall be provided with adequate off-street standing spaces. No vehicle stacking
areas shall cross any maneuvering lane, drive, sidewalk or public right-of-way.
A bypass lane or other suitable means of access to a public road shall be
provided for automobiles that do not use the drive-through facility.
         b.   One illuminated menu board sign per drive aisle shall be allowed
in addition to all other signs permitted by Chapter 4. The surface area of the
menu board sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and the height
shall not exceed six feet above grade.
      6.   Serving alcohol. All restaurants permitted to serve alcohol shall
comply in every respect with the Utah Liquor Control Act and Title 3, Chapter 2
of this Code.
      7.   Drive Through Standards:
         a.   Purpose. Where drive-up or drive-through uses and facilities are
allowed, they shall conform to all of the following standards, which are
intended to calm traffic, provide for adequate vehicle queuing space, prevent
automobile turning movement conflicts, and provide for pedestrian comfort and
safety.
         b.   Standards. Drive-up and drive-through facilities (i.e., driveway
queuing areas, customer service windows, teller machines, kiosks, drop-boxes,
or similar facilities) shall meet all the following standards:
            (1)   Prior to the menu board order location, vehicle stacking
shall be provided for a minimum distance of eighty feet (80') for a single
stacking lane or forty feet (40') per lane when there is more than one service
lane.
            (2)   Stacking lanes must be designed so that they do not interfere
with parking and vehicle circulation and of sufficient length to ensure
vehicles are not backing onto a public street and shall be clearly identified
using means such as striping, landscaping, or directional low impact signs.
            (3)   The Community Development Department may require a traffic,
circulation, and parking study addressing both on site and off site traffic and
circulation impacts for national chain restaurants with known high traffic
counts. The Planning Commission may required additional parking or stacking
area based on the study during site plan approval process.
            (4)   The design of the stacking area shall allow customers'
vehicles to leave the stacking line for emergency reasons.
            (5)   Drive-through uses shall be located so that access and egress
to the drive-through features are from an on-site drive aisle or other on-site
circulation facility, not a public street.
            (6)   Communication's sound system shall not exceed a measurement
of 55 dBA at any property line.
            (7)   Drive-through service windows shall not be located adjacent
to the primary or front property line.
   G.   Sexually Oriented Businesses:
      1.   Conform to Title 3, Chapter 8. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-13: MANUFACTURING AND ASSEMBLY:
   A.   All Manufacturing and Assembly Processes:
      1.   Chemical Storage: Storage of chemicals, pesticides and fertilizers
for wholesale, resale or as part of a manufacturing facility shall be subject
to the following:
         a.   The applicant must furnish evidence that the facility will comply
with DEQ or other regulatory agencies.
         b.   A buffer may be required within the required setback from
property line.
         c.   Approved loading and unloading spaces and off street parking
facilities will be required.
         d.   A secondary retaining area will be required. The secondary
retaining area shall be large enough to hold at least the amount of the largest
tank located in the retaining area.
         e.   Setbacks for structures are to be from the secondary containment
area.
         f.   There shall be no outdoor storage of chemicals and/or
fertilizers.
         g.   Construction of all facilities shall meet the criteria listed in
the approved International Building Code.
      2.   Bulk Storage of Hazardous or Flammable Liquids and Gases:
         a.   A hazard mitigation plan, outlining precautions and procedures
for hazardous substances, shall be provided to the City and any other
applicable emergency response or regulation authority which details the
quantities, storage methods and handling procedures for accidental releases,
spills, exposures, fires, explosions or other emergency conditions that could
occur and the potential extent of such incidents. The plan shall be reviewed
and updated at a minimum annually or upon modification of the type or
quantities of materials stored and utilized by the business.
         b.   The facility shall comply with all applicable regulations related
to the storage and quantity limits as determined by the South Davis Metro Fire
District or other applicable jurisdictional agency.
         c.   The applicant must furnish written documentation showing a review
from the appropriate fire district and/or DEQ; listing any conditions placed
upon the use and how they will comply with those conditions.
         d.   Any facility with outdoor aboveground tanks shall be enclosed by
an eight foot (8') high security fence or wall with the entrance and exit
through a gate that shall be locked during nonbusiness hours.
         e.   When adjacent to a residential zone, all structures or outdoor
activity areas shall be located a minimum of three hundred feet (300') from any
property line and all tanks shall be located a minimum of one thousand feet
(1,000') from a property line adjacent to a residential zone.
         f.   Approved loading and unloading spaces and off street parking
facilities will be required as listed in code Section
10-6-5.
         g.   Construction will meet the criteria of the International Building
Code as adopted.
         h.   Sufficient measures shall be made to ensure no discernable odor
is emitted from the facility, which may include but is not limited to
additional ventilation, insulation, or sealing between neighboring units.
         i.   Access to manufacturing and storage areas of the subject units be
physically restricted from access by the unauthorized personnel and the general
public.
         j.   This section does not apply to retail service stations or
convenience stores that also dispense propane unless they are in a residential
zone.
      3.   Food (human) Preparation: These standards shall apply to on-site
food preparation for off-premise consumption and sales.
         a.   Minimum operation size shall be greater than three thousand
(3,000) square feet in size.
         b.   Must only be used by a single food-processor/food-preparer.
         c.   Must use an in-ground grease trap system meeting City Engineering
and Sewer District requirements.
         d.   May not be used by food truck/food trailer operators or have food
truck/food trailers parked on the lot or parcel.
         e.   All structures, loading areas, outdoor activity areas, exclusive
of parking shall be located a minimum of three hundred feet (300') from any
abutting residential zones.
         f.   The application materials shall include written documentation
that the proposed facility meets any applicable Federal, State, or local
standards regarding such use including, but not limited to, those of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Utah
Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ), Utah Department of Agriculture, Utah
Department of Water Resources, and Davis County Health Department, as
applicable.
      4.   Where a manufacturing use is allowed in a commercial zone the
following apply:
         a.   It shall be wholly enclosed in a building; and
         b.   When the subject site is located within one hundred feet (100')
of a residential zone, the use shall be limited to the hours of operation of
the use to between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. when
there are identified impacts regards to noise, traffic, or parking.
      5.   Uses classified as light manufacturing/processing shall not:
         a.   Emit from a vent, stack, chimney, or combustion process any smoke
that is visible to the naked eye that is a result of the process of
manufacturing, processing, creating, repairing, renovating, painting, cleaning,
or assembling of goods, merchandise, or equipment.
         b.   Generate noise in the course of manufacturing of greater than
fifty feet (55) dBA as measured at the property line between the hours of 8
a.m. and 7 p.m. Between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. and eight
o’clock (8:00) A.M. the City's general noise regulations as coded in Title 4,
Chapter 2 Nuisances of this code shall apply.
         c.   Generate any ground transmitted vibration that is perceptible to
the human sense of touch measured at the lot line.
         d.   Generate any odor that reaches the "odor threshold" measured at
the lot line. For purposes of this section, the ODOR THRESHOLD is defined as
the minimum concentration in air of a gas, vapor, or particulate matter that
can be detected by the olfactory systems of a panel of healthy observers.
         e.   Require for its operations a daily average of more than two
hundred (200) gallons of water per employee.
         f.   Create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any
operations or equipment other than those of the creator of such disturbance, or
otherwise causes, creates, or contributes to the interference with electronic
signals (including television and radio broadcasting transmissions) to the
extent that the operation of any equipment not owned by the creator of such
disturbance is adversely affected.
         g.   Store materials necessary for the manufacturing or processing
activity in a location where such materials are visible from beyond the
boundaries of the property on which the manufacturing/processing facility is
located.
         h.   Semi-trucks or tractor trailers may be used to deliver or pick up
materials but may not remain on the premises continuously for more than 48
hours. Such trucks or trailers may not be used as a means to store materials
necessary for the manufacturing or processing activity or finished products of
the manufacturing activity.
      6.   Sand Blasting, power assisted propelling of solids or liquids or any
similar methods:
         a.   All operations for the removal of paint, stain or similar
coatings from surfaces by sand blasting, power assisted propelling of solids or
liquids, or any similar methods, shall be performed in accordance with the
following regulations:
            (1)   No such operation shall take place outside the hours of eight
o’clock (8:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) P.M.
            (2)   No operation shall take place outside of an enclosed
building.
            (3)   All operations shall be conducted in a well-ventilated
building which is equipped with an exhaust ventilation system to capture dust.
            (4)   All such operations shall be operated in a manner to prevent
vapor, dust and debris from causing a nuisance by falling on pedestrians,
vehicles, public thoroughfares and adjoining property.
            (5)   Outdoor storage of sand is prohibited. Sand shall be stored
in a container which ensures that no fugitive dust will be created from wind.
            (6)    All operations shall comply with state and federal
regulations.
   B.   Asphalt and Concrete Service Batching Plants:
      1.   Asphalt or concrete batching plant for producing asphalt or concrete
products used in construction activities are subject to the following
standards:
         a.   The batching plant site shall comply with all applicable
provisions of City, State and Federal laws.
         b.   The batching plant shall not be located within six hundred feet
(600') of a residence.
         c.   Hours of operation will be limited to Monday through Friday,
seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o’clock (7:00) P.M.
         d.   No portion of the batch plant or its operation shall be located
on a public street.
         e.   Compliance with all applicable City regulations regarding noise,
dust, odor and glare.
         f.   All plants shall be compliant with state and federal regulations
and obtain any necessary permits prior to commencing operations.
      2.   Temporary batch plants:
         a.   Temporary batch plant used in construction activities on the same
or nearby sites shall be limited to operations for up to six (6) months, with a
single renewal of a six-month time period permitted by the Community
Development Director.
         b.   The batch plant shall only furnish concrete, asphalt, or both, to
a specific project. The placement of a temporary batching plant for a private
project is restricted to the site of the project.
         c.   Temporary plant site must be clear of all equipment, material and
debris upon completion.
         d.   All public improvements that are damaged during the operation of
the temporary batching plant must be repaired or replaced within thirty (30)
days of completion of the project.
         e.   At termination and/or removal of the plant operation, the
operator shall have the person responsible walk the site with the building
official or his/her designee to verify the site meets City approval.
   C.   Food: Breweries, Distilleries, Wineries:
      1.   No outside storage of raw materials.
      2.   No outside storage of spent grain. Accumulated grains must be
disposed of within twenty four (24) hours after a batch is finished.
      3.   No drive-through windows.
      4.   Ability to provide off-street loading and unloading for all
materials.
      5.   For microbreweries: Size is usually determined by the number of
barrels produced each year. Microbreweries are limited to no more than fifteen
thousand (15,000) barrels per year.
      6.   Discharge into the Sewer District's wastewater system must be pre-
approved by the South Davis Sewer District and the wastewater treatment plant
operator.
      7.   For distilleries: all distillery facilities be located in a
standalone building whereby they are the only occupants in order to protect
against fire and/or explosion.
      8.   "Distillery" shall not include industrial distilleries, such as for
the production of ethanol for use as a fuel.
      9.   Parking. Parking shall be provided as follows:
         a.   One space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor space,
plus one space for each employee.
         b.   All other requirements of parking in Chapter 4 of this chapter
must be met.
      10.   Retail or Restaurant Component:
         a.   An accessory retail or restaurant component shall only be
permitted in conformance and subject to licensure and regulations of the Utah
State Department of Alcoholic Beverages Services.
         b.   All accessory retail or restaurant is subject to the standards
outline in Title 3, Chapter 2, Alcoholic Beverages of this code.
         c.   Additional parking shall be provided in conformance with Section
10-6-5.
   D.   Refinery, Oil And Gas:
      1.   All operations shall be a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from
any residential land use.
      2.   All uses shall have vehicular access to an arterial or collector
road.
      3.   Minimum lot size shall be one hundred (100) acres.
      4.   All structures shall be located at least one hundred fifty feet
(150') from all property lines.
      5.   Maximum lot coverage shall be sixty percent (60%).
      6.   A minimum twenty-five foot (25') landscaped buffer strip shall be
provided along all frontage property lines.
      7.   All outside storage of raw material shall be completely enclosed by
an eight-foot-high fence and screened from adjoining properties and roads. No
outdoor storage is permitted within the required buffer strip.
      8.   All storage facilities, conveying apparatuses, drying or wetting
chambers and axial ventilation fans shall be set back a minimum of one hundred
fifty feet (150') from all property lines.
      9.   Operational Requirements.
         a.   Machinery, Equipment and Operations. All machinery, equipment and
materials used in refining; all processing and manufacturing operations; and
all hauling of refined products must be maintained, operated, or conducted in
such a manner that:
            (1)   Flying objects and debris are not thrown.
            (2)   All emissions comply with state and federal air quality
regulations.
            (3)   There is no appreciable noise, vibration, dust, or mist.
      10.   A hazard mitigation plan, outlining precautions and procedures for
hazardous substances, shall be provided to the City and any other applicable
emergency response or regulation authority which details the chemical and
materials quantities, storage methods and handling procedures for accidental
releases, spills, exposures, fires, explosions or other emergency conditions
that could occur and the potential extent of such incidents. The plan shall be
reviewed and updated at a minimum annually or upon modification of the type or
quantities of materials stored and utilized by the business.
   E.   Repair, Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment:
      1.   All commercial and industrial machinery repair shall be completed
within an enclosed building.
      2.   No outdoor storage shall be permitted. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-14: MINING AND SUPPORT ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Mineral Extraction:
      1.   See SR Zone, Title 10 Chapter 17.
   B.   Mineral, Oil, Gas Extraction and Refining Support Activities:
      1.   Where outdoor storage is permitted as an accessory use, any outdoor
storage shall be compliant with Section
10-19-3(E). (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1- 2025)
10-19-15: PERSONAL SERVICES:
   A.   Animal Care, Boarding, Day Care and Kennels, Pet Services, and
Veterinary Services:
      1.   All animal care services shall comply with Title 5, Chapter 4,
Animal Control, as applicable.
      2.   Additionally, all outdoor play areas shall be located a minimum of
one hundred feet (100') from any residential land use.
      3.   Waste disposal is prohibited to City or County Storm Drain.
      4.   Veterinary clinics shall comply with all State and local regulations
relative to such an operation and shall maintain adequate housekeeping
practices designed to prevent the creation of a nuisance and to reduce to a
minimum the factors of noise and odor.
      5.   Pet boarding and day care services in the CS Zone shall be limited
to:
         a.   Small pets (twenty five (25) lbs. or less).
         b.   A maximum size of two thousand (2,000) sq. ft.
         c.   A maximum of ten (10) dogs at any one time.
      6.   The facility shall be mitigated or buffered for noise to ensure that
the maximum noise impact does not exceed fifty five (55) dBA at the property
line.
      7.   Facilities shall be equipped with noise buffering insulation where
located in a multi-tenant building or where located within one-hundred feet
(100') of a residential use.
   B.   Appliance, Electronic, and Small Engine Repair and Maintenance:
      1.   No outdoor storage.
   C.   Exterminating and Pest Control Services:
      1.   A hazard mitigation plan, outlining precautions and procedures for
hazardous substances, shall be provided to the City and any other applicable
emergency response or regulation authority which details the quantities,
storage methods and handling procedures for accidental releases, spills,
exposures, fires, explosions or other emergency conditions that could occur and
the potential extent of such incidents. The plan shall be reviewed and updated
at a minimum annually or upon modification of the type or quantities of
materials stored and utilized by the business.
   D.   Funeral Homes and Mortuaries:
      1.   This use cannot share space or any common wall with another use.
   E.   Janitorial, Laundry, and Linen Supply Services:
      1.   All operations shall ensure the safe storage, use, and disposal of
any detergents or chemicals in accordance with all state and federal
regulations, as well as any fire district and sewer district regulations, which
may include pre-treatment of wastewater.
      2.   A hazard mitigation plan, outlining precautions and procedures for
hazardous substances, shall be provided to the City and any other applicable
emergency response or regulation authority which details the quantities,
storage methods and handling procedures for accidental releases, spills,
exposures, fires, explosions or other emergency conditions that could occur and
the potential extent of such incidents. The plan shall be reviewed and updated
at a minimum annually or upon modification of the type or quantities of
materials stored and utilized by the business.
      3.   Laundry services are prohibited within the City's designated
drinking water source protection zones.
   F.   Pharmacies and Drugstores:
      1.   Medical cannabis pharmacies are subject to licensing procedures
required by the State of Utah.
         a.   License Required: No medicinal cannabis pharmacy shall be
established, operated, or maintained within the city without a valid license
issued by the Utah Department of Health, and without a valid business license
issued by the city.
         b.   As required by Utah Code Chapter 26-61a, a medicinal cannabis
pharmacy shall be located at least:
            (1)   Two hundred feet (200') from a community location (public or
private school, licensed child care facility or preschool, church, public
library, public playground or public park); or
            (2)   Six hundred feet (600') from an area zoned primarily
residential.
         c.   The proximity requirements described in Subsection C.1 shall be
measured as required in Chapter 26-61a, Utah Code, as amended.
         d.   Signs: Signs shall be subject to the dimensional requirements per
Sections 26-61a-505 and 4-41a-403, Utah Code, as amended.
         e.   Conflict of Laws: If any regulation in this section, regarding
medicinal cannabis is in conflict with Utah Code, the provisions of Utah Code
shall prevail.
   G.   Personal And Household Goods Repair, and Maintenance:
      1.   No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
   H.   Salons, Hair, Nail, Lashes, Permanent Cosmetics, Tattoos:
      1.   Tattoo parlors:
         a.   Tattoo parlors shall operate only between the hours of seven
o’clock (7:00) A.M. and eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M.
         b.   Service of alcohol, marijuana based substances, or other
controlled substance shall not be permitted in conjunction with a tattoo parlor
use.
         c.   The entrance door and storefront window glazing shall be seventy
five percent (75%) clear and free of obstructions such as signs, window
tinting, shelving, or racks.
         d.   The operator of the approved use shall prevent loitering and loud
noises around the subject site during and after the hours of business
operation.
         e.   A sign stating, "No tattoo service will be provided for anyone
under the age of eighteen (18)," shall be visible at all times on the door of
the front entrance.
         f.   The applicant shall comply with all applicable State and County
Health and Human Services regulations. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-16: RELIGIOUS, GRANT MAKING, CIVIC, PROFESSIONAL, AND SIMILAR
ORGANIZATIONS:
   A.   Religious Organizations, Churches.
      1.   Development Standards:
         a.   Parcel Size: No minimum parcel size is required, however, the
parcel chosen for a church must be adequate to meet all of the development
standards to be listed below that include, but are not limited to, setbacks,
landscaping, parking, improvements, and dedications.
         b.   Building Setbacks:
            (1)   Commercial Zones:
               (A)   Front: Thirty feet (30') from property line. (If project
fronts on more than one (1) street, setback applies to all street frontages.)
               (B)   Side and rear: Minimum ten feet (10') unless located
adjacent to a Residential Zone. In this case, the minimum setback must be
thirty feet (30').
            (2)   Residential Zones:
               (A)   Front: Thirty feet (30') from front property line. (If
project is on a corner lot, setbacks are thirty feet (30') on one (1) street
and twenty feet (20') on the other.)
               (B)   Side and rear: Follow setbacks required according to zone
property is in.
         c.   Building Height: Maximum building height shall follow zoning that
the project is in. Thirty five feet (35') is the maximum height in a
Residential Zone or in any zone adjacent to a Residential Zone (not including
chimneys, steeples and the like).
         d.   Landscaping Setbacks:
            (1)   Front: Thirty feet (30') minimum from property line. (If on a
corner lot in a Residential Zone, twenty feet (20') on shorter setback side.)
            (2)   Sides and rear: Five feet (5') minimum.
            (3)   Landscaping in the front areas shall also include the park
strip adjacent to the curb including street trees (minimum two inch (2")
caliper and spaced tirty feet (30') on center).
            (4)   Landscaping shall also be required within the parking lot
itself where large expanses of asphalt occur. There shall be a minimum of one
(1) planter, ten feet (10') wide within the parking lot area where over one
hundred twenty five (125) linear feet of asphalt occurs.
            (5)   Landscaping shall be in accordance with Title 10, Chapter 22,
Water Efficient Landscape Standards.
         e.   Fencing: Acceptable fence types shall include vinyl, precast
concrete, decorative iron, architecturally designed brick or block.
         f.   Parking:
            (1)    All parking for church facilities shall be on site.
            (2)   No parking is permitted within the front landscape setback.
            (3)   Parking shall be required at a rate and design as established
in Chapter 6, Off Street Parking.
         g.   Trash Enclosures and Accessory (Maintenance Or Storage)
Buildings:
            (1)   All trash bins shall be surrounded with six foot (6') high
masonry or precast enclosures to match the main building with solid metal
gates. Trash enclosures may be combined with accessory (maintenance or storage)
buildings. The setback of such structure shall be at least the same as the
minimum required front landscape setback, but in no case shall trash enclosures
be located any closer than ten feet (10') to a Residential District lot line or
five feet (5') to a Commercial District lot line.
            (2)   Accessory (maintenance or storage) buildings shall be built
of the same materials as the main building (siding and roofing) so as to blend
in with the entire project. Minimum setbacks to the front property line(s)
shall be the same as the main building. Buildings adjacent to a side or rear
property line (other than a street side of the property), which are built of
one hour fire rated construction, can be considered an accessory structure and
may be set back as close as three feet (3') to a side or rear property line.
         h.   Lighting: All lighting for church buildings, parking lots, and
accessory uses, if applicable, shall be downlit and minimize any adverse impact
on adjacent residential areas.
         i.   Ancillary Uses: Ancillary uses such as parks, ball diamonds,
pavilions, etc., shall not count toward landscaping on the church site but
shall stand alone and be considered as a separate site and subject to separate
land use approval. Any such ancillary uses are subject to, but not limited to,
the standards of this Code (if applicable). (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-17: RESIDENTIAL:
   A.   Accessory Dwelling Units:
      1.   Definition of Accessory Dwelling Unit: A subordinate dwelling, which
has its own eating, sleeping, and sanitation facilities which is:
         a.   Within or attached to a single-family residential building, or
         b.   Within a detached accessory structure associated with a single-
family dwelling.
      2.   Purpose and Intent: The purpose and intent of this section is to
recognize the residential character of the City of North Salt Lake and to
provide for supplementary living accommodations in the community, as well as
provide for supplementary income opportunities of property owners. These
provisions are intended to provide for affordable housing with reasonable
limitations to minimize the impact on neighboring properties and neighborhoods,
and to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the property owners and
residents of accessory dwelling units.
      3.   Owner Occupied: No accessory dwelling unit shall be created,
established, or occupied in a single-family dwelling unless the owner of the
property occupies either a portion of the main dwelling or a detached accessory
unit on the same single-family lot. For the purpose of this section, the term
"owner occupied" shall be defined as full time residency within the home by the
bona fide property owner(s) as shown on the Davis County tax assessment rolls.
Owner occupancy for a dwelling with an accessory dwelling unit shall not be
required when:
         a.   The owner cannot live in the dwelling because of a bona fide
temporary absence of three years or less for a temporary job assignment,
sabbatical, or voluntary service.
         b.   The owner was living in the dwelling immediately prior to leaving
for the temporary job assignment, sabbatical, or voluntary service.
         c.   The owner intends to make the dwelling his/her primary place of
residence upon returning from the temporary job assignment, sabbatical or
voluntary service.
      4.   Dwelling Unit Occupancy: The occupants of an accessory dwelling unit
shall be limited by one of the following family categories:
         a.   One person living alone; or
         b.   Two (2) or more persons all related by blood, by marriage, by
adoption; by legal guardianship or foster children; or
         c.   Up to four (4) unrelated persons living as a single housekeeping
unit.
         d.   Any of the above categories plus a temporary guest. A "temporary
guest" is defined as a person who stays with a family for a period of less than
thirty (30) days within any rolling one year period and does not utilize the
dwelling as a legal address for any purpose.
         e.   For purposes of the definition of family, the term "related"
shall mean a spouse, parent, child, stepchild, grandparent, grandchild,
brother, sister, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, first cousins, great-grandparent,
and great-grandchild. The term "related" does not include other, more distant
relationships.
      5.   Zones: An accessory dwelling unit which meets ordinance requirements
may be allowed in a single-family dwelling unit or in a detached accessory
structure within any zone upon a single family lot. No accessory dwelling unit
may be allowed in any multi-family dwelling or multi-family lot, or on any lot
that cannot satisfy the parking, setback, or lot coverage requirements.
      6.   Number Of Accessory Dwelling units: A maximum of one accessory
dwelling unit shall be allowed in each owner occupied single-family dwelling,
or in a detached accessory structure associated with a single-family dwelling.
      7.   Location And Type:
         a.    Within or Attached to Main Dwelling: Accessory dwelling units
may be allowed within or attached to the main residential dwelling (basement or
addition), over the garage (attached or detached), or in a detached accessory
structure (cottage home, guest house, or tiny home).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3759.png]
 
         b.   Setback Standard Compliance: Accessory dwelling units as an
addition to a primary dwelling shall meet all minimum setback standards
required for the primary dwelling.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3761.png]
 
         c.   Behind the Primary Dwelling: An accessory dwelling unit within an
accessory structure must meet the minimum of side yard required by the zone for
the primary dwelling and a rear yard setback of ten feet (10'), unless no
windows, doors, or other openings are adjacent to the property line, in which
case the allowed setback shall be five feet (5').
         d.    Adjacent to the Primary Dwelling: An accessory dwelling unit
within the side yard of the primary dwelling are required to meet the same
front, side, and rear yard setback as the primary dwelling.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3763.png]
 
         e.    Second Story Accessory Dwelling Units: An accessory dwelling
unit located in an accessory structure may only be located on a second story if
the structure meets the same minimum standards in the zone for height, as well
as front, side, and rear setback as the primary dwelling.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3765.png]
 
      8.   Appearance: Single family residences with interior accessory
dwelling units shall retain the appearance of a single family home. An
accessory dwelling unit in an accessory structure shall be designed so that, to
the degree reasonably feasible, the appearance of the building is compatible
with the architectural components of the primary dwelling unit (e.g., exterior
materials, color, and roof pitch).
      9.   Size:
         a.   Basement Dwelling Units: Shall be permitted to occupy the
entirety of the basement of the primary home regardless of area or bedroom
count.
         b.   Accessory Dwelling Units (Detached Structures): The size of an
accessory dwelling unit shall be at least three hundred (300) square feet and
shall not exceed twelve hundred (1200) square feet and be limited to no more
than two (2) bedrooms.
      10.   Lot Coverage: The combined building coverage for the detached
accessory dwelling units, main dwelling and additional accessory buildings may
not be larger than the maximum coverage allowed in the zone for the lot and
rear yards per section
10-10-3.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3773.png]
 
      11.    Building Entrances: A new single -family structure approved with
an accessory dwelling unit attached to or detached from the main dwelling unit,
shall have a separate, accessible entrance or stairway. An accessory dwelling
unit approved in an existing structure may use existing entrances on any side
of the structure that faces a street, or a side or rear entrance. Dwellings
with two (2) front doors side by side may not be used to provide separate
entrances for each unit with the exception of dwellings where the second door
provides direct access to the dwelling basement. The purpose of this
requirement is to preserve the single-family residential appearance of the
building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3775.png]
 
      12.   Address: The principal dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling
unit shall have the same address number, but shall refer to the accessory
dwelling unit as unit B. Addresses must be located in a visible location on the
street frontage side of the home.
      13.   Parking:
         a.   A single-family dwelling with an accessory dwelling unit shall
provide at least one (1) additional off street parking spaces for the accessory
unit, above the minimum spaces required for a single family dwelling. Accessory
dwelling unit parking may not be in tandem with required parking of the main
dwelling. One additional off street parking space shall be required accessory
dwelling units with 2 or more bedrooms. ADU's located within one-quarter (1/4)
mile of a bus rapid transit route shall be permitted to reduce the parking
requirement by one (1) space for the main dwelling unit.
         b.   No parking spaces may be located within the front or side yard
setbacks adjacent to a street, except for within an approved driveway.
         c.   The minimum width of parking areas and driveways shall be paved
with concrete or asphalt,
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3725.gif]
 
      14.   Separate Living Areas: An accessory dwelling unit must provide
living areas for eating, sleeping and sanitation facilities separate from the
principal dwelling unit.
      15.   Building Code: All construction and remodeling shall comply with
building codes and ordinance requirements in effect at the time of construction
or remodeling, in accordance with Utah state code section 10-9a-511.5, changes
to dwellings - egress windows.
      16.   Utility Meters: A single-family dwelling with an accessory dwelling
unit may have separate meters for each water, gas, and electricity utility
service. Each utility meter shall be in the property owner's name and the
property owner shall be responsible for payment of all utilities. No additional
water development or connection fee shall be required, unless a separate
utility connection is requested and installed by the property owner.
      17.   Interior Access: An interior access between the main living area
and an attached accessory dwelling unit must be maintained, unless sufficient
means of egress have been determined during an inspection by the fire
department.
      18.   Not Intended For Sale: The accessory dwelling unit shall not be
intended for sale or detached by deed and shall only be rented.
      19.   Accessory Dwelling Unit Permit: Any person owning an existing
accessory dwelling unit that has not previously been permitted by the city, or
any person constructing or causing the construction of a residence that has an
accessory dwelling unit, or any person remodeling or causing the remodeling of
a residence for an accessory dwelling unit, shall obtain a land use permit for
the accessory dwelling unit from the community development department. This
shall be in addition to any required building permit for the work to be
performed. In order to meet the requirements of the land use permit, the
applicant shall:
         a.   Submit a completed application form including a site plan that
shows property lines and dimensions, the location of existing buildings and
building entrances, proposed buildings or additions, dimensions from buildings
or additions to property lines, the location of parking stalls, and utility
meters,
         b.   Include detailed floor plans with labels on rooms indicating uses
or proposed uses,
         c.   Pay building permit fees, if applicable, for the construction of
a new dwelling, or the remodeling of an existing dwelling, in accordance with
the established fees and charges,
         d.   Make all corrections identified as necessary to comply with
building code requirements, as identified by the chief building official or his
designee, and provide photos of the life safety items required by building
code, including carbon monoxide detectors, smoke detectors, and earthquake
strapping on water heaters, and
         e.   Demonstrate and affirm that their property is otherwise in
compliance with all other provisions of the zoning ordinance.
      20.   Exceptions to Standards: The Planning Commission may issue a
conditional use permit for ADU's which modify the requirements for an ADU with
respect to maximum size, minimum parking, or setback.
         a.   In approving a conditional use permit the Planning Commission may
require additional conditions to mitigate the impact of the ADU on surrounding
properties. Specifically the Planning Commission may require:
      (1)   For ADU's that exceed the maximum size of one thousand two hundred
(1,200) sq. ft.: increased setbacks, privacy fencing, limitation on windows and
doors adjacent to abutting property lines, and additional parking.
            (2)   For ADUs with reduced or no additional parking: restrictions
on occupancy to tenants without vehicles.
            (3)   For ADU's with reduced setbacks: privacy fencing and
limitation on windows and doors adjacent to abutting property lines.
      21.   Failure To Complete Or Obtain A Land Use Permit: If the property
owner does not obtain a land use permit as outlined above, the accessory
dwelling unit shall not be considered legal nor approved. Failure to obtain a
land use permit for an existing accessory dwelling unit may result in a
citation for a code violation as governed by the process in North Salt Lake
City Title 12, Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Program.
      22.   Home Occupation Businesses: Home occupation businesses in an
accessory dwelling unit shall be restricted to a home office use which creates
no customer traffic. No home occupation business shall be established within an
accessory dwelling unit without the express written permission of the property
owner.
      23.   Accessory Dwelling Units, Tiny Homes:
         a.   Only one (1) tiny home shall be permitted as an accessory
dwelling unit per residential lot.
         b.   The tiny home shall be properly connected to water and sewer
facilities.
         c.   The tiny home dwelling structure must be located on a dedicated
parking location of asphalt or concrete and have the wheels and axel underbody
skirted from view.
         d.   Building inspections are required for construction of the
foundation, as well as to ensure the correct installation of the structure, and
to approve the correct connection to the utilities.
         e.   All manufactured home running gear, tongues, axles and wheels
must be removed at the time of installation.
         f.   The dwelling structure shall be constructed with materials that
are weather resistant and aesthetically consistent with the main dwelling.
         g.   The community development director may approve deviations from
the architectural standards on the basis of a finding that the architectural
style proposed provides compensation design features and that the proposed
dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the
vicinity.
         h.   The parking shall be the same as subsection 13 of this section.
   B.   Residential Short Term Rental (STR):
      1.   Purpose: This section is established to provide regulations and
design standards for residential short-term rentals (STRs) related to single
family and multi-family neighborhoods. These standards seek to allow for STRs
while also protecting the safety and general welfare of North Salt Lake
residents and preserving the residential character of City neighborhoods. In
allowing STRs, it provides existing property homeowners economic relief who
might otherwise be forced to leave a neighborhood, thus promoting and
preserving affordable housing in the City of North Salt Lake. This section also
intends to stabilize neighborhoods by promoting home ownership and preserving
long term rental housing in the market.
      2.   Residential Short Term Rental (STR): A STR is prohibited in all
residential dwellings, Residential Districts, and Residential P Districts
without first obtaining a STR land use permit as regulated in this section and
issued a valid business license. The following are exempt and shall not be
subject to the provisions of this section:
         a.   A residential lease of thirty (30) or more consecutive days.
         b.   Bed and breakfasts, RV parks, campgrounds, hotels, and motels, as
described and regulated in the North Salt Lake Land Development Code shall not
be subject to the provisions of this section.
      3.   General Standards and Requirements: A STR use may be allowed within
any existing legal residential dwelling by an administrative land use permit
from the Community Development Department, wherein the application demonstrates
compliance with requirements found in the North Salt Lake Land Development Code
and all of the following standards and requirements:
         a.   Application: A completed application form as provided by the
City.
         b.   Property Description: A detailed written description and/or
drawing of the property that identifies the use of each room of the dwelling
and defines the portions of the dwelling to be used for a STR shall be
provided. Only one designated STR area is allowed for a property.
         c.   Single and Two Family Dwellings:
            (1)   Only one designated STR area is allowed per property.
            (2)   Owner Occupancy: The owner of the subject property must
reside therein as their primary residence.
            (3)   An individual shall prove ownership of the property as
evidenced by a copy of a transfer deed listing the applicant as the fee title
owner. Fee title owner may be an individual or trustor of a family trust that
possesses fifty percent (50%) or more ownership of the proposed STR. Fee title
owner may not be a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or
similar entity.
            (4)   To establish that the property is the owner's primary
residence, the owner shall:
               (A)   Present a government issued identification document
listing the address of the property as the address of the owner; and
               (B)   A signed affidavit sworn before a notary public shall be
provided by the owner stating that the proposed property is the primary
residence of the owner, wherein they reside at least one hundred eighty three
(183) days per calendar year.
         d.   Occupancy During Rental Period: The subject property shall comply
with the following occupancy restrictions:
            (1)   The applicant shall provide the maximum renter occupancy
proposed and demonstrate that sufficient parking has been provided off street
at a rate of one-half (1/2) space per bedroom or sleeping area, with a minimum
of one (1) space.
            (2)   The property shall not be rented to more than one renter at
any given time, and the owner shall not divide and rent out portions of the
dwelling to multiple renters at the same time.
            (3)   A property shall not be exclusively rented as a STR for more
than one hundred eighty two (182) nights per year.
               (A)   The owner may reside on the property while it is occupied
by a renter.
               (B)   The property shall only be rented for a minimum duration
of one night and a maximum of thirty (30) consecutive nights.
            (4)   A two family dwelling or property with a valid land use
permit for an accessory dwelling unit may use and rent one of the dwelling
units as a STR for up to three hundred sixty five (365) nights per year.
            (5)   Conflict Of Private Restrictions: The owner shall provide a
signed affidavit sworn before a notary public that certifies to the City that
the subject property has no existing private covenants, conditions, or
restrictions prohibiting STRs.
         e.   Multifamily Dwellings:
            (1)   One half (1/2) of the total legal dwelling units on a single
property may be permitted as a STR, with a maximum of ten (10) units. The
entire dwelling unit which is permitted as an STR must be rented. It is
prohibited to rent a single room or portion of a dwelling unit on a multifamily
property as a STR.
            (2)   A dwelling unit may not be rented to more than one renter at
any given time. The dwelling unit shall only be rented for a minimum duration
of one night and a maximum of thirty (30) consecutive nights. The dwelling unit
may be used and rented as a STR for up to three hundred sixty five (365) nights
per year.
            (3)   A long term renter may not sublease their dwelling unit as a
STR.
            (4)   For multifamily properties, the fee title owner may be a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or similar entity.
            (5)   An owner of the property is not required to reside therein as
their primary residence if a designated employee, manager, or professional
management company is available to immediately respond twenty four (24) hours/
day, three hundred sixty five (365) days/year by telephone, and when necessary,
be able to physically respond within one hour of any legitimate complaint.
         f.   Parking Plan: A detailed written description and/or a drawing of
an off-street parking plan must be provided to ensure that all occupants of the
dwelling unit(s) and STR can be accommodated on-site at all times. Parking
shall be limited to the existing garage, driveway, and dedicated parking spots
of the residential unit and may not include any on-street parking. Shared guest
parking as part of a P-District or multi-family dwelling shall only be
permitted upon express written approval of the HOA or property management, as
applicable. Any proposed parking improvements shall also be included in the
off-street parking plan, and must be completed prior to issuance of a STR
business license. All elements of the parking plan must be in compliance with
all other requirements of this section.
         g.   Urgent Response: The owner, or a designated representative, shall
be available to immediately respond twenty four (24) hours/day, three hundred
sixty five (365) days/year by telephone, and when necessary, be able to
physically respond within one hour of any legitimate complaint. If the owner is
unreachable after three (3) attempted contacts by the City of North Salt Lake,
a notice of violation will be issued.
         h.   Property Maintenance Requirements: All short-term rentals shall
adhere to all City ordinances, including, but not limited to:
            (1)   Maintenance: Owners must adhere to the property maintenance
regulations in title 4, "Health And Sanitation" of this Code, as amended,
including, but not limited to, requirements for weed abatement, landscaping,
garbage removal, structure maintenance, and fence/wall maintenance.
            (2)   Snow Removal: Owners shall remove all snow from the sidewalks
of the property within twenty four (24) hours after snowfall in accordance with
section
7-1-2 of this Code, as amended.
         i.   Noise And Nuisance Control: Owners shall ensure that renters
adhere to the noise control in title 4, chapter 4 of this Code, as amended.
            (1)   If an Officer of the Law, Ordinance Enforcement Officer, or
designee responds to more than three (3) verified noise complaints in a twelve
(12) month time period the STR land use permit and business license may be
revoked or otherwise suspended for two (2) years from the date of the third
verified complaint.
            (2)   Should a renter violate the noise control chapter more than
once in any given seventy two (72)-hour period they shall be immediately
evicted from the property by the owner. or designated representative. If the
owner or designated representative fails to evict said renter, the STR permit
and license may be revoked and the owner fined per this code.
         j.   Noticing And Posting Requirements: A renter informational packet
must be maintained in a highly visible place within the dwelling or STR area,
and must include all of the following:
            (1)   City issued STR business license.
            (2)   24/7 owner, or a designated representative, contact
information.
            (3)   Parking requirements, including site map of approved
designated parking areas.
            (4)   Maximum occupancy.
            (5)   The noise ordinance of the City of North Salt Lake.
            (6)   Garbage pick-up dates, and a written description of where
garbage receptacles must be placed for pick-up.
            (7)   Contact information for the North Salt Lake City Police and
South Davis Metro Fire District.
            (8)   Other contact information or information related to other
regulations or conditions of an approval through the land use permit process,
as required by the Community Development Department.
      4.   Violations: It shall be a violation for any person to operate a STR:
         a.   Without first obtaining a STR land use permit, as regulated in
this section, and issued a valid STR business license; or
         b.   That does not comply with the requirements of this section, the
revised ordinances of North Salt Lake, or the North Salt Lake City Land
Development Code.
      5.   Enforcement And Fines: Upon a determination that a violation exists,
the Ordinance Enforcement Officer, Community Development Director, or designee,
will contact the owner or designated representative requiring such owner or
representative to halt, eradicate, destroy, remove, or otherwise cure the.
         a.   Each day that a violation occurs or continues is a separate
violation.
         b.   For any violation of this section, the issuing officer may issue
a written citation or notice of violation to the owner, specifying the
violation and the penalty to be imposed.
            (1)   For the first violation within any twelve (12)-month period,
the penalty shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00).
            (2)   For a second violation within any twelve (12)-month period,
the penalty shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
            (3)   For a third violation within any twelve (12)-month period the
penalty shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and revocation of the STR
business license and land use permit. The owner shall be ineligible for a STR
land use permit and a STR business license for a period of two (2) years from
the date of the third notice of violation.
            (4)   For any violation within any twelve (12)-month period
following the third violation, the penalty shall be one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) and the STR owner shall be banned from receiving a STR land use
permit and a STR business license. (Ord. 2019-02, 3-19-2019)
         c.   Permit Revocation: Pursuant to the provisions of this code or any
ordinance of the City, a STR permit may be revoked by the Community Development
Director or designee for the following:
            (1)   Three (3) verified violations within a twelve (12) month
period related to noise, property maintenance, parking, nuisance, and any
threat to public health and safety.
            (2)   One (1) verified violation that results in or constitutes the
following:
               (A)   An owner or designated representative fails to evict a
renter who has violated the noise control chapter more than once in any given
seventy two (72)-hour period.
               (B)   An owner or designated representative of the STR knowingly
or intentionally housing a sex offender, allowing offenses related to adult-
oriented businesses, sexual offences, or prostitution.
               (C)   An owner or designated representative of the STR knowingly
or intentionally allowing the use of the STR for retail, restaurant, banquet
space, or other similar use.
            (3)   The property owner and designated representative shall be
notified in writing of any verified violations, fines, and permit revocation.
            (4)   As provided in City Code section
10-2-2, appeal may be made to the City's designated Appeal Authority (Hearing
Officer) from any decision, determination or requirement of the Community
Development Director or designee under this title by filing with the City
Recorder a notice therof in writing within fifteen (15) days after such
decision, determination, or requirement is made. Such notice shall set forth in
detail the action and grounds upon which the owner, or other interested person,
is aggrieved.
            (5)    The City Recorder or designee, shall set the appeal for
hearing before the City's designated Appeal Authority, as provided in City Code
section
10-2-2 , to be held within a reasonable time from the date of receipt of the
appeal. The appellant shall be notified of the appeal hearing date at least
seven (7) days prior to the hearing. After hearing the appeal, the Hearing
Officer may affirm, modify, overrule the decision, determination or requirement
appealed, or remand the decision to the Administrative Land Use Authority for
additional review and enter any such order or orders. The filing of an appeal
shall stay all proceedings and actions in furtherance of the matter appealed,
pending a decision of the Hearing Officer.
   C.   Residential Structures:
      1.   Minimum Height Of Dwellings: No dwelling or structure containing a
dwelling shall be erected to a height less than one (1) story above grade.
(Ord. 2018-11, 10-2-2018)
      2.   Maximum Height And Floor Area Of Accessory Buildings: No building
which is accessory to a one-family, two-family, three-family or four-family
dwelling shall be erected to a height greater than one story, fourteen feet
(14') to the top of the wall plate and no higher than twenty feet (20') to the
highest point of the building roof or coping, nor be taller than the primary
structure. The maximum square foot floor area of an accessory building is fifty
percent (50%) of the footprint of the principal building to which it is
accessory.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3727.gif]
 
      3.   Area Of Accessory Buildings: No accessory building or group of
accessory buildings in any Residential District shall cover more than twenty
five percent (25%) of the rear yard. (Ord. 2018-14, 11-20-2018; amd. Ord. 2025-
06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-18: RETAIL TRADE:
   A.   Retail, General:
      1.   General merchandise and groceries within the CS zone shall be
limited to a maximum size of ten thousand (10,000) sq. ft.
   B.   Retail, Specialty:
      1.   Car washes, see section
10-19-5(C).
      2.   Home and nursery centers.
         a.   Outdoor mechanical equipment, including, but not limited to,
heaters and fans, shall not be located within five feet (5') of a property
line. To facilitate reduction of noise, permanently mounted mechanical
equipment shall be enclosed to the maximum extent possible.
         b.   Long term outdoor storage shall be screened from adjacent
property and shall not be located within the required setback, parking, loading
or unloading areas, and may not impede vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
      3.   Passenger vehicle fueling stations (gasoline, electric, natural gas,
etc.)
         a.   The pump islands of the convenience store may be erected in the
front yard area provided the pumps are set back at least twenty-four feet (24')
from the right-of-way of any street.
         b.   Hard-Surfaced driveways leading to and from a pump island and
other properly located service facilities permitted on the property shall be
allowed in the front yard area provided that the driveways shall be defined by
the construction of a concrete curb on the side adjoining the sidewalk. The
area between the curb and the sidewalk shall be landscaped to comply with
Chapter 22.
         c.   The site shall be designed and provide for the delivery by
fueling trucks, such that delivery is completed entirely off-street and no
entry is blocked during delivery.
         d.   A ten-foot distance shall be maintained between a driveway and
the property line with which it is parallel or approximately parallel.
         e.   All Parking Areas on the convenience store Lot shall maintain the
required landscaped Front Yard as required in Chapter 22 and shall be bordered
by concrete curbing.
      4.   Tobacco specialty businesses:
         a.   Tobacco specialty business licenses shall only be permitted
within the MD Zone and may not be located within:
            (1)   One thousand feet (1,000') of a community location;
            (2)   Six hundred feet (600') of another retail tobacco specialty
business;
            (3)   Six hundred feet (600') from property used or zoned for
residential uses; or
            (4)   As otherwise defined by Utah State Code Section 10-8-41.6, as
amended.
         b.   For purposes of this section, the proximity requirements shall be
measured in a straight line from the nearest entrance of the tobacco specialty
business to the nearest property boundary of the community location, or
agricultural or residential use or zone, without regard to intervening
structures, roadways, City boundaries, or zoning districts.
         c.   As used in this section "community location" means: a public or
private kindergarten, elementary, middle, junior high, or high school; a
licensed childcare facility or preschool; a trade or technical school; a
church; a public library; a public playground; a public park; a youth center or
other space used primarily for youth oriented activities; a public recreation
facility; a public arcade; or as otherwise defined by Utah State Code Section
10-8-41.6, as amended.
         d.   All sales of tobacco products shall conform to state and federal
regulations.
         e.   In addition to these guidelines, the following will also be
required: The color of the building shall be restricted to earth tones or shall
match the design theme of the center in which it is a part.
         f.   At least twenty five percent (25%) of the first floor facade that
faces a public street or sidewalk shall be windows or doors of clear or lightly
tinted glass that allows views into and out of the building at eye level.
         g.   The use of bars, chains, or similar security devices that are
visible from a public street or sidewalk shall be prohibited.
         h.   The use of neon lighting shall be prohibited on the building
exterior exclusive of building signage.
         i.   Tobacco specialty businesses shall conform to the sign
regulations as described in this Code.
         j.   Tobacco specialty businesses shall be limited to one specialty
tobacco business per ten thousand (10,000) in population to include all
residents in the City. The total population figures shall be based on the U.S.
Census Bureau's annual estimates. For the purposes of this section, population
estimates shall be rounded down to the nearest ten thousand (10,000).
   C.   Retail, online and other:
      1.   No outdoor storage shall be permitted. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-19: SOCIAL SERVICES:
   A.   Daycare Services, Child or Adult (Commercial):
      1.   Scope: This section is established to provide regulations and
standards for commercial daycare centers and businesses that care for groups of
adults with disabilities, vulnerable persons, or children, for the purpose of
protecting health, safety, and general welfare of patrons and the general
public.
      2.   Requirements And Conditions: Adult or child daycare services are
permitted in all commercial zones with the following standards:
         a.   All drop off and pick up areas shall be designed in a manner that
shall allow vehicles to enter and exit from a public street by forward motion
only;
         b.   Stacking or queuing of vehicles shall not interrupt traffic flow
on the public or private street; and
         c.   Parking shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 10-6 of this
title.
      3.   Business License: Prior to issuance of a business license for any
commercial daycare facility the applicant must first submit the following to be
reviewed in compliance with City code.
         a.   The ratio of the standard and maximum quantity of employees and
persons to be cared for on premise, to be compliant with State regulations;
         b.   Proof of State licensing, where applicable;
         c.   A site plan outlining traffic flow during peak drop off and pick
up times; and
         d.   A safety protocol plan that outlines the procedures to be
followed by the daycare facility in the event that a patron leaves the premise
unsupervised. This plan shall be reviewed by the North Salt Lake Police Chief.
      4.   Childcare centers shall provide a design which includes appropriate
playground facilities; and
      5.   Adult Daycare shall not include any overnight residential use.
      6.   Facilities in the C-S zone shall be limited in size to one thousand
five hundred (1,500) sq. ft. (Ord. 2022-01, 4-5-2002; amd. Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-
2025)
10-19-20: TEMPORARY USES:
   A.   Use Limitations.
      1.   Temporary Uses include firework stands, Christmas tree lots, and
other similar seasonal Uses.
      2.   Temporary Use Permit. Temporary Uses shall obtain a separate
business license and Land Use Permit for each use and location.
      3.   Time Limitations. Land Use Permits may be allowed for up to a six
(6) month period with the following exceptions:
         a.   Firework Stands. Restrictions shall follow the public sales and
display limitations found in state code.
         b.   Christmas Tree Lots. Shall only be permitted from November 1
through December 31.
      4.   Hours of Operation. Temporary Uses may be open from eight o’clock
(8:00) A.M. to ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. unless provided otherwise under state
code.
      5.   Signage. Permanent signs are prohibited for Temporary Uses. All
Signs shall follow the requirements of Chapter 6.
      6.   Regulations by Other Agencies. This Section does not exempt the
applicant or operator from acquiring any other required permit for operation.
      7.   Liability Insurance. The applicant must obtain adequate liability
insurance to cover all activities related to the Use for the duration of the
permit, prior to issuance of the Temporary Use permit. A copy of the liability
insurance policy shall be submitted to the City with the business license
Application.
   B.   Site Improvements.
      1.   Temporary Uses shall meet the following requirements:
         a.   If the Temporary Use is located on an unimproved Parcel, the
following shall apply:
            (1)   Based on the scope of the operation, the land-use authority
may require the installation of a minimum road base or gravel surface for
parking, to assure the safe passage of vehicles on adjacent roadways, and the
safety of patrons.
            (2)   Sufficient off-Street parking shall be provided to meet the
needs of the operation and of any existing Uses on the property.
            (3)   Structures, displays, and other activities must be located
sufficient distance from any Street to provide for public safety and clear view
area requirements as found in Chapter 1.
            (4)   If any part of the temporary use becomes a nuisance or safety
hazard, the land-use authority may require changes or discontinuance of the
operation.
            (5)   All activities and displays shall take place in accordance
with the standards for outside business activities found elsewhere in this
Title.
         b.   If the temporary use is located on an improved lot or parcel, the
following shall apply:
            (1)   Sufficient off-Street parking shall be provided to meet the
needs of the operation and any existing Uses on the property as determined by
the land use authority.
            (2)   Structures, displays, and other activities must be located
sufficient distance from Streets to provide for public safety and clear view
requirements as found in Chapter 1.
            (3)   If any part of the operation becomes a nuisance or safety
hazard, the land use authority may require changes to or discontinuance of the
operation.
            (4)   In addition to the foregoing, all activities and displays
shall take place in accordance with the standards for outside business
activities found elsewhere in this Title.
            (5)   Permanently located businesses that operate a temporary use
shall meet the design standard and site improvement requirements found in
Section
10-1-38.
   C.   Site Restoration. The site must be restored to its original condition
upon expiration of the Temporary Use Permit. The site may not be used for
storage of any temporary use or structures.
   D.   Temporary Structures. All Temporary Structures must be approved by the
land-use authority. In order to avoid damage to adjacent Uses or property, all
temporary structures shall be properly secured or anchored to the ground to
prevent the structure from being moved. The City may require additional
securing or anchoring upon finding that the method of securing is inadequate.
(Ord. 2025- 06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-21: TRANSPORTATION AND FREIGHT:
   A.   All Transportation and Freight Uses:
      1.   All outdoor vehicle storage subject to section
10-19-3(E).
      2.   No outdoor vehicle repair shall be permitted.
   B.   Freight And Commodities Transportation:
      1.   Terminal, Freight Or Truck:
         a.   The use shall be located with direct access on a principal
arterial or near an interstate interchange, and with no access through
residential streets.
         b.   No outdoor activity area shall be located within three hundred
feet (300') from any residential zone.
         c.   Accessory uses directly related to the maintenance and fueling of
vehicles (including, but not limited to, truck and trailer washing, fuel pumps,
garages for minor repair) are allowed within an enclosed structure only.
         d.   Installation of fuel tanks shall require approval from the Utah
Division of Environmental Quality and the fire district.
      2.   Rental, moving trucks.
         a.   See section
10-19-5. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-22: UTILITIES, PUBLIC SERVICES, WASTE MANAGEMENT, AND REMEDIATION
SERVICES:
   A.   Communications, Towers and Facilities: cellular.
      1.   Small wireless cellular facilities, see section
7-8-1, Article B.
      2.   Cellular Towers and Facilities:
         a.   Shall be a conditional use in any residential zone.
      3.   The Planning Commission may require in or near residential areas the
use of a stealth tower structure to blend into the existing environment.
      4.   Height by zone:
         a.   Residential Zones (sixty feet (60')).
         b.   CG Zone (eighty feet (80')).
         c.   MD and MG Zone (one hundred feet (100')).
         d.   Prohibited in CS, CH, P-Districts.
         e.   Cellular antenna or towers attached to buildings shall not exceed
the maximum height for the zone.
      5.   Outdoor yard areas shall be secured and screened in accordance with
section
10-19-3(E).
      6.   Lights, beacons or strobes of any kind shall not be permitted on any
tower, antenna, or facilities unless required by the Federal Aviation
Administration.
      7.   Setback requirements. Towers shall be located no closer than fifty
feet (50') to a public street right of way and no closer to any property lines
than twenty five percent (25%) of the height of the proposed tower unless an
exception is granted by the Planning Commission.
      8.   No more than one (1) tower may be located on a parcel.
      9.   No advertisement of any kind shall be installed on telecommunication
towers and/or facilities.
      10.   The towers shall be painted a non-contrasting gray or similar color
minimizing their visibility, unless otherwise required by the Federal
Communications Commission or Federal Aviation Administration. The Planning
Commission may require an alternative (stealth) tower structure to blend into
the existing environment. The towers and accessory structures shall be well
maintained.
   B.   Energy Distribution and Storage Facilities, Electric Or Natural Gas:
      1.   Facilities shall be required to screen the property in accordance
with Section
10-19-3(E).
      2.   Landscaping and sound buffers shall be provided for a minimum
distance of thirty feet (30') for property lines adjacent to a residential zone
or use.
      3.   Facilities shall not exceed noise levels greater than forty (40) dBA
at the property line.
      4.   Facilities shall be designed to allow adequate access by emergency
vehicles and in conformance with separation requirement for battery storage by
the building and fire code.
      5.   A hazard mitigation plan, outlining precautions and procedures for
emergencies, shall be provided to the City and any other applicable emergency
response or regulation authority which details procedures for fires, explosions
or other emergency conditions that could occur and the potential extent of such
incidents. The plan shall be reviewed and updated at a minimum annually or upon
modification of the type or quantities of materials stored and utilized by the
business.
   C.   Pipeline Distribution and Facilities:
      1.   Private pipelines:
         a.   Natural gas and petroleum pipelines located on properties with
sensitive areas including, but not limited to, wetlands, steep slopes,
woodlands, or floodplains may be subject to the following special use standards
in order to minimize construction impacts:
            (1)   Entrance And Exit To Property: Prior to the pipeline's
installation, the applicant and landowners/tenants shall reach an acceptable
agreement on the route that will be used for entering and exiting the right of
way and other construction areas. The affected property owners/tenants shall be
notified of the project intent and approximate scheduling of the construction.
            (2)   Location: All pipelines greater than ten inches (10") in
diameter that transport flammable or hazardous material shall be located a
minimum of five hundred feet (500') from any occupied principal structure.
            (3)   Land Cover: Except for aboveground piping facilities, the
pipeline shall be buried with:
               (A)   A minimum of three feet (3') of top cover; or
               (B)   Substantially the same top cover as an existing parallel
pipeline, but not less than three feet (3'), where an existing pipeline is
within one hundred feet (100') perpendicular to the new pipeline.
            (4)   Replacement Of Topsoil:
               (A)   Existing topsoil depths shall be restored.
               (B)   Replacement shall be undertaken in a manner as to minimize
settling and the mixing of topsoil with subsoil materials. In no instance shall
the topsoil materials be used for any other purpose.
               (C)   As the topsoil is replaced, all rocks greater than three
inches (3") in dimension shall be removed.
            (5)   Restoration Of Ground Cover And Field Tiles:
               (A)   All conservation practices such as terraces or grassed
waterways that are damaged by the pipeline's construction shall be restored to
their preconstruction condition. Vegetation in sensitive areas shall be
restored to their preconstruction state.
               (B)   All existing field tiles shall be identified before
construction and repaired or replaced at the conclusion of construction.
         b.   A hazard mitigation plan, outlining precautions and procedures
for emergencies, shall be provided to the City and any other applicable
emergency response or regulation authority which details procedures for leaks,
spills, fires, explosions or other emergency conditions that could occur and
the potential extent of such incidents. The plan shall be reviewed and updated
at a minimum annually or upon modification of the type or quantities of
materials stored and utilized by the business.
   D.   Public Utility Station and Wireless Communication Accessory Structures:
      1.   Applicability: When it is desired to create a new lot or parcel of
property and its primary use is to be a public utility station structure or
structures, these standards shall apply.
      2.   Subdivision Of Property:
         a.   Lot Size And Dimensions: Upon review and approval by the Planning
Commission, the minimum size and dimensions of a lot or parcel shall be
sufficient to meet the needs of the public utility station structure.
         b.   Frontage: Lots and parcels are not required to have street
frontage if there is a recorded perpetual access easement across adjoining
property connecting to a dedicated and improved street right-of-way that is
sufficient width to meet the needs of the public utility, as determined by the
Planning Commission at the time of approval and that satisfies the requirements
of public safety agencies.
         c.   Creation Of Lot Or Parcel: Unless otherwise prohibited by Utah
State Code, lots or parcels may be created as a lot or parcel within a recorded
subdivision plat, or created by a recorded deed that describes the property by
metes and bounds legal description.
      3.   Development Standards: The following development standards shall
apply to all lots or parcels created for public utility stations:
         a.   Location: A public utility station shall be located no closer
than thirty feet (30') from any existing habitable structure or street. The
station may not be located in the path of any planned street, as illustrated on
the North Salt Lake master street plan or General Plan.
         b.   Building Setbacks and Height:
            (1)   The maximum height shall be fifteen feet (15') high.
            (2)   The minimum setback from property line:
               (A)   Thirty feet (30') from street right-of-way.
               (B)   Ten feet (10') for landlocked properties and all other
property lines.
         c.   Fencing:
            (1)    For lots or parcels with street frontage the following
standards apply:
               (A)   For site obscuring fencing, a minimum eight foot (8')
decorative, nonclimbable wall shall be constructed a minimum of twenty five
feet (25') from a public street, and along all property lines; or
               (B)   For non-site obscuring fencing, a minimum eight foot (8')
decorative, non-climbable metal fencing shall be constructed a minimum of ten
feet (10') from a public street, and along all property lines.
               (C)   Fencing shall include appropriate warning signage as
required by the FCC.
            (2)   For lots or parcels without street frontage, a minimum six
foot (6') wall or decorative metal fencing and nonclimbable screening fence and
gate(s) shall be constructed along all property lines.
         d.   Architectural Standards: Public utility stations shall be painted
or constructed of materials with earth tone colors and shall be architecturally
compatible with surrounding structures.
         e.   Landscaping: All areas within public view are required to provide
landscaping under the standards of the respective zone in which they are
located and in accordance with Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscape
Standards. Properties with street frontage shall provide landscaped plantings
between the fencing and street in accordance with outdoor storage screening
standards in Section
10-19-3(E). Areas within enclosed fencing are not required to be landscaped,
but all open areas shall be maintained clear of all weeds and debris.
         f.   Enclosure: All unenclosed elements of the facility that are not
housed in a building, and isolated minor elements such as pad mounted
transformers, telephone pedestals, metering stations, and other equipment vital
to the operation of the public utility station shall be contained within the
screened portion of the lot or parcel.
      4.   Other Uses: Other uses of the site, and accessory uses, including
the storage of materials outside of an enclosed building, are prohibited.
   E.   Septic Tank, Portable Toilet and Related Services:
      1.   All portable toilets shall be cleaned, sanitized, and emptied prior
to being stored on the property;
      2.   In addition to complying with the requirements for outdoor storage
in Section
10-19-3(E), all portable toilets shall be stored a minimum of twenty-five feet
from any property line;
      3.   Repair and maintenance of portable toilets shall be done within an
enclosed building;
      4.   No waste disposal shall be permitted on the storage site;
      5.   No secondary waste storage or transfer shall be permitted on site;
      6.   Any waste collection vehicles shall be emptied and cleaned prior to
returning to the site for parking or overnight storage.
   F.   Sewage Treatment Facilities:
      1.   All sewage treatment facilities shall be approved and operated in
accordance with Utah State Law and rules established by the Utah Division of
Environmental Quality.
      2.   No facility shall be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a
residential zone or residence.
      3.   All structures and facilities shall be setback a minimum of fifty
feet (50') from any property line.
      4.   All facilities shall have a minimum landscape buffer of twenty feet
(20') along all property lines and frontages.
   G.   Utilities Transmission Lines and Control:
      1.   Applications for transmission lines installation shall contain the
approving signatures of all landowners that the transmission line sets on or
crosses. An owner signed letter of intent or easement is acceptable.
      2.   Electric substations and other utility structures shall be deemed
outdoor storage areas and shall meet the standards in section
10-19-3(E) of this chapter.
      3.   Towers for the purpose of communicating from the substation to
remote devices shall be deemed an accessory use to an approved substation;
provided, that the pole and antenna are no taller than maximum tower height
permitted in the zone, see section
10-19-22(A).
   H.   Waste, Nonhazardous: treatment, disposal, or recycle:
      1.   The site shall be screened from the street(s) by a sight obscuring
fence. The fence shall be of sufficient height so that no storage containers
shall be visible above the required screening and be in accordance with section
10-9-3(E).
      2.   All grounds and facilities shall be maintained in an orderly manner
so as not to create a public nuisance.
      3.   All mechanical equipment emissions; power driven processing; and/or
other outdoor activity areas shall be located a minimum of three hundred feet
(300') from any abutting residential zones.
      4.   All driveways into and through the facility and any open area with a
driving surface shall be surfaced with an asphalt or concrete. All driveways
shall be kept open and passable by emergency vehicles.
      5.   Additional standards for recycling centers:
         a.   Any container provided for after hour donation of recyclable
materials shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any abutting residential
zone, shall be of sturdy construction and shall have sufficient capacity to
accommodate materials collected.
         b.    Except for after hour donation containers, no unsorted material
shall be stored outside.
   I.   Waste, Materials Recovery Facilities:
      1.   Composting facilities may not accept hazardous waste, as defined in
federal regulations at 40 CFR Part 261 and derivative state regulations.
      2.   Requirements for all size composting facilities.
         a.   All facilities shall be managed by an individual or group of
individuals professionally trained by the US Composting Council or a similar
entity.
         b.   During the notification and/or permit application process a
responsible party for the facility shall be identified; and certification shall
be presented that the facility meets any and all other applicable local and/or
state organic material facility permitting requirements, and/or in absence of
such rules shall operate in accordance with best management practices.
         c.   Compliance with all applicable federal, state and local
regulations, including, without limitation, those pertaining to permitting,
operations, maintenance and site closure is required.
         d.   A statement listing remediation plans for potential odor, pest
control, and traffic should be an addendum to the zoning application shall be
included in the zoning application.
         e.   All operations shall be conducted in a controlled manner to
minimize the creation of nuisances, such as odors, dust, noise, runoff,
vectors, and fire.
            (1)   Nuisances must be undetectable at the property line for
facilities located in Urban Residential Zones.
            (2)   Nuisances must be mitigated to comply with best practices in
all other zones.
         f.   Operations shall be subject to municipal engineering review to
ensure adequate emergency access has been provided.
         g.   Protection of existing water infrastructure, water bodies,
groundwater, and floodplains must be prioritized. A survey shall be provided to
ensure compliance.
            (1)   There shall be no standing water on site.
            (2)   If composting activities are permitted to occur within a
designated floodplain, they shall be conducted using protective measures as
required by the state or local jurisdiction. Composting operations shall be
located and designed so that water which comes in contact with the material
processing, will not run off into public or private streets, storm sewers,
drainage ditches, water retention basins, streams or lakes. [Refer to your
state or local regulations].
            (3)   Setback from water wells: at a minimum of one hundred feet
(100').
            (4)   Setback from municipal water supplies or wells at a minimum
of two hundred fifty (250') (does not apply to Small Composting Facilities).
            (5)   Setback from down gradient surface water bodies at a minimum
of two hundred fifty feet (250').
            (6)   Setback from up gradient surface water bodies at a minimum of
one hundred feet (100').
         h.   Composting activities shall occur in accordance with applicable
local and/or state enforcement agency rules and regulations, and/or in absence
of such rules, in accordance with best management practices, including site
monitoring and frequent temperature checks to certify minimum safety
precautions are met.
      3.   Maximum of twenty five thousand (25,000) cubic yards of compost may
be on site at any one time
      4.   Tipping area / pad, shall ideally be a concrete or asphalt surface,
and able to contain all incoming materials for mixing, blending and/or
sorting.. Organic material within a tipping area shall not exceed ten feet
(10') in height at any time.
      5.   All incoming off-site food residuals and feedstocks ideally (ie
manure, wood chip, leaves etc) shall be incorporated into a composting windrow
or other composting process within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt at the
facility, or any shorter period of time as determined by the local public
health authority. All other incoming organic material shall be incorporated
into a composting windrow or other composting process within five (5) days of
receipt at the facility.
      6.   Maximum ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards of compost shall be on
site at any one time.
      7.   No final disposal may occur at a consolidation facility. Any
transfer of materials will be from container to container or container to
equipment.
      8.   Public drop-off areas shall have adequate space for safe access for
pedestrians and adequate parking for employees or volunteers.
      9.   Drop-off containers used for food waste collection must be leak-
proof and have well-fitting lids to prevent access by vermin.
      10.   Any waste collection trucks used must be fitted with a leak-proof
bed.
      11.   Any material stored on site, whether for temporary drop-off times
or for permanent sites, must be removed within seven (7) days or sooner as
required by local or state regulations.
      12.   Facility operator shall provide a list in the zoning application of
materials to be accepted at such sites. The operator shall institute signage,
for both temporary or permanent sites, indicating acceptable items.
      13.   If permitted and water/sewer access is available, rinsing of
containers may be allowed.
      14.   Food waste processing can include depackaging equipment or
equipment that grinds, heats, dehydrates and/or pelletizes food waste into
another material. The operator shall ensure that the process generates no
nuisances such as odors, vectors, leachate or runoff and maintains all material
on site.
      15.   Prohibited Materials: wastewater treatment discharge or other
related biosolids, fats, oils, grease, animal mortalities, animal processing
byproducts, or organic materials that pose health and safety hazards, such as
diapers, sanitary products, pet wastes or animal carcasses, or any other
organic material prohibited as determined by best management practices for the
scope and scale of the composting methodology.
   J.   Waste, Remediation Services:
      1.   All equipment used in association with the business shall be
cleaned, sanitized, and emptied prior to being stored on the property;
      2.   In addition to complying with the requirements for outdoor storage
in Section
10-19-3(E), all equipment shall be stored a minimum of twenty five feet (25')
from any property line;
      3.   No waste from remediation sites shall be permitted on the property;
      4.   No transfer of waste from remediation sites shall be permitted on
site;
      5.   Any waste collection vehicles shall be emptied and cleaned prior to
returning to the site for parking or overnight storage. (2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-23: WAREHOUSING AND WHOLESALE TRADE:
   A.   Wholesale, Trade, Durable Goods (Permitted):
      1.   No permitted use shall utilize outdoor storage.
      2.   Outdoor cargo container storage and handling facilities:
         a.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum size of property required for
establishment of such facility shall be five (5) acres.
         b.   Stacking more than three (3) containers high is prohibited and
shall be screened and setback from property lines in accordance with section
10-19-3(E).
         c.   Cargo containers shall not be used for:
            (1)   Refrigeration.
            (2)   Residential use of any kind.
            (3)   Storage or housing of animals.
         d.   Any container stored or kept on property shall be safe,
structurally sound, stable, and in good repair.
         e.   Any cargo container that becomes unsound, unstable, or otherwise
dangerous shall be immediately repaired or removed from the property where
kept.
         f.   Any cargo container stored or kept in violation of the unified
development ordinance shall be deemed a dangerous condition and a public
nuisance and may be subject to civil enforcement including abatement as per
Title 12, Administrative Enforcement.
         g.   Number Of Containers: The land use permit shall be issued for a
specific maximum number of cargo containers based upon capacity, setback, and
adequate egress for emergency vehicles.
      3.   Wholesale, Trade, Rental, Durable Goods, (Conditionally Permitted):
Wholesale trade and rental of durable goods shall require a conditional use
permit with the following standards:
         a.   All outdoor storage of goods shall be in accordance with section
10-19-3(E).
         b.   All outdoor storage shall be upon hard surface of concrete or
asphalt.
   B.   Wholesale Trade, Nondurable Goods (Permitted):
      1.   No permitted use shall utilize outdoor storage.
   C.   Wholesale Trade, Nondurable Goods, (Conditionally Permitted):
      1.   Bulk Storage of Hazardous or Flammable Liquids and Gases for
wholesale trade:
         a.   The facility for aboveground tanks shall be enclosed by an eight
foot (8') high security fence or wall with the entrance and exit through a gate
that shall be locked during nonbusiness hours.
         b.   When adjacent to a residential zone, all structures or outdoor
activity areas shall be located a minimum of three hundred feet (300') from any
property line and all tanks shall be located a minimum of one thousand feet
(1,000') from a property line adjacent to a residential zone.
         c.   The applicant must furnish written documentation showing a review
from the appropriate fire district and/or DEQ; listing any conditions placed
upon the use and how they will comply with those conditions.
         d.   Approved loading and unloading spaces and off street parking
facilities will be required as listed in this title.
         e.   Construction will meet the criteria of the current Building Code
as adopted.
         f.   A hazard mitigation plan, outlining precautions and procedures
for hazardous substances, shall be provided to the City and any other
applicable emergency response or regulation authority which details the
quantities, storage methods and handling procedures for hazardous materials
addressing accidental releases, spills, exposures, fires, explosions or other
emergency conditions that could occur and the potential extent of such
incidents. The plan shall be reviewed and updated at a minimum annually or upon
modification of the type or quantities of materials stored and utilized by the
business.
         g.   This section does not apply to retail service stations or
convenience stores that also dispense propane unless they are in a residential
zone. (2025-06, 4-1-2025)
10-19-24: WAREHOUSING, STORAGE FACILITIES:
   A.   General Warehousing and Storage Facilities:
      1.   All structures shall be setback a minimum of one hundred feet (100')
from any adjacent property with an existing residential use or adjacent
residentially zoned property.
      2.   All warehousing shall be conducted within an enclosed structure
except where outdoor storage is permitted and in conformance with Section
10-19-3(E).
      3.   A hazard mitigation plan, outlining precautions and procedures for
hazardous substances, shall be provided to the City and any other applicable
emergency response or regulation authority which details the quantities,
storage methods and handling procedures for hazardous materials addressing
accidental releases, spills, exposures, fires, explosions or other emergency
conditions that could occur and the potential extent of such incidents. The
plan shall be reviewed and updated at a minimum annually or upon modification
of the type or quantities of materials stored and utilized by the business.
   B.   Self-Storage Units: All self-service storage facilities and
recreational vehicle storage facilities shall be designed, constructed,
operated and occupied in accordance with the following:
      1.   Self-storage units shall only be permitted within the Storage Unit
Overlay Zone.
      2.   Accessory caretaker residences shall only be approved subject to the
standards in section
10-19-3(A).
      3.   All structures shall comply with all design standards found in
section
10-1-38.
      4.   All goods and wares shall be stored within an enclosed building,
except that boats, travel trailers, motor homes and automobiles in running
order, may be stored in screened exterior areas which shall have shown on the
site plan and approved for that purpose and shall only be permitted on asphalt
or concrete surfaces.
      5.   No individual units shall be larger than twelve by fifty feet (12' x
50').
      6.    Any storage of partially dismantled, wrecked or inoperable
vehicles, trailers, campers, motor homes or junk is prohibited.
      7.    Any repair, construction, reconstruction or manufacturing is
prohibited;
      8.    Any storage of hazardous materials including but not limited to
gasoline, paint, paint remover and similar flammable or hazardous materials is
prohibited.
      9.   Self-storage facilities shall include screening in accordance with
section
10-19-3(E) Outdoor Storage. Such screening shall be in compliance with the
Chapter 22 Water Efficient Landscaping. Screening shall be maintained in good
condition with no advertising thereon, except as permitted by the Chapter 4
signage regulations.
      10.   All self-storage facilities shall include a barrier wall extending
the full length of the property line.
      11.   Where the barrier is to be provided by the building facade, said
facades shall be in accordance with the setback requirements applicable to the
zone in which it is located.
      12.   Access to the site shall be sufficient for traffic, emergency and
fire vehicles and meet the minimum driveway aisle width for two way traffic
provided in Chapter 6 Parking standards and include sufficient turning radii
for emergency vehicles.
      13.   No facility shall be approved without adequate fire protection.
      14.   No individual units shall be supplied with water or sewer
facilities.
      15.   The design and improvement of the facility shall make adequate
provision for storm water and snow removal.
      16.   All outdoor lighting shall screens lighting to mitigate its impact
on surrounding uses.
      17.   The applicant shall provide an operations plan which addresses the
following:
         a.   On-site management and security;
         b.   Accumulation, disposal, and transportation of solid waste; and
         c.   Loading and services, including fire access.
   C.   Self-Storage Facility, Indoor Climate Controlled.
      1.   Indoor self-storage facilities shall meet the same standards for
Self-Storage units in Subsection B above with the following exception:
         a.   No outdoor storage shall be permitted; and
         b.   No screening shall be required, but the site shall be landscaped
in accordance with the standards for the underlying zone and shall be in
accordance with Chapter 22 Water Efficient Landscape Design. (Ord. 2025-06, 4-
1-2025)
CHAPTER 20
SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION:
10-20-1: Purpose
10-20-2: Applicability
10-20-3: Application Requirements
10-20-4: Site Plan Standards
10-20-5: Site Plan Review Process
10-20-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards for the
review of site plan applications. These standards will ensure that the
development of the land will be compatible while still promoting diversity,
contribute to the stability of land values, and enhance the quality of life of
city residents. The community values reflected in this chapter shall protect
and promote the health, safety and welfare of the city residents.
   B.   Additional review may be required for specific projects, such as
conditional use permits. Should there be conflicting standards including the
provisions in this section and any other provisions in the city ordinances, the
more restrictive standards shall prevail. (Ord. 2011-07, 5-3-2011)
10-20-2: APPLICABILITY:
Site plan review and approval shall be required for any new construction for
the following uses:
   A.   Any multiple-family residential use;
   B.   Any nonresidential use. (Ord. 2011-07, 5-3-2011)
10-20-3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
An application for site plan review shall be submitted by the property owner or
an authorized representative. All site plans shall be prepared by a licensed/
certified professional, such as an architect, landscape architect, planner,
engineer, surveyor, etc. The requirements for a complete site plan review
application are:
   A.   Letter Of Application: Letter of application, including:
      1.   Type of business.
      2.   Explanation of the daily operations of the business.
      3.   Estimated daily shipping and receiving (by way of trucks, rail, or
other).
      4.   Estimated number of employees at peak shift.
      5.   If the applicant is asking for an exception to the code, describe
the exception desired and justify why it should be granted.
   B.   Site Plan: Site plan, showing the following:
      1.   A vicinity map.
      2.   All lot lines with dimensions. Minimum scale one inch equals thirty
feet (1" = 30').
      3.   Location of all existing and proposed structures within the boundary
of the property showing setback distances from property lines and distances
from other structures on the subject parcel and on adjoining parcels.
      4.   Names of all adjacent property owners.
      5.   Parking lot location showing dimensions, surrounding curb, gutter
and sidewalk, number and location of parking stalls, proposed lighting,
driveway approaches from city street and type of surface (see chapter 6 of this
title).
      6.   Fire protection, including existing and/or proposed fire hydrants
(see international fire code for spacing requirements), new water lines, tees,
etc.
      7.   Proposed water and sewer lines, connections, meter box locations,
lateral sizes, fire hydrants, etc.
      8.   All existing utilities on the property and on the adjacent city
street right of way.
      9.   Existing and proposed easements on the property.
      10.   Location of existing and proposed curb, gutter and sidewalk on the
adjacent city street (sidewalk may or may not be required). If new curb and
gutter is to be installed, a profile of the TBC must be shown. Also, elevations
on the existing edge of asphalt must be shown every fifty feet (50') if the
street grade is greater than one percent (1%), and every twenty five feet (25')
if the street grade is less than one percent (1%). Also, a cross section of the
street widening showing pavement thicknesses must be shown.
      11.   Any off site improvements, including, but not limited to,
acceleration and deceleration lanes, utility extensions, storm drainage
facilities or other off site systems that are impacted by the proposed site
plan.
      12.   A note stating that the contractor must meet all city
specifications and standards within the city right of way.
      13.   Fence information, including the location, height and type (see
chapter 1 of this title).
      14.   Sign information, including the location, height and size of all
proposed signs (see chapter 4 of this title).
   C.   Grading, Drainage Plan: Grading and drainage plan, including the
following:
      1.   Existing and proposed topographic contour lines at intervals that
clearly identify the topographic layout of the land on the property, but in no
case shall the contours be at an interval greater than two feet (2').
      2.   Spot elevations must be shown of the final floor elevation of all
structures, flow lines of all pipes, strategic locations of existing and
proposed TBC, top of storm drain grates and at other locations as deemed
necessary by city staff.
      3.   Hydrology calculations based on a 10-year storm. The calculation
must size the detention basin, size the orifice plate and determine the amount
of flow which can be released (the release rate can be 0.2 cfs/acre). Detention
basin shall retain the required 24-hour storm equivalent, as required under the
Utah pollutant discharge elimination system (UPDES) general discharge permit.
      4.   A table itemizing the amount and percentage of area considered,
impervious (buildings, pavement, etc.) and pervious surfaces (landscaping and
natural areas).
      5.   Location of the overflow spillway, including spot elevations as
needed.
      6.   Location and shape of water surface at the detained 10-year storm
level, including the elevation.
      7.   Location of roof drains, including where they will tie into the
storm drain system.
      8.   Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), when required.
      9.   Low impact development (LID):
         a.   Low impact development (LID) is an approach to land development
that uses various land planning and design practices and technologies to
simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource systems and reduce
infrastructure costs. LID still allows land to be developed, but in a cost
effective manner that helps mitigate potential environmental impacts.
         b.   As part of the city of North Salt Lake permit, the city requires
use of an LID approach, which includes the implementation of structural BMPs,
where practicable, that infiltrate, evapotranspire or harvest and use
stormwater for the site to protect water quality.
         c.   All development and redevelopment that warrants compliance with
the UGCP regulation must include an LID analysis that meets the objective of
mirroring the predevelopment hydrology and meets the objective of retaining on
site, with no discharge, the 0.6-inch, 24-hour rainfall event.
         d.   Redevelopment of commercial, industrial, institutional, or multi-
family sites that add or replace (alone or in combinations) five thousand
(5,000) square feet of impervious surface or disturb five thousand (5,000)
square feet of land must include an LID analysis that meets the objective of
retaining on site, with no discharge, the 0.6-inch, 24-hour rainfall event.
Groundwater recharge may be considered to meet this requirement, where
applicable and feasible.
         e.   No LID limits are defined except designs must not negatively
impact surrounding properties. The analysis must identify LID options
considered and list the reasons why it will be incorporated or why the
considered LIDs are not practical for the site use or conditions. Submit a
report with stormwater calculations that summarizes the analysis and results.
         f.   Suggested and preferred LIDs are outlined in the city's
"Stormwater Best Management Practices Handbook". The city engineer may consider
and approve other innovative LID approaches not included as preferred measures
that meet or exceed the objectives of the city's stormwater management plan.
      10.   Postconstruction stormwater maintenance plan and agreement:
         a.   The purpose of the postconstruction stormwater maintenance plan
and agreement is to control stormwater runoff and reduce pollutants in
stormwater runoff after construction is complete and the developed site is in
operation. This is achieved by accomplishing the following:
            (1)   Controlling erosion.
            (2)   Controlling discharge of sediment into stormwater drainage
facilities or off site.
            (3)   Preventing illicit discharges into on site soils, storm
drainage facilities or off site.
            (4)   Prevention of debris and garbage from entering the stormwater
system.
         b.   A postconstruction stormwater maintenance plan must be prepared
and submitted with the plans for approval for all privately owned or maintained
facilities that warrant compliance with the UGCP regulation. The plan shall be
contained on a plan sheet of its own, rather than being a part of another plan
sheet, and is to contain at least the following:
            (1)   The site plan, including vicinity map, proposed contours,
permanent stormwater features, and landscaping.
            (2)   BMPs to accomplish the purpose of the plan. Examples of
appropriate BMPs may include those addressing operation and maintenance of
storm drainage quality control facilities, operation and maintenance of
stormwater discharge control facilities, maintenance of landscaping, good
housekeeping practices, etc.
            (3)   Showing the following for each BMP specified:
               (A)   Location and extent of specified BMPs, as appropriate.
               (B)   Detailed schedule of execution for each specified BMP, in
terms of starting time, duration, frequency, etc., as appropriate.
               (C)   Any information in addition to or different from that
shown on the BMP fact sheets as necessary to employ the BMPs on the site.
         c.   The owner of development that warrants compliance with the UGCP
regulation must submit a signed stormwater maintenance agreement using the city
of North Salt Lake agreement template. The postconstruction maintenance
agreement needs to be recorded at the Davis County recorder's office.
   D.   Landscape Plan: Landscape plan, prepared by a licensed architect or
landscape architect, showing the following:
      1.   Location and type of all landscaping. Show locations, type and size
of all trees.
      2.   The total area in square feet of all landscaping.
      3.   Location of irrigation system, including heads.
      4.   All landscaping shall conform to Title 10, Chapter 22, Water
Efficient Landscape Standards.
   E.   Building Plan: Building plan, showing the following:
      1.   Elevation view from front, side and rear.
      2.   Height of building.
      3.   Type of exterior construction.
   F.   Miscellaneous: The following may be required depending on field
conditions, type of business, etc.:
      1.   Erosion control plan.
      2.   Retaining wall details.
      3.   Density calculations (to be provided for multi-family dwellings,
condos, etc.).
      4.   Screening of yards.
      5.   Davis County flood control approval (to be provided when drainage
ties into Davis County storm drain system).
      6.   Agreements with railroad companies, petroleum carrier companies,
adjacent landowners, etc. (Ord. 2011-07, 5-3-2011; amd. Ord. 2014-16, 10-21-
2014; Ord. 2016-12, 8-16-2016; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-20-4: SITE PLAN STANDARDS:
   A.   A final site plan shall conform to its approved conceptual plan. (Ord.
2011-07, 5-3-2011)
   B.   A site plan shall conform to standards set forth in this chapter and
other provisions of the land use and subdivision ordinances. (Ord. 2011-07, 5-
3-2011; amd. 2012 Code)
   C.   The entire site shall be developed at one time unless a phased
development plan is approved by the planning commission.
   D.   A site plan review may be conducted for multiple buildings within a
project simultaneously to achieve phasing, when all the buildings being
reviewed are identical. (Ord. 2011-07, 5-3-2011)
10-20-5: SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Notwithstanding the process outlined in the table below, a
nonresidential or multiple-family residential building located within an RDA,
EDA or CDA, or located within a "P" district or planned unit development, shall
be reviewed by both the planning commission and city council.
 
                                                                                Planning   City
                                                                                Commission Council
Multiple-family residential:
     Greater than 6 units                                                  X          X
     6 units or less                                                       X
Nonresidential buildings:
     Lot size greater than 5 acres or building size greater than 30,000 squXre        X
feet
     Lot size of 5 acres or less or building size of 30,000 square feet or Xess
 
   B.   Site plan application and all applicable documents shall be submitted
to the zoning administrator, or designee, for review.
   C.   Upon deeming the application complete, the zoning administrator, or
designee, shall present the application to the development review committee.
The development review committee shall evaluate the merits of the application
and shall produce written comments for the applicant.
   D.   Upon compliance with the zoning administrator, or designee, and the
development review committee recommendations, the revised application shall be
presented to the planning commission for review and action. The planning
commission shall review the application for compliance with the standards
listed in this chapter. The planning commission shall then either approve,
approve with conditions, deny the application, or shall recommend to the city
council approval, approval with conditions, or denial. Action may be postponed
on any site plan if the planning commission determines that further information
is required or to carry out research or evaluations prior to making a final
decision on the proposed site plan.
   E.   When applicable, the planning commission recommendation shall be
presented to the city council. The city council shall review the site plan
application and approve, approve with conditions or modifications, disapprove
or modify the plan. Action may be postponed on any site plan if the city
council determines that further information is required or to carry out
research or evaluations prior to making a final decision on the proposed site
plan.
   F.   The zoning administrator or designee shall notify the applicant of
approval or denial. (Ord. 2011-07, 5-3-2011)
CHAPTER 21
EXISTING USES OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
10-21-1: Purpose
10-21-2: Application
10-21-3: Public Hearing
10-21-4: City Council Consideration
10-21-5: Overlay Zone Designation; Existing Uses
10-21-6: Abandonment Of Use
10-21-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this zone is to allow existing legal nonconforming uses in the
General Commercial Zone to be considered as permitted uses in the General
Commercial Zone. This zone shall be an overlay zone in the General Commercial
Zone when it is applied to a parcel of property. (Ord. 2012-09, 6-19-2012)
10-21-2: APPLICATION:
   A.   Any property owner or user of property in the General Commercial Zone
and whose property was rezoned by the City of North Salt Lake to general
commercial on February 7, 2012, may apply to have this overlay zone applied to
their use and property.
   B.   In order to have standing to apply for this overlay zone, an owner or
user of the property must have been the legal owner or user of the property on
February 7, 2012, and a written application must be filed within twenty four
(24) months of February 7, 2012. Applicants with standing should file an
application with the City Recorder. Such application must contain the following
information:
      1.   The signature(s) of the property owner(s), together with evidence
that they were the property owner on February 7, 2012;
      2.   A description of and zoning map depicting the property to which the
zone is being requested to apply consisting of the Davis County parcel
identification numbers;
      3.   A specific description of the current existing uses and
nonconforming uses of the property;
      4.   A specific identification of the existing buildings or other
structures used for the nonconforming uses identified; and
      5.   The date when the legal nonconforming use first began on the
property, the previous zoning designation for the property, and the date of the
zone change which rendered the use nonconforming.
      6.   Payment of a rezoning application fee as listed in the North Salt
Lake City fee schedule.
   C.   If the City planning staff deems the application to be substantially
complete it shall submit the application to the City Planning Commission for
its recommendation to the City Council. If the application is incomplete it
shall be returned to the applicant with instructions on what information is
needed to complete the application. (Ord. 2012-09, 6-19-2012)
10-21-3: PUBLIC HEARING:
   A.   Once the application is complete it shall be noticed and scheduled for
a public hearing before the City Planning Commission at its next regularly
scheduled meeting. The Planning Commission shall process that application as it
would a request to amend the City zoning map. The City Planning Commission
shall make a recommendation to the City Council as to whether or not the City
Council should apply the overlay zone to the property pursuant to the submitted
application.
   B.   The City Planning Commission shall recommend positively that the City
Council grant the application for the overlay zone designation on the property
if it appears from the application that the described existing use of the
property is a legal nonconforming use as defined in Utah Code 10-9a-103(32) and
section
10-1-47 of this title. (Ord. 2012-09, 6-19-2012)
10-21-4: CITY COUNCIL CONSIDERATION:
Upon a recommendation from the City Planning Commission, the City Council
shall, at its next regularly scheduled meeting, if practical, consider the
application of the overlay zone to the property applied for as it would any
application for a zone change within the City. The City Council shall approve
the application for the overlay zone designation on the property if it appears
from the application that the described use of the property is a legal
nonconforming use as defined in Utah Code 10-9a-103(32) and section
10-1-47 of this title, unless findings to the contrary deem such a zone change,
in the opinion of the City Council, contrary to the best interest of the City.
(Ord. 2012-09, 6-19-2012)
10-21-5: OVERLAY ZONE DESIGNATION; EXISTING USES:
   A.   If the overlay zone designation is granted by the City Council, the
specified existing use as specifically described in the application, as that
use is updated or upgraded from time to time, including remodeling and
expansion to comply with Federal, State and local laws, ordinances and
regulations, shall be considered a permitted use for that parcel of property
and the City's zoning (land use) map shall be amended to reflect the
application of the overlay zone to the parcel of property.
   B.   The use of the parcel of property under the overlay zone designation
shall enjoy all the rights, protections and benefits of any other permitted use
in the General Commercial Zone as if specifically identified as a permitted use
in the City's General Commercial Zone text, including the right to modify,
reconstruct or construct structures associated with such permitted use.
   C.   The specifically identified use may continue indefinitely as a
permitted use unless the use is abandoned. (Ord. 2012-09, 6-19-2012)
10-21-6: ABANDONMENT OF USE:
   A.   Abandonment of the permitted manufacturing use shall be presumed to
have occurred if:
      1.   A majority of the primary structure associated with the
manufacturing use has been voluntarily demolished without prior written
agreement with the City regarding an extension of the overlay zone permitted
manufacturing use; or
      2.   The manufacturing use has been discontinued for one year, not
including time associated with repairing, upgrading or replacing structures
associated with the use; or
      3.   The primary structure associated with the manufacturing use remains
vacant for a period of one year, not including time associated with repairing,
upgrading or replacing structures associated with the use.
   B.   The property owner may rebut the presumption of abandonment under the
provisions of section
10-2-2 of this title regarding appeals, and shall have the burden of
establishing that any claimed abandonment has not in fact occurred. (Ord. 2012-
09, 6-19-2012)
CHAPTER 22
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-22-1: Purpose
10-22-2: Applicability
10-22-3: Landscape Design Standards
10-22-4: Irrigation Design Standards
10-22-5: Landscapes In New Single-Family Residential Developments
10-22-6: Prohibition On Restrictive Covenants Requiring Uniform Plant Material
Irrigated With Spray Irrigation
10-22-7: Landscapes In Commercial, Industrial, Institutional, Mixed Use And
Multi-Family Developments
10-22-8: Documentation For Commercial, Industrial, And Institutional Projects
10-22-9: Plan Review, Construction Inspection, And Post- Construction
Monitoring For Commercial, Industrial, And Institutional Projects
10-22-10: Prohibited Watering Practices
10-22-11: Enforcement, Penalty For Violations
10-22-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the public by enhancing the development and open space areas with
landscaping and vegetation while encouraging efficient use of water. More
specifically this Chapter functions to:
   A.   Preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality of neighborhoods and
commercial areas;
   B.   Maintain and strengthen a positive visual identity of the City;
   C.   Enhance the appearance of parking lots visible from public streets;
   D.   Enhance and protect property values;
   E.   Lessen the impact of noise, dust, debris, heat, wind, and air;
   F.   Promote water efficient landscaping to conserve water and reduce demand
for current and future water resources;
   G.   Provide shade, reduce the heat island effect (reflective heat from
impervious surfaces), and lessen energy consumption;
   H.   Buffer and screen undesirable uses and appearances from adjacent
properties;
   I.   Reduce the rate and volume of storm water runoff, and enhance the
quality of storm water runoff;
   J.   Act as a natural drainage system and lessen drainage problems; and
   K.   Promote healthy outdoor recreational activities. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-
2022)
10-22-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new and rehabilitated
landscaping for:
   A.   Public agency projects;
   B.   Private commercial and industrial development projects;
   C.   Developer-installed landscaping in multi-family and single-family
residential projects;
   D.   Homeowner provided landscape improvements within the front, side, and
rear yards of new single and two-family dwellings;
   E.   Homeowners of one and two-family dwellings upon which the property
owners desire to replace lawn areas with water efficient landscaping within the
front, side, or rear yards or adjacent park strip;
   F.   Any existing multiple-family residential, commercial, or industrial
site where a proposed building addition increases the footprint of buildings
within the property boundary by thirty percent (30%) or more; and
   G.   Property modifications resulting in the addition or removal of
impervious surfaces exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   H.   The required landscaping percentage shall be strictly followed;
however, the Land Use Authority may reduce the percentage requirement through a
landscape modification process. Exceptions shall be limited in their
application and shall be based on the following criteria:
      1.   There is a physical hardship associated with the property that
results in a unique circumstance that does not apply to other similar
properties;
      2.   The proposed reduction in landscape area shall be mitigated through
enhanced landscaping improvements and/or the provision of amenity areas that
exceed the minimum standards of this chapter; and
      3.   Exceptions shall not be granted for the sole reason of providing
additional building area, increasing residential density on a property, or
meeting the minimum off-street parking stall requirement. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-
2022)
10-22-3: LANDSCAPE DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Plant Selection:
      1.   Plants shall be well-suited to the microclimate and soil conditions
at the project site. Both native and locally-adapted plants are acceptable.
Plants with similar water needs shall be grouped together as much as possible.
      2.   Areas with slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) shall be
landscaped with deep-rooting, water-conserving plants for erosion control and
soil stabilization and are not permitted to be planted with turf grass.
      3.   Park strips and other landscaped areas less than eight feet (8')
wide may not be landscaped with sod/turf. Only water-conserving plants, which
do not have a mass planting of any type of plant material which requires
uniform overhead spray irrigation, may be used in a park strip
      4.   Shrubs and ornamental grasses shall be planted and maintained in
groupings of at least three (3) to increase the microclimate shade area above
plant root zones, and to provide a pleasing and balanced aesthetic of plant
material massing in the landscape. Groupings may consist of straight rows,
grids or triangulation planting patterns.
      5.   Plants and trees specified for a project landscape plan shall be
selected from the WBWCD recommended plant list and the recommended trees
included in Title 7, Chapter 9, Community Forestry. These plant materials are
suitable for the local climate with respect to temperature ranges and moderate
to high drought tolerance. Additional plant species that can be demonstrated as
suitable for the local climate and soil conditions, shall be permitted.
      6.   The typical plant bed width shall be a minimum of three feet (3');
the minimum plant bed width shall be one and a half feet (1.5') for ornamental
grasses, perennials, and ground covers, and one foot (1') for planters for
climbing vines.
      7.   Plant beds may be substituted by planters or other similar
streetscape amenities within the Core Subdistrict of the Town Center.
   B.   Tree Selection: Tree species shall be selected based on growth
characteristics and site conditions, including available space, overhead
clearance, soil conditions, exposure, and desired color and appearance. Trees
shall be selected as follows:
      1.   Broad canopy trees shall be selected where shade or screening of
tall objects is desired;
      2.   Low-growing trees shall be selected for spaces under utility wires;
      3.   Select trees from which lower branches can be trimmed to maintain a
healthy growth habit where vision clearance and natural surveillance is a
concern;
      4.   Narrow or columnar trees shall be selected where awnings or other
building features limit growth, or where greater visibility is desired between
buildings and the street for natural surveillance;
      5.   Street trees shall be planted in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 9,
Community Forestry for placement within existing and proposed park strips, and
in sidewalk tree wells on streets without park strips. Tree placement shall
provide canopy cover (shade) and avoid conflicts with existing trees, retaining
walls, utilities, lighting, and other obstacles; and
      6.   All new trees planted shall be irrigated by means of drip irrigation
rings and not by overhead sprinklers.
   C.   Mulch: After completion of all planting, all irrigated non-turf areas
shall be covered with a minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch to retain water,
inhibit weed growth, and moderate soil temperature. Non-porous material shall
not be placed under the mulch. Permitted mulch:
      1.   All rock mulch must be angular or crushed, clean or washed landscape
gravel, and be rocks size of two-inch minus;
      2.   Pea gravel is prohibited for use in park strips;
      3.   Rock mulch used in park strips adjacent to a public street with a
slope of eight percent (8%) or greater shall be compacted;
      4.   Bark and lava rock mulch are prohibited in park strips with slopes
of eight percent (8%) or greater and due to weight and erosion concerns;
      5.   The final grade of all mulch adjacent to a sidewalk or curb shall be
level or slightly below the height of the sidewalk and curb to prevent erosion
loss.
   D.   Soil Preparation: Soil preparation will be suitable to provide healthy
growing conditions for the plants and to encourage water infiltration and
penetration. Soil preparation shall include scarifying the soil to a minimum
depth of six (6) inches and amending the soil with organic material as per
specific recommendations of the Landscape Designer/Landscape Architect based on
the soil conditions.
      1.   Soil amendments (organic material) shall also be added and tilled
into the soil to a minimum depth of six inches (6") to increase organic content
and improve water retention.
      2.   Soil amendment type and quantity shall be recommended by the
Landscape Architect (designer) based on a review of the soil conditions.
   E.   Turf Design:
      1.   Turf species are required to be drought tolerant.
      2.   Turf grass shall not be installed in areas less than eight feet (8')
wide.
      3.   Turf grass shall not be allowed in park strips, parking lot islands,
and other planted bed landscape areas.
      4.   Turf grass shall not be allowed on slopes with a grade over twenty
five percent (25%).
      5.   A minimum of one tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet of turf
area shall be planted within or adjacent to the turf area.
   F.   Park Strip Design: The intent of this section is to provide an
assortment of allowed plant, organic and/or natural materials that allow for
creative landscaping, maintain a healthy street tree canopy, and create an
attractive pedestrian environment while encouraging water conservation.
      1.   Plant Coverage: Live plant materials, not to exceed twenty two
inches (22") in height, are allowed. Plants with heights up to thirty six
inches (36") tall may be allowed as specimen or accent plants when not located
within clear view areas (see section
10-1-31). These plants may not be planted in a manner that would create a
visual barrier between the street and the sidewalk.
      2.   At least thirty three percent (33%) or more of the park strip
surface must be covered with perennial or low growing shrub vegetation within
three (3) years of planting or when planting has reached maturity, whichever
comes first.
         a.   The addition of street trees chosen in accordance with Title 7,
Chapter 9, Community Forestry shall be credited towards required park strip
plant coverage as follows:
            (1)   Small Trees: Fifty (50) square feet;
            (2)   Medium Trees: Seventy five (75) square feet;
            (3)   Large Trees: One hundred (100) square feet;
         b.   For lots with two (2) or more street frontages, this standard
shall be applied separately to each adjacent park strip on each street
frontage.
      3.   Plants which have thorns, spines, or other sharp, rigid parts are
hazardous to pedestrians and bicyclists, and are difficult to walk across and
are prohibited.
      4.   Gravel, Rocks, And Boulders: Because rock, gravel and other hard
surface materials as a ground cover retain and emit heat during the summer
months when water is scarce, they may not be used within a thirty six inch
(36") radius (72 inch diameter) of any street tree, unless an operable
irrigation system is provided. Otherwise, gravel, rocks, and boulders, may be
used on portions of the park strip as permitted in this Chapter.
      5.   Boulders as an accent material are limited to thirty six inches
(36") in height, and may not be arranged in a manner that creates a continuous
visual obstruction. Any boulder raised above the curb height shall be set back
from the curb by at least twenty four inches (24").
      6.   Paving Materials: Paving materials in park strips shall be limited
to poured concrete, concrete pavers, brick pavers, or natural stone pavers, and
may be used only in portions of a park strip as a carriageway to provide for
safe and convenient access across park strips to and from vehicles that may
park at the curb.
         a.   Carriageways shall be not more than four feet (4') in width and
shall be located so as to provide the most direct route from the curb to the
sidewalk.
      7.   Retaining Walls, Fences And Other Similar Structural Encroachments:
Retaining walls, fences, steps, raised planter boxes and other similar
structural encroachments in park strips are only permitted when specifically
approved in an approved General Development Plan and have been reviewed by the
engineering department pursuant to adopted standards and/or recognized
engineering principles. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-22-4: IRRIGATION DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Smart Automatic Irrigation Controller: Landscaped areas shall be
provided with a WaterSense labeled smart irrigation controller which
automatically adjusts the frequency and/or duration of irrigation events in
response to changing weather conditions. All controllers shall be equipped with
automatic rain delay or rain shut-off capabilities and shall be setup to
operate in "smart" mode.
   B.   Each valve shall irrigate a landscape with similar site, slope and soil
conditions and plant materials with similar watering needs. Turf and non-turf
areas shall be irrigated on separate valves. Drip emitters and sprinklers shall
be placed on separate valves.
   C.   Drip emitters or a bubbler shall be provided for each tree. Bubblers
shall not exceed one and one half (1.5) gallons per minute per device. Bubblers
for trees shall be placed on a separate valve unless specifically exempted by
the City due to the limited number of trees on the project site.
   D.   Drip irrigation or bubblers shall be used to irrigate plants in non-
turf areas.
   E.   Pop-up spray heads shall be at a minimum of four inches (4") in height
to avoid blockage from lawn foliage.
   F.   Sprinklers shall have matched precipitation rates with each control
valve circuit.
   G.   Sprinkler heads shall be attached to rigid lateral lines with flexible
material (swing joints) to reduce potential for breakage.
   H.   Check valves shall be required where elevation differences cause low-
head drainage. Pressure compensating valves and sprinklers shall be required
where a significant variation in water pressure occurs within the irrigation
system due to elevation differences.
   I.   Filters shall be required on all secondary water service connections.
Filters shall have as a minimum a thirty (30) mesh screen and shall be cleaned
and maintained by the property owner on a regular basis.
   J.   Drip irrigation lines require additional filtration at or after the
zone valve at a minimum of two hundred (200) mesh and end flush valves are
required as necessary for drip irrigation lines.
   K.   Valves with spray or stream sprinklers shall be scheduled to operate in
accordance with local water supplier restrictions to reduce water loss from
wind, evaporation or other environmental conditions not suitable for
irrigation.
   L.   Program valves for multiple repeat cycles where necessary to reduce
runoff, particularly on slopes and soils with slow infiltration rates.
   M.   Meter Installation: Meters shall be specified by the City, or other
water provider, for the particular installation and shall report instantaneous
flow in gallons per minute (gpm) and totalized flow in gallons via encoded
register output. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-22-5: LANDSCAPES IN NEW SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Homebuilders and/or developers subdividing lots and/or constructing new
single-family residential homes shall provide water-efficient landscaping to
prospective home buyers, such as the Localscapes design style when the
landscape is installed by the homebuilder/developer. The water-efficient
landscaping option shall meet the Landscape Design Standards and Irrigation
Design Standards of this chapter, and any central open shape area consisting of
plant material in mass requiring overhead spray irrigation shall not exceed
twenty five percent (25%) of the lot or six thousand five hundred (6,500)
square feet, whichever is less.
   B.   Homebuilders and/or developers who construct model homes for a
designated subdivision shall install water-efficient landscaping, such as the
Localscapes design style. The water-efficient landscaping option shall meet the
Landscape Design Standards and Irrigation Design Standards of this chapter, and
any central open shape area consisting of plant material in mass requiring
overhead spray irrigation shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of lot or
six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet, whichever is less.
   C.   New construction homes shall have landscaping and irrigation plans
approved by the City which meet the aforementioned requirements.
   D.   Model homes shall include an informational brochure on water-efficient
landscaping or Localscapes. Localscapes brochures can be obtained from the
City.
   E.   When buyers or owners are installing their own landscaping on new home
construction, a time frame for landscaping to be completed shall be twelve (12)
months from the time of occupancy, unless granted an extension by the City due
to water availability, season, or drought conditions.
   F.   All exceptions related to installation timeline, shall require the
submission of an erosion control plan which meets the following requirements:
      1.   All disturbed surfaces shall be protected by mulching, erosion mats,
native seeding, and/or other effective means of soil protection;
      2.   Silt fencing and/or vegetative buffers with native seed mix shall be
provided at the lowest lot elevations. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-22-6: PROHIBITION ON RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS REQUIRING UNIFORM PLANT MATERIAL
IRRIGATED WITH SPRAY IRRIGATION:
   A.   Any Homeowners Association governing documents, such as by-laws,
operating rules, covenants, conditions, and restrictions that govern the
operation of a common interest development, are void and unenforceable if they:
      1.   Require the use of any uniform plant material requiring overhead
spray irrigation in landscape areas less than eight feet (8') wide or require
any uniform plant material requiring overhead spray irrigation in other areas
that exceed forty percent (40%) of the landscaped area; or
      2.   Prohibit, or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting,
the use of water-conserving plants as a group; or
      3.   Have the effect of prohibiting or restricting compliance with this
chapter or other water conservation measures. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-22-7: LANDSCAPES IN COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, INSTITUTIONAL, MIXED USE AND
MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Commercial, industrial, and institutional landscapes shall meet the
Landscape Design Standards and Irrigation Design Standards of this chapter, and
the turf area shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the total lot or five
thousand (5,000) square feet, whichever is less.
   B.   Mixed use and multi-family developments shall meet the Landscape Design
Standards and Irrigation Design Standards of this chapter, and the turf area
shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the lot or five thousand (5,000) square
feet, except within bona fide recreation areas designated and approved by the
Planning Commission during site plan approval. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-22-8: DOCUMENTATION FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL PROJECTS:
Landscape Plan Documentation Package: For all commercial, industrial, multi-
family and institutional projects, a Landscape Plan Documentation Package shall
be submitted to and approved by the City prior to the issue of any permit. The
Landscape Plan Documentation Package shall be prepared by a registered
landscape architect or other qualified professional and shall consist of the
following items:
   A.   Project Data Sheet: The Project Data Sheet shall contain the following:
      1.   Project name and address;
      2.   Applicant or applicant agent's name, address, phone number, and
email address;
      3.   Landscape architect's name, address, phone number, and email
address; and
      4.   Landscape contractor's name, address, phone number and email
address, if available at this time.
   B.   Planting Plan: A detailed planting plan shall be drawn at a scale that
clearly identifies the following:
      1.   Location of all plant materials, a legend with botanical and common
names, and size of plant materials;
      2.   Property lines and street names;
      3.   Existing and proposed buildings, walls, fences, utilities, paved
areas and other site improvements;
      4.   Existing trees and plant materials to be removed or retained;
      5.   Scale: graphic and written;
      6.   Date of design;
      7.   Designation of a landscape zone; and
      8.   Details and specifications for tree staking, soil preparation, and
other planting work.
   C.   Irrigation Plan: A detailed irrigation plan shall be drawn at the same
scale as the planting plan and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Layout of the irrigation system and a legend summarizing the type
and size of all components of the system, including manufacturer name and model
numbers;
      2.   Static water pressure in pounds per square inch (psi) at the point
of connection to the public water supply;
      3.   Flow rate in gallons per minute and design operating pressure in psi
for each valve and precipitation rate in inches per hour for each valve with
sprinklers;
      4.   Installation details for irrigation components; and
      5.   Backflow preventor
   D.   Grading Plan: A grading plan shall be drawn at the same scale as the
planting plan and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Property lines and street names, existing and proposed buildings,
walls, fences, utilities, paved areas and other site improvements; and
      2.   Existing and finished contour lines and spot elevations as necessary
for the proposed site improvements. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-22-9: PLAN REVIEW, CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION, AND POST-CONSTRUCTION MONITORING
FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL PROJECTS:
   A.   As part of the Building Permit approval process, a copy of the
Landscape Plan Documentation Package shall be submitted to the City for review
and approval before construction begins.
   B.   All installers and designers shall meet state and local license,
insurance, and bonding requirements, and be able to show proof of such.
   C.   During construction, site inspection of the landscaping may be
performed by the applicable city departments and staff.
   D.   Following construction and prior to issuing the approval for occupancy,
an inspection shall be scheduled with the applicable city departments to verify
compliance with the approved landscape plans. The Certificate of Substantial
Completion shall be completed by the property owner, contractor or landscape
architect and submitted to the City.
   E.   The City reserves the right to perform site inspections at any time
before, during or after the irrigation system and landscape installation, and
to require corrective measures if requirements of this ordinance are not
satisfied.
   F.   Landscaping to be completed prior to occupancy for all commercial
properties, unless granted an extension of time by the City due to water
availability, season, or drought conditions, and shall be accompanied by a
landscape bond to guarantee the installation.
   G.   All exceptions related to landscape installation timeline, shall
require the submission of an erosion control plan which meets the following
requirements:
      1.   All disturbed surfaces shall be protected by mulching, erosion mats,
natives seeding, and/or other effective means of soil protection;
      2.   Silt fencing and/or vegetative buffers with native seed mix shall be
provided at the lowest lot elevations. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-22-10: PROHIBITED WATERING PRACTICES:
Regardless of the age of a development (commercial, industrial, office, or
residential), water shall be properly used. Waste of water is prohibited. (Ord.
2022-03, 6-7-2022)
10-22-11: ENFORCEMENT, PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS:
The provisions of these regulations shall be enforced in accordance with Title
12, Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Program. As is required by Title
12, any consumer who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be issued a
written notice of violation and may be subject to the penalties stated in Title
12. In addition to Title 12 penalties, the failure to correct violations as
indicated in a notice of violation may result in the termination of water
service to the customer. (Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
CHAPTER 23
[RESERVED]
CHAPTER 24
[RESERVED]
CHAPTER 25
HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT (C-H)
SECTION:
10-25-1: Purpose
10-25-2: Use Regulations
10-25-3: Site Regulations
10-25-4: U.S. 89 Right Of Way And Improvement Requirements
10-25-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the highway commercial (C-H) zoning district is to encourage a
mixture of uses supporting all modes of transportation utilizing Highway 89,
including, but not limited to, pedestrians, cyclists, public transit, and
vehicular traffic. The design standards and use restrictions intend to unify
the corridor with the town center to create a distinct identity for the area,
improve the appearance, and enhance the safety of the Highway 89 corridor.
(Ord. 2015-18, 11-17-2015)
10-25-2: USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   General Provisions: No building, structure or land shall be used and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered,
enlarged or maintained in the highway commercial (C-H) zoning district except
as provided in this title. Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental
to uses authorized by conditional use permit in any district are also
authorized by issuance of a conditional use permit in any such district.
   B.   Developments: Developments in the highway commercial (C-H) zoning
district which contain mixed uses (combining of residential and nonresidential
uses) or multi-family developments are subject to the requirements of chapter
13, "Planned District (P)", of this title and may only be approved after going
through the process required by that chapter.
   C.   Permitted Uses: The following uses of land shall be permitted in the
highway commercial (C-H) zoning district:
      General office.
      General retail and personal services, except for those that are
prohibited in this zone.
      Restaurants.
      Sales of automobiles, recreational vehicles and motor sports vehicles.
   D.   Conditional Uses: The following uses of land shall be conditional in
the highway commercial (C-H) zoning district:
      Retail stores larger than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
      Special events (carnivals, craft fairs, farmers' markets, festivals,
fundraisers, mobile food truck fairs).
   E.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses of land are prohibited in the
highway commercial (C-H) zoning district:
      Auto body shops and auto repair facilities, excluding oil change and
lubrication shops.
      Bowling alleys.
      Car wash facilities.
      Gas stations.
      Manufacturing.
      Mining.
      Nonstore retailers.
      Pawnshops, title loan, quick loan or other payday loan or check cashing
services.
      Pipeline transportation.
      Private clubs.
      RV (recreational vehicle) parks and campgrounds.
      Rail transportation.
      Residential development containing less than five (5) dwelling units.
      Self-serve laundromats.
      Self-storage.
      Sexually oriented businesses.
      Support activities for transportation.
      Taverns.
      Tobacco stores.
      Truck transportation.
      Uses requiring outside storage.
      Warehousing and storage facilities.
      Waste management and remediation services.
      Wholesale.
   F.   Staff Determination Uses: All uses not listed herein shall go through
the staff determination process as outlined in section
10-11-2 of this title. (Ord. 2015-18, 11-17-2015)
10-25-3: SITE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Height Regulations: The maximum height for all buildings and structures
in feet shall be thirty feet (30'), or two (2) stories, whichever is lower,
except as approved by conditional use with the following standards:
      1.   Location:
         a.   The property is located within the Town Center Master Plan; or
         b.   The property is located north of 1000 North Street.
      2.   Setback: To transition from residential neighborhoods, a graduated
setback is required from shared property lines with existing single family
homes as a condition of height exception:
 
Minimum Setback (feet) Maximum Stories Maximum Height (feet)
20                     2               35
40                     3               45
60                     4               55
 
   B.   Lot Standards:
      1.   Minimum lot area, width, depth shall be determined through the site
plan review process and shall be what is necessary for a proposed development
to comply with maximum height, parking, landscaping, right of way dedication,
where applicable, and any other site requirements of this or other titles.
      C.   Landscaping: The minimum amount of landscaping required for each lot
shall be fifteen percent (15%). Sod shall be limited to five percent (5%) of
the lot or five thousand (5,000) square feet, whichever is less. Landscaping
for all developments shall, at a minimum, comply with the cross section for
U.S. 89 in this chapter. All landscaping shall conform to Title 10, Chapter 22,
Water Efficient Landscape Standards.
   D.   Setbacks:
      1.   The front yard setback shall be ten feet (10'), but can be increased
through the site plan review process in order to provide for pedestrian and
other street level activities and land uses such as plazas, outdoor sitting and
eating areas, open spaces and other types of human scale amenities. The front
yard setback is measured from the front property line after any necessary right
of way has been dedicated.
      2.   The rear yard setback shall be ten feel (10').
      3.   There are no side setbacks, except as required by the international
building code.
   E.   Parking:
      1.   Parking may only be located to the side or rear of any buildings in
the highway commercial (C-H) zoning district.
      2.   All parking shall meet the requirements of chapter 6 of this title,
except as may be modified below:
         a.   Retail: Sixty five percent (65%) of the required parking found in
chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 2015-18, 11-17-2015; amd. Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-
2022; Ord. 2023-04, 2-21-2023)
10-25-4: U.S. 89 RIGHT OF WAY AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Development along the U.S. 89 corridor shall dedicate not less than
fifty five feet (55') of right of way (1/2 of the required 110 foot right of
way on U.S. 89) for the full length of the proposed project and shall include
the following improvements within that right of way:
      1.   Six foot (6') median (1/2 of a 12 foot median).
      2.   Two (2) 12-foot automobile travel lanes.
      3.   Seven and one-half foot (71/2') improved shoulder.
      4.   Two and one-half foot (21/2') curb and gutter.
      5.   Eight foot (8') landscaped park strips.
      6.   Seven foot (7') sidewalk.
   B.   Required landscaping shall include street trees from the city's
approved list of tree species. Required street trees shall be located within
the required park strip. If it is determined that planting trees within the
park strip presents a safety hazard or hazard to utility lines, street trees
may be moved to the front yard setback area. All landscaping shall conform to
Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscape Standards. (Ord. 2015-18, 11-
17-2015; amd. Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022)
TITLE 11
FLOOD CONTROL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Statutory Authorization
11-1-2: Findings Of Fact
11-1-3: Statement Of Purpose
11-1-4: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
11-1-1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The state legislature has, in Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-84, delegated
the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council does ordain as set forth in
this title. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-1-2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which
results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare. These flood losses are created by the cumulative
effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights
and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable
to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-1-3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this title to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-1-4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this title uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Definitions Of Words And Phrases
11-2-1: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this title shall be
interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
title its most reasonable application.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows, active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition,
and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation of the Base Flood, relative to the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) as shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM).
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building:
   A.   Built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B,
C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building
in zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure
member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the
water; and
   B.   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case
of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, "elevated building" also
includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE or V, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building",
even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the
breakaway walls met the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the national flood
insurance program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM, or before September 15, 2022, for FIRMs effective before that date.
"Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community flood insurance rate map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after September 15, 2022, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start
of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): The land area subject to flood hazards, shown
on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zones A, AE, A1-30, A99, AR, AO, AH, V,
VO, VE, or V-30.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub.L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure"; provided, that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this title when
specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this title. (For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the North American Vertical
Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 2022-02, 5-17-2022; Ord. 2022-05, 9-6-2022)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Lands Applicable
11-3-2: Basis For Establishing Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
11-3-3: Establishment Of Development Permit
11-3-4: Compliance Required
11-3-5: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
11-3-6: Interpretation
11-3-7: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
11-3-8:    Severability
11-3-1: LANDS APPLICABLE:
This title shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-3-2: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study For North Salt Lake City", dated September 15, 2022, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM
and FBFM) and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this title. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 2022-02,
5-17-2022)
11-3-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-3-4: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this title and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-3-5: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This title is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this title and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 07-11,
5-15-2007)
11-3-6: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this title, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-3-7: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this title is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This title does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This title shall
not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this title or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-3-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, provision, or portion of this title is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the title shall not be
affected. (Ord. 2022-05, 9-6-2022)
CHAPTER 4
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
11-4-1: Designation Of Floodplain Administrator
11-4-2: Duties And Responsibilities
11-4-3: Permit Procedures
11-4-4: Variance Procedures
11-4-5: Penalty
11-4-1: DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The city engineer is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this title and other appropriate
sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-4-2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this title.
   B.   Review permit applications to determine whether a proposed building
site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding.
   C.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this title.
   D.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
   E.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.
   F.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management
agency.
   G.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained.
   H.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
section
11-3-2 of this title, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
chapter 5 of this title.
   I.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
   J.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE or AH on the community FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'); provided,
that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision).
   K.   Where Base Flood Elevation data are utilized in Zone A, obtain and
maintain records of the lowest floor and floodproofing elevations for new and
substantially improved construction. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 2022-05,
9-6-2022)
11-4-3: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application Information Required: Application for a development permit
shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/
her, and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of
special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      3.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of subsection
11-5-2B of this title;
      4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      5.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection
11-4-2A of this chapter.
   B.   Considerations: Approval or denial of a development permit by the
floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this title
and the following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding or
erosion damage for the proposed use;
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-4-4: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   Appeal Board: The appeal board, as established by the community, shall
hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of
this title. The hearing officer is hereby appointed as the appeal board. (Ord.
07-11, 5-15-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-07, 4-30-2012)
   B.   Authority Of Appeal Board: The appeal board shall hear and render
judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in
the enforcement or administration of this title.
   C.   Further Appeal: Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the
appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   Records Maintained; Reporting: The floodplain administrator shall
maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances
to the federal emergency management agency upon request.
   E.   Historic Places: Variances may be issued for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the national register of
historic places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
   F.   Lot Size: Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection
11-4-3B2 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
   G.   Conditions May Be Attached: Upon consideration of the factors noted
above and the intent of this title, the appeal board may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this title.
   H.   Flood Level Increase Not Permitted: Variances shall not be issued
within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge would result.
   I.   Repair Of Historic Structures: Variances may be issued for the repair
or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
   J.   Prerequisites For Granting: Prerequisites for granting variances:
      1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      3.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   K.   New Construction And Substantial Improvements: Variances may be issued
by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use;
provided, that:
      1.   The criteria outlined in subsections A through I of this section are
met; and
      2.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-4-5: PENALTY:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this title and
other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this title by
failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a class B misdemeanor. Any person who violates this title or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation and, in addition, shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007; amd. 2012 Code)
CHAPTER 5
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
SECTION:
11-5-1: General Standards
11-5-2: Specific Standards
11-5-3: Standards For Subdivision Proposals
11-5-4: Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
11-5-5: Floodways
11-5-1: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
   A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
   F.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   G.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-5-2: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in section
11-3-2 and subsection
11-4-2H of this title, and subsection
11-5-3C of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvements
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in
subsection
11-4-3A1 of this title, is satisfied.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification, which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed, shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
   C.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
      1.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
   D.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a
community FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      2.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community FIRM on sites: a)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; b) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision; c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision; or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
      3.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-
30, AH and AE on the community FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
this subsection be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base
flood elevation; or
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community FIRM either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days;
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      3.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection
11-4-3A of this title, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-5-3: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   A.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections
11-1-2,
11-1-3 and
11-1-4 of this title.
   B.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development
permit requirements of sections
11-3-3 and
11-4-3 of this title and the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
11-3-2 or subsection
11-4-2H of this title.
   D.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
   E.   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-5-4: STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES):
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section
11-3-2 of this title are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet
(3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
   A.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
   B.   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
      1.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
      2.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
   C.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in subsection
 11-4-3A1 of this title, are satisfied.
   D.   Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord.
07-11, 5-15-2007)
11-5-5: FLOODWAYS:
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section
11-3-2 of this title are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
shall apply:
   A.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway, unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations; provided, that the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 07-11, 5-15-2007)
TITLE 12
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING PROGRAM
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
Part 1 - Purpose And Scope
12-1-101: Short Title
12-1-102: Declaration Of Purpose
12-1-103: Scope
12-1-104: Existing Law Continued
12-1-105: Criminal Prosecution Right
12-1-106: Effect Of Heading
12-1-107: Validity Of Title - Severability
12-1-108: No Mandatory Duty - Civil Liability
12-1-109: General Rules Of Interpretation Of Ordinances
12-1-110: Definitions Applicable To Title Generally
12-1-111: Acts Include Causing, Aiding, And Abetting
Part 2 - Service Requirements
12-1-201: Service Of Process
12-1-202: Constructive Notice Of Recorded Documents
Part 3 - General Authority And Offenses
12-1-301: General Enforcement Authority
12-1-302: Adoption Of Policy And Procedures
12-1-303: Authority To Inspect
12-1-304: Power To Arrest
12-1-305: False Information Or Refusal Prohibited
12-1-306: Failure To Obey A Subpoena
PART 1 - PURPOSE AND SCOPE
12-1-101: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING
PROGRAM (ACE HEARING PROGRAM). This title shall also be known as title 12,
North Salt Lake City Municipal Code. It may be cited and pleaded under either
designation. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-102: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The City Council of North Salt Lake City finds that the enforcement of this
Code and applicable State codes throughout the City is an important public
service. Code enforcement is vital to the protection of the public's health,
safety, and quality of life. The City Council recognizes that enforcement
starts with the drafting of precise regulations that can be effectively applied
in administrative code enforcement hearings and judicial proceedings. The City
Council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a
combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain
compliance with these regulations. Failure to comply with an administrative
code enforcement action may require the City Attorney to file a judicial action
to gain compliance. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-103: SCOPE:
The provisions of this title may be applied to all violations of this Code. It
has been designed as an additional remedy for the City to use in achieving
compliance of its ordinances. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-104: EXISTING LAW CONTINUED:
The provisions of this title do not invalidate any other title or ordinance,
but shall be read in conjunction with those titles and ordinances as an
additional remedy available for enforcement of those ordinances. (Ord. 2018-08,
9-4-2018)
12-1-105: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION RIGHT:
The City has sole discretion in deciding whether to file a civil or criminal
case for the violation of any of its ordinances. The City may choose to file
both, or one or the other. The enactment of this administrative remedy shall in
no way interfere with the City's right to prosecute City ordinance violations
as criminal offenses. The City may use any of the remedies available under the
law in both civil and criminal prosecution. If the City chooses to file both
civil and criminal charges for the same day of violation, no civil penalties
may be assessed, but all other remedies are available. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-106: EFFECT OF HEADING:
Title, chapter, part and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed
to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent
of the provisions of any title, chapter, part, or section hereof. (Ord. 2018-
08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-107: VALIDITY OF TITLE - SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision of
this title is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The City Council of this
City hereby declares that it would have adopted this title and each section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses,
phrases, portions, or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This
section shall apply to all amendments heretofore or hereafter made to this
title. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-108: NO MANDATORY DUTY - CIVIL LIABILITY:
It is the intent of the City Council that in establishing performance standards
or establishing an obligation to act by a City officer or employee, these
standards shall not be construed as creating a mandatory duty for purposes of
tort liability if the officer or employee fails to perform his or her directed
duty or duties. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-109: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION OF ORDINANCES:
   A.   For purposes of this title:
      1.   Any gender includes the other gender.
      2.   "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
      3.   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
      4.   Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense,
and vice versa.
      5.   Words and phrases used in this title and not specifically defined
shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-110: DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE TO TITLE GENERALLY:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this title, shall be
construed as defined in this section, unless a different meaning is
specifically defined elsewhere in this title and specifically stated to apply:
ABATEMENT: Means any action the City may take on public or private property and
any adjacent property as may be necessary to remove or alleviate a violation,
including, but not limited to, demolition, removal, repair, boarding, and
securing or replacement of property.
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER: Means an order issued by a Hearing
Officer. The order may include an order to abate the violation, pay civil
penalties and administrative costs, or take any other action as authorized or
required by this title and applicable State codes.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE: Means the position established by this title.
ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Means the appointed animal
control officer of Davis County Animal Control.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: Means the appointed official who is responsible for
enforcing Building Codes, as adopted.
CITY: Means the area within the territorial City limits of North Salt Lake
City, and such territory outside of this City over which the City has
jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or incorporation
provisions or any law.
CITY COUNCIL: Means the City Council of North Salt Lake City.
CODE ENFORCEMENT LIEN: Means a lien recorded to collect outstanding civil
penalties, administrative fees, and costs.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERFORMANCE BOND: Means a bond posted by a responsible person
to ensure compliance with this Code, applicable State titles, a judicial
action, or an administrative code enforcement order.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER OR OFFICIAL: Means any person authorized to enforce
violations of this Code or applicable State codes.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: Means any person that holds a recorded mortgage or deed
of trust on a property.
GOOD CAUSE: Means incapacitating illness; death; lack of proper notice;
unavailability due to unavoidable, unpreventable, or extenuating emergency or
circumstance; if a required act causes an imminent and irreparable injury; and
acts of nature adverse to performing required acts.
IMMINENT LIFE SAFETY HAZARD: Means any condition that creates a present,
extreme, and immediate danger to life, property, health, or public safety.
LEGAL INTEREST: Means any interest that is represented by a document, such as a
deed of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien,
mechanic's lien, or other similar instrument that is recorded with the County
Recorder.
NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE: Means a document issued by the City, representing that a
property complies with the requirements outlined in the notice of violation.
NOTICE OF SATISFACTION: Means a document or form approved by the Administrative
Law Judge or his or her designee, which indicates that all outstanding civil
penalties and costs have been either paid in full, or that the City has
negotiated an agreed amount, or that a subsequent administrative or judicial
decision has resolved the outstanding debt. In addition to the satisfaction of
the financial debt, the property must also be in compliance with the
requirements outlined in the notice of violation.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION: Means a written notice prepared by an Enforcement Officer
or official that informs a responsible person of code violations and orders
them to take certain steps to correct the violations.
OATH: Includes affirmations and oaths.
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Means the person(s) appointed by the City
Manager of North Salt Lake City to enforce the provisions of this Code,
including the Code Enforcement Officer, Building Official, Community
Development Director, or City Planner.
PERSON: Means any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, sergeant, officer, or employee of
any of them, or any other entity that is recognized by law as the subject of
rights or duties.
PROPERTY OWNER: Means the recorded owner of real property based on the County
Assessor's records.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Means any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist
that constitutes a threat to the public's health, safety, and welfare, or that
significantly obstructs, injures, or interferes with the reasonable or free use
of property in a neighborhood or community or by any considerable number of
persons. A public nuisance also has the same meaning as set forth in the Utah
Code Annotated.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Means a person who is responsible for causing or
maintaining a violation of this Code or applicable State codes. The property
owner, tenant, person with a legal interest in the real property, or person in
possession of the real property shall be liable for any violation maintained on
the property. In all cases, the property owner shall be considered a
responsible person.
WRITTEN: Includes handwritten, typewritten, photocopied, computer printed, or
facsimile. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-111: ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING, AIDING, AND ABETTING:
Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful in this title, it shall include
causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting such act or omission. (Ord. 2018-08,
9-4-2018)
PART 2 - SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
12-1-201: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
   A.   Whenever service is required to be given under this title for
enforcement purposes, the document shall be served by any of the following
methods, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically stated to
apply:
      1.   Regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the
owner(s) or other responsible person(s);
      2.   Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. If
not inhabited, the notice must also be mailed as in subsection A1 of this
section. The form of the posted notice shall be approved by the City Ordinance
Enforcement Officer or his or her designee;
      3.   Personal service pursuant to Utah Rules of Civil Procedure rule 4(e)
(1) or rule 4(e)(5); or
      4.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation where the identity
or whereabouts of the person to be served are unknown and cannot be ascertained
through reasonable diligence, where service is impracticable under the
circumstances, or where there exists good cause to believe that the person to
be served is avoiding service of process.
   B.   Service by regular mail in the manner described above shall be deemed
served on the third day after the date of mailing.
   C.   If service complies with the requirements of this section, it shall be
deemed a valid service even if a party claims not to have received the service
and it shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this title.
   D.   The failure to serve all responsible person(s) shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-202: CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE OF RECORDED DOCUMENTS:
Whenever a document is recorded with the County Recorder as authorized or
required by this title or applicable State codes, recordation shall provide
constructive notice of the information contained in the recorded documents.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 3 - GENERAL AUTHORITY AND OFFENSES
12-1-301: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
Whenever the City Ordinance Enforcement Officer or enforcement official finds
that a violation of this Code or applicable State codes has occurred or
continues to exist, the appropriate administrative enforcement procedure may be
used as outlined in this title. The City Ordinance Enforcement Officer or any
designated enforcement official has the authority and power necessary to gain
compliance with the provisions of this Code and applicable State codes. These
powers include the power to issue notices of violation and administrative
citations, inspect public and private property, abate nuisances and violations
occurring on public and private property, and use whatever judicial and
administrative remedies are available under this Code or applicable State
codes. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-302: ADOPTION OF POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
The Administrative Law Judge is authorized to develop policies and procedures
relating to the hearing procedures, scope of hearings, subpoena powers, and
other matters relating to the Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Program.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-303: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
The Ordinance Enforcement Officer or any designated enforcement official is
authorized to enter upon any property or premises, with the consent of the
property owner or person with care, custody, and control of the property, to
ascertain whether the provisions of this Code or applicable State codes are
being obeyed and to make any examinations and surveys as may be necessary in
the performance of the enforcement duties. This may include the taking of
photographs, samples, or other physical evidence. All inspections, entries,
examinations, and surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner based upon
cause. If the responsible person refuses to allow the enforcement official to
enter the property, the enforcement official shall obtain a judicial search
warrant. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-304: POWER TO ARREST:
The Ordinance Enforcement Officer or any designated enforcement official is
authorized to issue a citation, without a warrant, to any person whenever there
is reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of
this Code or applicable State codes in the enforcement official's presence. The
Ordinance Enforcement Officer or enforcement official can only arrest a person
only by issuing a misdemeanor citation or administrative citation. (Ord. 2018-
08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-305: FALSE INFORMATION OR REFUSAL PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make a false statement or
refuse to give his or her name or address with intent to deceive or interfere
with a City employee when in the performance of his or her official duties
under the provisions of this title. A violation of this section is a Class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-1-306: FAILURE TO OBEY A SUBPOENA:
It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to obey a subpoena issued for
an administrative code enforcement hearing. Failure to obey a subpoena
constitutes contempt and may be prosecuted as a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord.
2018-08, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
Part 1 - Notice
12-2-101: Authority
12-2-102: Notice Of Violation
12-2-103: Failure To Bring Property Into Compliance
12-2-104: Inspections
Part 2 - Emergency Abatement
12-2-201: Authority
12-2-202: Procedures
12-2-203: Notice Of Emergency Abatement
Part 3 - Demolitions
12-2-301: Authority
12-2-302: Procedures
Part 4 - Administrative Citations
12-2-401: Declaration Of Purpose
12-2-402: Authority
12-2-403: Procedures
12-2-404: Contents Of Administrative Citation
12-2-405: Civil Penalties Assessed
Part 5 - Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Procedures
12-2-501: Declaration Of Purpose
12-2-502: Authority And Scope Of Hearings
12-2-503: Request For Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
12-2-504: Default Hearings And Orders
12-2-505: Notification Of Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
12-2-506: Disqualification Of Administrative Law Judge
12-2-507: Powers Of The Administrative Law Judge
12-2-508: Procedures At Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
12-2-509: Failure To Attend Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
12-2-510: Administrative Code Enforcement Order
12-2-511: Failure To Comply With Order
Part 6 - Administrative Enforcement Appeals
12-2-601: Appeal Of Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Decision
PART 1 - NOTICE
12-2-101: AUTHORITY:
Any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in violation of any
provisions of this Code or applicable State codes that constitutes a violation
may be abated by the City pursuant to the procedures set forth in this part.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-102: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   Whenever the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or any designated
enforcement official determines that a violation of this Code or applicable
State codes has occurred or continues to exist, the Ordinance Enforcement
Officer or enforcement official may choose to proceed under the administrative
abatement procedures. If this procedure is used, a notice of violation shall be
issued to a responsible person. The notice of violation shall include the
following information:
      1.   Name of property owner;
      2.   Street address of violation;
      3.   Date violation observed;
      4.   All code sections violated and description of condition of the
property that violates the applicable codes;
      5.   A statement explaining the type of remedial action required to
permanently correct outstanding violations, which may include corrections,
repairs, demolition, removal, or other appropriate action;
      6.   Specific date to correct the violations listed in the notice of
violation, which date shall be at least ten (10) days from the date of service;
      7.   Explanation of the consequences should the responsible person fail
to comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice of
violation, which may include, but are not limited to, criminal prosecution;
civil penalties; revocation of permits; recordation of the notice of violation;
withholding of future Municipal permits; abatement of the violation; costs;
administrative fees; and any other legal remedies;
      8.   That civil penalties will begin to accrue immediately on expiration
of the date to correct violations;
      9.   The amount of the civil penalty on each violation and that the
penalty will accrue daily until the property is brought into compliance;
      10.   That only one notice of violation is required for any 12-month
period, and that civil penalties begin immediately upon any subsequent
violations of the notice. The responsible person may request a hearing on the
renewed violations by following the same procedure as provided for the original
notice.
      11.   Procedures to request a hearing as provided in section
12-2-503 of this chapter, and consequences for failure to request one.
   B.   The notice of violation shall be served by one of the methods of
service listed in section
12-1-201 of this title.
   C.   More than one notice of violation may be issued against the same
responsible person, if it encompasses different dates, or different violations.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-103: FAILURE TO BRING PROPERTY INTO COMPLIANCE:
   A.   If a responsible person fails to bring a violation into compliance
within ten (10) days of service of the notice of violation, the Hearing Officer
may assess civil penalties for each and every subsequent day of violation, as
provided by the comprehensive fee resolution, adopted by the City Council.
   B.   Failure to comply with the notice of violation is a Class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-104: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the responsible person served with a notice of
violation to request an inspection when his or her property has been brought
into compliance. It is prima facie evidence that the violation remains on the
property if no inspection is requested. Civil penalties accumulate daily until
the property has been inspected and a notice of compliance is issued.
Reinspection fees shall be assessed if more than one inspection is necessary.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 2 - EMERGENCY ABATEMENT
12-2-201: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Whenever the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or official determines that
an imminent life safety hazard exists that requires immediate correction or
elimination, the officer may exercise the following powers without prior notice
to the responsible person:
      1.   Order the immediate vacation of any tenants, and prohibit occupancy
until all repairs are completed;
      2.   Post the premises as unsafe, substandard, or dangerous;
      3.   Board, fence, or secure the building or site;
      4.   Raze and grade that portion of the building or site to prevent
further collapse, and remove any hazard to the general public;
      5.   Make any minimal emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any
imminent life safety hazard; or
      6.   Take any other action appropriate to eliminate the emergency.
   B.   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer has the authority, based on cause, to
enter the property without a search warrant or court order to accomplish the
above listed acts to abate the safety hazard.
   C.   The responsible person shall be liable for all costs associated with
the abatement of the life safety hazard. Costs may be recovered pursuant to
this title. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-202: PROCEDURES:
   A.   The City Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall pursue only the minimum
level of correction or abatement as necessary to eliminate the immediacy of the
hazard. Costs incurred by the City during the emergency abatement process shall
be assessed and recovered against the responsible person through the procedures
outlined in the "remedies" section of this title.
   B.   The City Ordinance Enforcement Officer may also pursue any other
administrative or judicial remedy to abate any remaining violations. (Ord.
2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-203: NOTICE OF EMERGENCY ABATEMENT:
After an emergency abatement, the City shall notify the owner or responsible
person of the abatement action taken. This notice shall be served within ten
(10) days of completion of the abatement. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 3 - DEMOLITIONS
12-2-301: AUTHORITY:
Whenever the Ordinance Enforcement Officer, Chief Building Officer, or Fire
Inspector determines that a property or building requires demolition, any one
of them may demolish or remove the offending structure, or exercise any or all
of the powers listed in section
12-2-201 of this chapter once appropriate notice has been given to a
responsible person pursuant to the Uniform Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
Code or Fire Codes as required under State law. The responsible person shall be
liable for all costs associated with the demolition. Costs may be recovered
pursuant to this title. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-302: PROCEDURES:
Once the City Ordinance Enforcement Officer has determined that the City Chief
Building Inspector or the Fire Marshal has complied with all of the notice
requirements of the applicable laws, the property will be abated pursuant to
the abatement remedy. Other applicable remedies may also be pursued. (Ord.
2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 4 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
12-2-401: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The City Council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of
enforcement for minor violations of this Code and applicable State codes. The
City Council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement is an
administrative citation program. The procedures established in this part shall
be in addition to criminal, civil, or any other legal remedy established by law
that may be pursued to address violations of this Code or applicable State
codes. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-402: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Any person violating any minor provision of this Code or applicable
State codes may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement official
as provided in this part.
   B.   A civil penalty shall be assessed by means of an administrative
citation issued by the enforcement official, and shall be payable directly to
the City Treasurer's Office.
   C.   Penalties assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be
collected in accordance with the procedures specified in the remedies section
of this title. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-403: PROCEDURES:
   A.   Upon discovering any violation of this Code or applicable State codes
an enforcement official may issue an administrative citation to a responsible
person in the manner prescribed in this part or as prescribed in section
12-1-201 of this title. The administrative citation shall be issued on a form
approved by the Administrative Law Judge.
   B.   If the responsible person is a business, the enforcement official shall
attempt to locate the business owner and issue an administrative citation to
the business owner. If the enforcement official can only locate the manager of
the business, the administrative citation may be given to the manager of the
business. A copy of the administrative citation may also be mailed to the
business owner or any other responsible person in the manner prescribed in
section
12-1-201 of this title.
   C.   Once the responsible person has been located, the enforcement official
shall attempt to obtain the signature of that person on the administrative
citation. If the responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative
citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the
citation and subsequent proceedings.
   D.   If the enforcement official is unable to locate the responsible person
for the violation, then the administrative citation shall be mailed to the
responsible person in the manner prescribed in section
12-1-201 of this title.
   E.   If no one can be located at the property, then the administrative
citation may be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property and a
copy subsequently mailed to the responsible person in the manner prescribed by
section
12-1-201 of this title.
   F.   The administrative citation shall also contain the signature of the
enforcement official.
   G.   The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive
notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this part.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-404: CONTENTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
   A.   The administrative citation shall refer to the date and location of the
violations and the approximate time the violations were observed.
   B.   The administrative citation shall refer to the code sections violated
and the titles of those sections.
   C.   The administrative citation shall state the amount of penalty imposed
for the violations.
   D.   The administrative citation shall explain how the penalty shall be
paid, the time period by which the penalty shall be paid, and the consequences
of failure to pay the penalty.
   E.   The administrative citation shall identify the right and the procedures
to request a hearing.
   F.   The citation shall contain the signature of the enforcement official
and the signature of the responsible person, if he or she can be located, as
outlined in section
12-2-403 of this part. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-405: CIVIL PENALTIES ASSESSED:
   A.   The Administrative Law Judge shall establish policies to assist in the
assessment of civil penalties for administrative citations.
   B.   Civil penalties shall be assessed immediately for each violation listed
on the administrative citation. The penalties shall be those established in the
North Salt Lake City Consolidated Fee Schedule.
   C.   Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the
violations, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City. (Ord.
2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 5 - ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING PROCEDURES
12-2-501: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The City Council finds that there is a need to establish uniform procedures for
administrative code enforcement hearings conducted pursuant to this Code. It is
the purpose and intent of the City Council to afford due process of law to any
person who is directly affected by an administrative action. Due process of law
includes notice, an opportunity to participate in the administrative hearing,
and an explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative action. These
procedures are also intended to establish a forum to efficiently,
expeditiously, and fairly resolve issues raised in any administrative code
enforcement action. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-502: AUTHORITY AND SCOPE OF HEARINGS:
Enforcement of City Code violations may be conducted through this Civil Code
Program, presided over by the Administrative Law Judge. The Administrative Law
Judge shall develop policies and procedures to regulate the hearing process for
any violation of this Code and applicable State codes that are handled pursuant
to the administrative abatement procedures, the emergency abatement procedures,
the demolition procedures, or the administrative citation procedures. (Ord.
2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-503: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   A.   A person served with one of the following documents or notices has the
right to request an administrative code enforcement hearing, if the request is
filed within ten (10) calendar days from the date of service of one of the
following notices:
      1.   Notice of violation;
      2.   Notice of itemized bill for costs;
      3.   Administrative citation;
      4.   Notice of emergency abatement.
   B.   The request for hearing shall be made in writing and filed with the
Administrative Law Judge. The request shall contain the case number, the
address of the violation, and the signature of the responsible party.
   C.   As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of the
request for hearing, the Administrative Law Judge shall schedule a date, time,
and place for the hearing.
   D.   Failure to request a hearing as provided shall constitute a waiver of
the right to a hearing and a waiver of the right to challenge the action. (Ord.
2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-504: DEFAULT HEARINGS AND ORDERS:
   A.   If the responsible person fails to request a hearing before the
expiration of the ten (10) day deadline the case shall be set for a default
hearing. The Administrative Law Judge shall schedule a default hearing. The
responsible person shall be notified of the date, time, and place of the
hearing by one of the methods listed in section
12-1-201 of this title.
   B.   A default hearing shall be scheduled for all cases that have
outstanding or unpaid civil penalties, fines, fees and/or costs due to the City
before collection, if a hearing on that case has not already been held.
   C.   At the default hearing, the responsible person shall have the
opportunity to present evidence to show that good cause exists, as defined in
this title, to do one or more of the following:
      1.   Waive or reduce the fines which have accumulated;
      2.   Postpone an abatement action by the City; or
      3.   Excuse the responsible person's failure to request a hearing within
the ten (10) day period.
   D.   If the responsible person fails to establish good cause to take one or
more of the actions set forth in subsection C of this section, the
Administrative Law Judge shall review the notice of violation and any other
relevant information included in the case file. The Administrative Law Judge
shall not accept any other evidence.
   E.   If the evidence shows that the violations existed, the Administrative
Law Judge shall enter an order requiring abatement of the violations, and the
payment of all fines and fees. Fines shall run until the City issues a Notice
of Compliance stating when the violations were actually abated. (Ord. 2018-08,
9-4-2018)
12-2-505: NOTIFICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   A.   Written notice of the day, time, and place of the hearing shall be
served to a responsible person as soon as practicable prior to the date of the
hearing.
   B.   The format and contents of the hearing notice shall be in accordance
with rules and policies promulgated by the Administrative Law Judge.
   C.   The notice of hearing shall be served by any of the methods of service
listed in section
12-1-201 of this title. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-506: DISQUALIFICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:
The Administrative Law Judge is subject to disqualification for bias,
prejudice, interest, or any other reason for which a Judge may be disqualified
in a court of law. Rules and procedures for disqualification and replacement
shall be promulgated by the Administrative Law Judge. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-507: POWERS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:
   A.   The Administrative Law Judge has the authority to hold hearings,
determine if violations of City ordinances exist, order compliance with City
ordinances, and enforce compliance as provided in this title on any matter
subject to the provisions of this title.
   B.   The Administrative Law Judge may continue a hearing based on good cause
shown by one of the parties to the hearing. The Administrative Law Judge must
enter on the record the good cause on which a continuance is granted.
   C.   The Administrative Law Judge, at the request of any party to the
hearing, may sign subpoenas for witnesses, documents, and other evidence where
the attendance of the witness for the admission of evidence is deemed necessary
to decide the issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena,
including witness and mileage fees, shall be borne by the party requesting the
subpoena. The Administrative Law Judge shall develop policies and procedures
relating to the issuance of subpoenas in administrative code enforcement
hearings, including the form of the subpoena and related costs.
   D.   The Administrative Law Judge has continuing jurisdiction over the
subject matter of an administrative code enforcement hearing for the purposes
of granting a continuance; ordering compliance by issuing an administrative
code enforcement order using any remedies available under the law; ensuring
compliance of that order, which includes the right to authorize the City to
enter and abate a violation; modifying an administrative code enforcement
order; or, where extraordinary circumstances exist, granting a new hearing.
   E.   The Administrative Law Judge has the authority to require a responsible
person to post a code enforcement performance bond to ensure compliance with an
administrative code enforcement order. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-508: PROCEDURES AT ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   A.   Administrative code enforcement hearings are intended to be informal in
nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply; however, an
informal exchange of discovery may be required. The request must be in writing.
Failure to request discovery shall not be a basis for a continuance.
Complainant information is protected and shall not be released unless the
complainant is a witness at the hearing. The procedure and format of the
administrative hearing shall follow the procedures promulgated by the
Administrative Law Judge.
   B.   The City bears the burden of proof at an administrative code
enforcement hearing to establish the existence of a violation of this Code or
applicable State codes.
   C.   The standard of proof to be used by the Administrative Law Judge in
deciding the issues at an administrative hearing is whether the preponderance
of the evidence shows that the violations exist.
   D.   Each party shall have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and
present evidence in support of his or her case. A written declaration signed
under penalty of perjury may be accepted in lieu of a personal appearance.
Testimony may be given by telephone or other electronic means.
   E.   All hearings are open to the public. They shall be recorded by audio
tape. Hearings may be held at the location of the violation.
   F.   The responsible person has a right to be represented by an attorney. If
an attorney will be representing the responsible person at the hearing, notice
of the attorney's name, address, and telephone number must be given to the City
at least one day prior to the hearing. If notice is not given, the hearing may
be continued at the City's request, and all costs of the continuance assessed
to the responsible person.
   G.   No new hearing shall be granted, unless the Administrative Law Judge
determines that extraordinary circumstances exist which justify a new hearing.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-509: FAILURE TO ATTEND ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
Any party whose property or actions are the subject of any administrative code
enforcement hearing and who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive
the right to a hearing, and will result in a default judgment for the City,
provided that proper notice of the hearing has been provided. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-
4-2018)
12-2-510: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
   A.   The parties may enter into a stipulated agreement, which must be signed
by both parties. This agreement shall be entered as the administrative code
enforcement order. Entry of this agreement shall constitute a waiver of the
right to a hearing and the right to appeal.
   B.   Once all evidence and testimony are completed, the Administrative Law
Judge shall issue an administrative code enforcement order that affirms,
modifies or rejects the notice or citation. The Administrative Law Judge may
increase or decrease the total amount of civil penalties and costs that are due
pursuant to the City's fee schedule and the procedures in this title.
   C.   The Administrative Law Judge may order the City to enter the property
and abate all violations, which may include removing animals kept in violation
of this Code.
   D.   The Administrative Law Judge may revoke a permit, an animal license, or
the right to possess animals as provided in this Code.
   E.   As part of the administrative code enforcement order, the
Administrative Law Judge may condition the total or partial assessment of civil
penalties on the responsible person's ability to complete compliance by
specified deadlines.
   F.   The Administrative Law Judge may schedule subsequent review hearings as
may be necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing to ensure compliance
with the administrative code enforcement order.
   G.   The Administrative Law Judge may order the responsible person to post a
performance bond to ensure compliance with the order.
   H.   The administrative code enforcement order shall become final on the
date of the signing of the order.
   I.   The administrative code enforcement order shall be served on all
parties by any one of the methods listed in section
12-1-201 of this title. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-2-511: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER:
   A.   Upon the failure of the responsible person to comply with the terms and
deadlines set forth in the administrative code enforcement order, the City may
use all appropriate legal means to recover the civil penalties and
administrative costs to obtain compliance.
   B.   After the Administrative Law Judge issues an administrative code
enforcement order, the Administrative Law Judge shall monitor the violations
and determine compliance. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 6 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT APPEALS
12-2-601: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING DECISION:
   A.   Any person adversely affected by any decision made in the exercise of
the provisions of this chapter may file a petition for review of the decision
or order by the District Court within thirty (30) days after the decision is
rendered.
   B.   No person may challenge in District Court an Administrative Code
Enforcement Hearing Officer's decision until that person has exhausted his or
her administrative remedies.
   C.   Within one hundred twenty (120) days after submitting the petition, the
party petitioning for appeal shall request a copy of the record of the
proceedings, including transcripts of hearings when necessary. The
Administrative Law Division shall not submit copies of files or transcripts to
the reviewing court until the party petitioning for appeal has paid all
required costs. The petitioning party's failure to properly arrange for copies
of the record, or to pay the full costs for the record, within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the petition for review was filed shall be grounds for
dismissal of the petition. If a transcript of a hearing cannot be prepared
because the tape recording is incomplete or unintelligible, the District Court
may, in its discretion, remand the matter to the Administrative Law Judge for a
supplemental proceeding to complete the record. The District Court may limit
the scope of the supplemental proceeding to issues that, in the court's
opinion, need to be clarified.
   D.   The District Court's review is limited to the record of the
administrative decision that is being appealed. The court shall not accept nor
consider any evidence that is not part of the record of that decision.
   E.   The courts shall:
      1.   Presume that the Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Officer's
decision and orders are valid; and
      2.   Review the record to determine whether or not the decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or illegal. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REMEDIES
SECTION:
Part 1 - Recordation Of Notices Of Violation
12-3-101: Declaration Of Purpose
12-3-102: Authority
12-3-103: Procedures For Recordation
12-3-104: Service Of Notice Of Recordation
12-3-105: Failure To Request
12-3-106: Notice Of Compliance - Procedures
12-3-107: Prohibition Against Issuance Of Municipal Permits
12-3-108: Cancellation Of Recorded Notice Of Violation
Part 2 - Administrative Civil Penalties
12-3-201: Authority
12-3-202: Procedures For Assessing Civil Penalties
12-3-203: Determination Of Civil Penalties
12-3-204: Modification Of Civil Penalties
12-3-205: Failure To Pay Penalties
Part 3 - Abatement Of Violation
12-3-301: Authority To Abate
12-3-302: Procedures For Abatement
Part 4 - Costs
12-3-401: Declaration Of Purpose
12-3-402: Authority
12-3-403: Notification Of Assessment Of Reinspection Fees
12-3-404: Failure To Timely Pay Costs
Part 5 - Fees
12-3-501: Administrative Fees
Part 6 - Injunctions
12-3-601: Civil Violations - Injunctions
Part 7 - Bonds
12-3-701: Performance Bond
PART 1 - RECORDATION OF NOTICES OF VIOLATION
12-3-101: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The City Council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of
enforcement for violations of this Code and applicable State codes that are
found to exist on real property. The City Council further finds that an
appropriate method of enforcement for these types of violations is the issuance
and recordation of notices of violation. The procedures established in this
part shall be in addition to criminal, civil, or any other remedy established
by law that may be pursued to address the violation of this Code or applicable
State codes. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-102: AUTHORITY:
Whenever the City Ordinance Enforcement Officer determines that a property or
violation has not been brought into compliance as required in this title, the
City Ordinance Enforcement Officer has the authority to record the notice of
violation or administrative code enforcement order with the Recorder's Office
of Davis County. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-103: PROCEDURES FOR RECORDATION:
   A.   Once the City Ordinance Enforcement Officer has issued a notice of
violation to a responsible person, and the property remains in violation after
the deadline established in the notice of violation, and no request for an
administrative hearing has been filed, the City Ordinance Enforcement Officer
shall record a notice of violation with the Recorder's Office of Davis County.
   B.   If an administrative hearing is held, and an order is issued in the
City's favor, the City Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall record the
administrative code enforcement order with the Recorder's Office of Davis
County.
   C.   The recordation shall include the name of the property owner, the
parcel number, the legal description of the parcel, and a copy of the notice of
violation or order.
   D.   The recordation does not encumber the property, but merely places
future interested parties on notice of any continuing violation found upon the
property. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-104: SERVICE OF NOTICE OF RECORDATION:
A notice of the recordation shall be served on the responsible person and the
property owner pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in section
12-1-201 of this title. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-105: FAILURE TO REQUEST:
The failure of any person to file a request for an administrative code
enforcement hearing when served with a notice of violation shall constitute a
waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and shall not affect the
validity of the recorded notice of violation. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-106: NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE - PROCEDURES:
   A.   When the violations have been corrected, the responsible person or
property owner may request an inspection of the property from the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer.
   B.   Upon receipt of a request for inspection, the Ordinance Enforcement
Officer shall reinspect the property as soon as practicable to determine
whether the violations listed in the notice of violation or the order have been
corrected, and whether all necessary permits have been issued and final
inspections have been performed.
   C.   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall serve a notice of satisfaction
to the responsible person or property owner in the manner provided in section
12-1-201 of this title, if the Ordinance Enforcement Officer determines that:
      1.   All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation or order
have been corrected;
      2.   All necessary permits have been issued and finalized;
      3.   All civil penalties assessed against the property have been paid or
satisfied; and
      4.   The party requesting the notice of satisfaction has paid all
administrative fees and costs.
   D.   If the Ordinance Enforcement Officer denies a request to issue a notice
of satisfaction, upon request the Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall serve the
responsible person with a written explanation setting forth the reasons for the
denial. The written explanation shall be served by any of the methods of
service listed in section
12-1-201 of this title. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-107: PROHIBITION AGAINST ISSUANCE OF MUNICIPAL PERMITS:
The City may withhold business licenses; or permits for any alteration, repair,
or construction pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on the
property, or any permits pertaining to the use and development of the real
property or the structure. The City may withhold permits until a notice of
satisfaction has been issued by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer. The City may
not withhold permits that are necessary to obtain a notice of satisfaction or
that are necessary to correct serious health and safety violations. (Ord. 2018-
08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-108: CANCELLATION OF RECORDED NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
The Ordinance Enforcement Officer or responsible person shall record the notice
of satisfaction with the County Recorder's Office. Recordation of the notice of
satisfaction shall have the effect of canceling the recorded notice of
violation. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 2 - ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES
12-3-201: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Any person violating any provision of this Code or applicable State
codes may be subject to the assessment of civil penalties for each violation.
   B.   Each and every day a violation of any provision of this Code or
applicable State codes exists is a separate violation subject to the assessment
of civil penalties.
   C.   Civil penalties cannot be assessed when a criminal case has been filed
for the same date and violation, because fines will be assessed with the
criminal case.
   D.   Interest shall be assessed per City policy on all outstanding civil
penalties balances until the case has been paid in full.
   E.   Civil penalties for violations of any provision of this Code or
applicable State codes shall be assessed pursuant to the North Salt Lake City
Consolidated Fee Schedule. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-202: PROCEDURES FOR ASSESSING CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   If a responsible person fails to bring a violation into compliance
within ten (10) days of service of the notice of violation, civil penalties
shall be owed to the City for each and every subsequent day of violation.
   B.   Civil penalties are assessed and owing immediately for any violation of
this Code or applicable State codes for an administrative citation. (Ord. 2018-
08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-203: DETERMINATION OF CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   Civil penalties shall be assessed per violation per day pursuant to the
City fee schedule for a notice of violation.
   B.   Civil penalties shall continue to accrue until the violation(s) has/
have been brought into compliance with this Code or applicable State codes.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-204: MODIFICATION OF CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   Upon completion of the notice of violation or administrative
enforcement order, the Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Officer may
modify the civil penalties on a finding of good cause.
   B.   Civil penalties may be waived or modified by the Hearing Officer if
there is a finding of good cause based on the responsible person's claim of
nonconforming use or conditional use and:
      1.   The City's need to verify the claim; or
      2.   The responsible person's filing of an application for either use
before expiration of the date to correct. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-205: FAILURE TO PAY PENALTIES:
The failure of any person to pay civil penalties assessed within the specified
time may result in the City Ordinance Enforcement Officer's pursuing any legal
remedy to collect the civil penalties as provided in the law. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-
4-2018)
PART 3 - ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION
12-3-301: AUTHORITY TO ABATE:
The City Ordinance Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter upon any property
or premises to abate the violation of this Code and applicable State codes. The
City Ordinance Enforcement Officer is authorized to assess all costs for the
abatement to the responsible person and use any remedy available under the law
to collect the costs. If additional abatements are necessary within two (2)
years, treble costs may be assessed against the responsible person(s) for the
actual abatement. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-302: PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT:
   A.   Once the procedures set forth in this title have been completed, the
violation may be abated by City personnel or by a private contractor acting
under the direction of the City.
   B.   City personnel or a private contractor may enter upon private property
in a reasonable manner to abate the ordinance violation as specified in the
notice of violation or administrative code enforcement order.
   C.   If the responsible person abates the violation before the City performs
the actual abatement pursuant to a notice of violation or administrative code
enforcement order, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer may still assess all costs
incurred by the City against the responsible person.
   D.   When the abatement is completed, a report describing the work performed
and an itemized account of the total abatement costs shall be prepared by the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer. The report shall contain the names and addresses
of the responsible persons of each parcel, and the tax parcel number.
   E.   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall serve the notice of costs and
the itemized bill of costs by registered mail to the last known address of the
responsible person(s). The notice shall demand full payment within twenty (20)
days to the City Treasurer.
   F.   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall schedule an itemized bill for
costs hearing, if requested in writing by any or all responsible persons. (Ord.
2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 4 - COSTS
12-3-401: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
   A.   The City Council finds that there is a need to recover costs incurred
by enforcement officials and other City personnel who spend considerable time
inspecting and reinspecting properties throughout the City in an effort to
ensure compliance with this Code or applicable State codes.
   B.   The City Council further finds that the assessment of costs is an
appropriate method to recover expenses incurred for actual costs of abating
violations, reinspection fees, filing fees, attorney fees, Hearing Officer
fees, title search, and any additional actual costs incurred by the City for
each individual case. The assessment and collection of costs shall not preclude
the imposition of any administrative or judicial civil penalties or fines for
violations of this Code or applicable State codes. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-402: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Whenever actual costs are incurred by the City on a property to obtain
compliance with provisions of this Code and applicable State codes, the City
Ordinance Enforcement Officer may assess costs against the responsible person.
   B.   Once a notice of violation has been issued, the property will be
inspected one time. Any additional inspections shall be subject to reinspection
fees pursuant to the City fee schedule. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-403: NOTIFICATION OF ASSESSMENT OF REINSPECTION FEES:
   A.   Notification of reinspection fees shall be provided on the notice of
violation served to the responsible person(s).
   B.   Reinspection fees assessed or collected pursuant to this part shall not
be included in any other costs assessed.
   C.   The failure of any responsible person to receive notice of the
reinspection fees shall not affect the validity of any other fees imposed under
this part. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-3-404: FAILURE TO TIMELY PAY COSTS:
The failure of any person to pay assessed costs by the deadline specified in
the invoice shall result in a late fee pursuant to City policy. (Ord. 2018-08,
9-4-2018)
PART 5 - FEES
12-3-501: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES:
The Ordinance Enforcement Officer or Code Enforcement Hearing Officer is
authorized to assess administrative fees for costs incurred in the
administration of this program, such as investigation of violations,
preparation for hearings, hearings, and the collection process. The fee
assessed shall be the amount set in the City fee schedule. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-
2018)
PART 6 - INJUNCTIONS
12-3-601: CIVIL VIOLATIONS - INJUNCTIONS:
In addition to any other remedy provided under this Code or State codes,
including criminal prosecution or administrative remedies, any provision of
this Code may be enforced by injunction issued in the Fourth District Court
upon a suit brought by the City. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 7 - BONDS
12-3-701: PERFORMANCE BOND:
   A.   As part of any notice, order, or action, the Administrative Code
Enforcement Hearing Officer has the authority to require responsible persons to
post a performance bond to ensure compliance with this Code, applicable State
codes, or any judicial action.
   B.   If the responsible person fails to comply with the notice, order, or
action, the bond will be forfeited to the City. The bond will not be used to
offset the other outstanding costs and fees associated with the case. (Ord.
2018-08, 9-4-2018)
CHAPTER 4
RECOVERY OF CODE ENFORCEMENT PENALTIES AND COSTS
SECTION:
Part 1 - Code Enforcement Tax Liens
12-4-101: Declaration Of Purpose
12-4-102: Procedures For Tax Liens Without A Judgment
12-4-103: Procedures For Tax Liens With A Judgment
12-4-104: Cancellation Of Code Enforcement Tax Lien
Part 2 - Writ Of Execution
12-4-201: Recovery Of Costs By Writ Of Execution
Part 3 - Writ Of Garnishment
12-4-301: Recovery Of Costs By Writ Of Garnishment
Part 4 - Allocation Of Funds Collected Under Administrative Code Enforcement
Hearing Program
12-4-401: Abatement Fund
12-4-402: Repayment To Abatement Fund
12-4-403: Civil Penalties, Code Enforcement Administrative Fees And Cost Fund
PART 1 - CODE ENFORCEMENT TAX LIENS
12-4-101: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The City Council finds that recordation of code enforcement tax liens will
assist in the collection of civil penalties, administrative costs, and
administrative fees assessed by the administrative code enforcement hearing
program or judicial orders. The City Council further finds that collection of
civil penalties, costs, and fees assessed for code enforcement violations is
important in deterring future violations and maintaining the integrity of the
City's code enforcement system. The procedures established in this part shall
be used to complement existing administrative or judicial remedies that may be
pursued to address violations of this Code or applicable State codes. (Ord.
2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-4-102: PROCEDURES FOR TAX LIENS WITHOUT A JUDGMENT:
   A.   Once the City has abated a property for weeds, garbage, refuse, or
unsightly or deleterious objects or structures, the Ordinance Enforcement
Officer shall prepare three (3) copies of the Itemized Statement of Costs
incurred in the removal and destruction of the violations and deliver them to
the City Treasurer within ten (10) days after completion of the work of
removing the violations.
   B.   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall send, by registered mail to the
property owner's last known address, a copy of the Itemized Statement of Costs
informing him or her that a code enforcement tax lien is being recorded for the
amount of actual costs of abatement. Payment shall be due within twenty (20)
calendar days from the date of mailing.
   C.   Upon receipt of the Itemized Statement of Costs, the City Treasurer
shall record a code enforcement tax lien against the property with the County
Treasurer's Office.
   D.   The failure of any person with a financial interest in the property to
actually receive the notice of the lien shall not affect the validity of the
lien or any proceedings taken to collect the outstanding costs of abatement.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-4-103: PROCEDURES FOR TAX LIENS WITH A JUDGMENT:
Once a judgment has been obtained from the appropriate court assessing costs
against the responsible person(s), the City Ordinance Enforcement Officer may
record a code enforcement tax lien against any real property owned by the
responsible person(s). (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-4-104: CANCELLATION OF CODE ENFORCEMENT TAX LIEN:
Once payment in full is received for the outstanding civil penalties and costs,
or the amount is deemed satisfied pursuant to a subsequent administrative or
judicial order, the City Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall either record a
notice of satisfaction of judgment, or provide the property owner or financial
institution with the notice of satisfaction of judgment so that it can record
this notice with the County Recorder's Office. The notice of satisfaction of
judgment shall include the same information as provided for in the original
code enforcement tax lien. Such notice of satisfaction of judgment shall cancel
the code enforcement tax lien. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 2 - WRIT OF EXECUTION
12-4-201: RECOVERY OF COSTS BY WRIT OF EXECUTION:
After obtaining a judgment, the City Ordinance Enforcement Officer may collect
the obligation by use of all appropriate legal means. This may include the
execution on personal property owned by the responsible person by filing a writ
with the applicable court. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 3 - WRIT OF GARNISHMENT
12-4-301: RECOVERY OF COSTS BY WRIT OF GARNISHMENT:
After obtaining a judgment, the City Ordinance Enforcement Officer may collect
the obligation by use of all appropriate legal means. This may include the
garnishment of paychecks, financial accounts, and other income or financial
assets by filing a writ with the applicable court. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
PART 4 - ALLOCATION OF FUNDS COLLECTED UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
HEARING PROGRAM
12-4-401: ABATEMENT FUND:
There is hereby established a revolving fund to be known as the "Abatement
Fund" to defray costs of administrative and judicial abatements. The fund shall
be reimbursed by collection from the property or property owner as specified in
this title and by the courts. The City Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall
establish accounting procedures to ensure proper account identification,
credit, and collection. This fund may be operated and used in conjunction with
procedures ordered or authorized under the abatement provision of this title.
(Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
12-4-402: REPAYMENT TO ABATEMENT FUND:
All monies recovered from the sale or transfer of property or by payment for
the actual abatement costs shall be paid to the City Treasurer, who shall
credit the appropriate amount to the Abatement Superfund. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-
2018)
12-4-403: CIVIL PENALTIES, CODE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND COST FUND:
Civil penalties, administrative fees and administrative costs, except for
actual abatement costs, collected pursuant to this part shall be deposited in
the General Fund of the City and shall be appropriated and allocated in a
manner determined by the City Council. The City Manager shall establish
accounting procedures to ensure proper account identification, credit, and
collection. (Ord. 2018-08, 9-4-2018)
TITLE 13
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
13-1-1: Short Title
13-1-2: Introduction
13-1-3: Purpose And Intent
13-1-4: Interpretation, Conflict, And Severability
13-1-5: Definitions
13-1-6: Saving Provision, Relationship To Previous Ordinance
13-1-7: Considerations
13-1-8: General Responsibilities
13-1-9: Appeal Of Administrative Land Use Authority Decisions
13-1-10: Appeal From Appeal Authority Decision
13-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Title shall be known as Title 13, or the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY
OF NORTH SALT LAKE, and may be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-1-2: INTRODUCTION:
   A.   Scope Of Subdivisions: Subdivisions in the City shall be designed for
building purposes without apparent danger to health or peril from fire, flood,
landslide, subsidence, geologic and natural hazards, or other menace. Land
should not be subdivided and developed until available public facilities and
improvements exist or adequate guarantees are in place and proper provision has
been made for drainage, water, sewerage and capital improvements, such as parks
and recreation facilities, streets and transportation facilities, and related
improvements. If necessary and required public facilities, infrastructure or
safety protections are not in place or cannot be provided for, the subdivision
shall not be allowed.
   B.   Conformance To Adopted Standards: Any proposed essential infrastructure
improvement shall conform to adopted standards, specifications, and ordinances.
   C.   Burden Of Proof: For all proceedings in regard to development approval
under this Title or amendments to this Title, the burden of proof showing
satisfaction of all requirements shall rest with the applicant or authorized
agent of the proposed development or amendment. The requirements and standards
set forth herein are the minimum acceptable standards for land use applications
within the City.
   D.   Assumption Of Validity: The City will assume that all information
provided is accurate and valid. If any information provided to the City is
found to be outdated, false or in any way misleading, the application for
development approval may be denied or revoked by the City Council regardless of
previous approvals. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-1-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   The purpose of this section and the intent of the City in its
adoption is to promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of
the present and future inhabitants of the City.
      2.   This section will accomplish this purpose by:
         a.   Providing policies, standards, requirements and procedures to
regulate and control the design and improvements of all developments.
         b.   Assisting in the implementation of the City's goals, objectives,
policies and programs by ensuring that all proposed developments, together with
provisions for their design and improvements, are consistent with the General
Plan and other applicable plans.
         c.   Preserving and protecting, to the maximum extent possible, unique
and valuable natural resources and amenities, including topographic and
geologic features, natural watercourses, wildlife habitats, historical and
cultural places, and scenic vistas and attractions; and improving the public
access to and enjoyment of such resources and amenities through the dedication
or continuance of appropriate public easements thereto.
         d.   Preserving and protecting the special environmental quality and
aesthetic character of any hillside and mountainous area; preventing
detrimental impacts on the soil mantle, vegetative cover and other
environmental factors; reducing the hazards of life and property from fire,
flood, erosion, sedimentation and soil slippage; and relating the amount of
grading within a development to the slope of the natural terrain.
         e.   Encouraging the clustering of housing and building developments
where subdivisions or other developments are permitted in hillside and
mountainous areas, minimizing grading, preserving the natural terrain and
enlarging open spaces.
         f.   Regulating land use intensity and population density, street
capacity and traffic access, the slope of the natural terrain, the availability
and capacity of public facilities and utilities, and open spaces.
         g.   Providing lots of sufficient size and appropriate design for the
purposes for which they are to be used.
         h.   Providing streets of adequate capacity and design for the traffic
that will utilize them and ensuring maximum safety for pedestrians and users of
vehicles.
         i.   Ensuring adequate access to each building site.
         j.   Providing sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bike paths, and equestrian
and hiking trails for the safety, convenience and enjoyment of residents of new
developments.
         k.   Providing adequate systems of water supply, sanitary sewage
disposal, storm drainage, street lighting and other utilities needed for public
health, safety and convenience.
         l.   Providing adequate sites for public facilities needed to serve
residents of new developments.
         m.   Ensuring that costs of providing land for streets, alleys,
pedestrian ways, bike paths, easements and other rights of way and for the
improvements therein needed to serve new developments are borne by the
developer.
         n.   Preventing land which is actually or potentially dangerous by
reason of flood hazard, inundation, inadequate access, inadequate water supply
or fire protection, insufficient sewerage facilities or hazardous geological
conditions from being developed for any use or in any manner tending to create
an increased detriment to the public health, safety or general welfare.
         o.   Ensuring that, insofar as possible, land is developed in a manner
that will promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare
and the physical, social and economic development of the area in conformance
with the General Plan, and provide access for solar and other renewable energy
sources to the maximum extent possible, and encourage energy conservation
through design, layout, "siting" and other techniques.
         p.   Preserving and protecting to the maximum extent possible, solar
access to structures and encouraging, promoting or requiring energy
conservation and the use of renewable energy sources.
         q.   Providing space for off street parking, as needed.
         r.   Providing space for bike paths and trails.
   B.   Intent: This Title is designed to inform the developer and public of
the requirements and conditions necessary to obtain approval of a subdivision
as specifically provided. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-1-4: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, AND SEVERABILITY:
   A.   Interpretation: These regulations shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general
welfare. The burden of proof shall, in all proceedings pursuant to this title,
rest with the proponent of an application for development approval. Any dispute
arising from the administration of this title may be appealed to the City's
Administrative Appeal Authority (Hearing Officer) as provided for in City Code
section 10-2-2(C).
   B.   General Interpretation:
      1.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may"
is permissive and discretionary.
      2.   The words "City Planner" shall mean the City Planner of the City or
designee.
      3.   The words "City Engineer" shall mean the City Engineer of the City
or designee.
      4.   The words "Building Official" shall mean the Building Official of
the City or designee.
      5.   The words "Community Development Director" shall mean the Community
Development Director of the City or designee.
      6.   The words "Public Works Director" shall mean the Public Works
Director of the City or designee.
      7.   The words "City Manager" shall mean the City Manager of the City or
designee.
      8.   The words "Planning Commission" shall mean the City Planning
Commission.
      9.   The word "Council" shall mean the City Council, the governing body
of the City.
      10.   The word "City" shall mean the City of North Salt Lake.
      11.   The word "County" shall mean Davis County Utah.
      12.   The word "State" shall mean the State of Utah.
      13.   The words "Zoning Ordinance" shall mean Title 10 of the municipal
code of the City.
      14.   The words "Subdivision Ordinance" or "this title" shall mean Title
13 of the municipal code of the City.
      15.   The word "code" shall mean the municipal code of the City.
   C.   Conflict With Other Provisions:
      1.   These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate or
annul any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute or provision of law. If
any provision of these regulations imposes a restriction different from those
imposed by another provision, ordinance, rule, regulation or law, whichever
provision is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control.
      2.   Further, these regulations are not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant, private agreement or restriction, including, but not
limited to, restrictive covenants and declarations of covenants, conditions and
restrictions; provided, however, that the City is under no obligation to
enforce private covenants or agreements.
   D.   Severability: If any part or provision of these regulations or
application thereof to any person or circumstance is adjudged invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its
operation to the part, provision or application directly involved in all
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not
affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the
application thereof to other persons or circumstances. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-
2024)
13-1-5: DEFINITIONS:
If any word or phrase used in this Title is not defined herein but is defined
in related sections of Utah Code Annotated or in the City of North Salt Lake
City Land Use Ordinance (Title 10), such definitions are incorporated herein
and shall apply as though set forth herein in full, unless the context clearly
indicates a contrary intention. Unless a contrary intention clearly appears,
words used in the present tense include the future, the singular includes the
plural, the term "shall" is mandatory and the term "may" is permissive. (Ord.
2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-1-6: SAVING PROVISION, RELATIONSHIP TO PREVIOUS ORDINANCE:
   A.   These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action under
prior existing subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying
or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
municipality under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of
these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any
person, firm or corporation by lawful action for the municipality, except as
shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.
   B.   The procedures set forth in this title are intended to supersede any
inconsistent procedural provisions in the previous development ordinances. The
substantive requirements of the application form and the review process shall
remain unchanged, but all final actions under that ordinance are subject to the
appeal processes set forth herein. All applications for subdivision approval
are subject to termination as set forth herein. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-1-7: CONSIDERATIONS:
   A.   General Plan And Land Use Ordinance: The General Plan and the City's
Land Use Ordinance (Title 10) shall guide the use of all land within the
corporate boundaries of the City. The size and design of lots, the nature of
utilities, the design and improvement of streets, the type and intensity of
land use, or the provisions for any special facilities in any subdivision shall
conform to the land uses and the standards established in the Land Use
Ordinance, construction standards and specifications manuals, and other
applicable ordinances or regulations which are guided by the General Plan and
adopted by the City Council.
   B.   Natural Landscape And Existing Conditions: Trees, native land cover,
natural watercourses and topography shall be preserved when possible.
Subdivisions shall be so designed as to prevent excessive grading and scarring
of the landscape and shall be in conformance with City Code Title 10, Chapter
12: Sensitive Area District and Geologic Hazards. The design of new
subdivisions shall consider and relate to existing street widths, alignments
and names.
   C.   Community Facilities: Community facilities, such as parks, recreation
areas, trails and transportation facilities shall be provided in the
subdivision in accordance with the General Plan, this Title, and other
applicable ordinances and resolutions. This title establishes procedures for
the referral of information on proposed subdivisions to interested boards,
bureaus and other governmental agencies and utility companies, both private and
public, so that the extension of community facilities and utilities may be
accomplished in an orderly manner and coordinated with the development of the
subdivision. In order to facilitate the acquisition of land areas required to
implement this policy, the developer may be required to dedicate, grant
easements or otherwise reserve land for parks, playgrounds, public ways,
utility easements or other public purposes as specified. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-
2024)
13-1-8: GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Developer: The developer shall prepare a plat consistent with the
standards contained herein and shall pay for the design and inspection of the
essential infrastructure improvements required. The City shall process the
submitted plat in accordance with the regulations set forth herein. The
developer shall not alter the terrain or remove any vegetation from the
proposed subdivision site or engage in any site development until the necessary
approvals as outlined herein have been obtained.
   B.   Development Review Staff: Development review will be conducted by
applicable staff members and directed by the Community Development Director, or
designee. Review staff shall consist of representatives from city departments
and special service district representatives as required by the City Manager,
or designee, and as applicable to each development application. Development
proposals shall be reviewed for design; for conformity to the General Plan,
Town Center Master Plan, or other applicable plans, and to the Land Use
Ordinance; and for the environmental quality of the subdivision design. The
Community Development Director, or designee, shall ensure that developments are
processed as provided for in this Title.
   C.   Other Agencies: Any application for a proposed subdivision may be
referred by the development review staff to such special districts,
governmental boards, bureaus, utility companies and other agencies which will
provide public and private facilities and services to the subdivision for their
information and comment. Developers shall be responsible for distributing plans
to and coordinating the comments received from all public and private entities
and obtaining will-serve letters or permits, as applicable.
   D.   Public Works Director And City Engineer: The Public Works Director and
City Engineer, or their designees, shall make comments as to engineering
requirements for street widths, grades, alignments and flood control, whether
the proposed essential infrastructure improvements are consistent with this
Title and other applicable ordinances, construction standards and
specifications, or any other applicable regulations, and shall be responsible
for the inspection and approval of all construction of essential improvements.
Street layout and overall circulation shall be in accord with adopted
transportation plans and sound transportation planning principles.
   E.   Administrative Land Use Authority (ALUA): The Administrative Land Use
Authority is charged with making investigations, reports and findings on
proposed subdivisions as to their conformance to land use and subdivision
ordinances, and other pertinent plans, ordinances, or regulations.
      1.   The Planning Commission shall act as the Administrative Land Use
Authority for:
         a.   Preliminary Plans.
         b.   Plat amendments which do not include the vacation of any public
right of way, public trail or municipal utility easement.
      2.   Community Development Director, with the assistance of the
applicable staff and as directed by the City Manager, shall act as the
Administrative Land Use Authority for:
         a.   Final plat.
         b.   Minor subdivisions.
         c.   Lot line adjustments.
      3.   The City Council shall act as the Administrative Land Use Authority
for plat amendments which include the vacation of any public right of way,
public trail or municipal easement only after receiving a recommendation from
the Planning Commission regarding the vacation of any public right of way,
public trail or municipal utility easement as a condition of plat amendment
approval, in accordance with City Code section 13-7-1.
   F.   City Attorney: The City Attorney, or designee, shall verify, prior to
recordation of a plat, that the form of the final plat is correct and
acceptable, the developer dedicating land for public use is the owner of
record, and the land is free and clear of unacceptable encumbrances or tax
clearances according to the title report submitted by the developer, or any
other liens or encumbrances on land being dedicated for public use.
   G.   Mayor: The Mayor shall perform the non-discretionary and ministerial
act of signing the plat solely to accept offers of dedication. (Ord. 2024-01,
1-16-2024)
13-1-9: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY DECISIONS:
   A.   As provided in City Code section
10-2-2 , appeal may be made to the City's designated Appeal Authority (Hearing
Officer) from any decision, determination or requirement of the Administrative
Land Use Authority under this title by filing with the City Recorder a notice
thereof in writing within fifteen (15) days after such decision, determination
or requirement is made. Such notice shall set forth in detail the action and
grounds upon which the developer, or other interested person, is aggrieved. In
the event of an appeal, application deadlines set forth in this title shall be
extended to incorporate the time necessary to hear and consider such appeals.
   B.   Hearing: The City Recorder, or designee, shall set the appeal for
hearing before the City's designated Appeal Authority, as provided in City Code
section
10-2-2 , to be held within a reasonable time from the date of receipt of the
appeal. The appellant shall be notified of the appeal hearing date at least
seven (7) days prior to the hearing. After hearing the appeal, the Hearing
Officer may affirm, modify, overrule the decision, determination or requirement
appealed, or remand the decision to the Administrative Land Use Authority for
additional review and enter any such order or orders. The filing of an appeal
shall stay all proceedings and actions in furtherance of the matter appealed,
pending a decision of the Hearing Officer. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-1-10: APPEAL FROM APPEAL AUTHORITY DECISION:
Any person adversely affected by the Appeal Authority's decision may petition
the District Court for a review of the decision within thirty (30) days of said
decision. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICATION
SECTION:
13-2-1: Subdivision Control
13-2-2: Required Plat Approval
13-2-3: Transfer Of Land
13-2-4: Transfer Of Land; Voidable
13-2-5: Development Construction
13-2-6: Building Permits
13-2-7: Certificates Of Occupancy
 
13-2-8: Penalties
13-2-1: SUBDIVISION CONTROL:
   A.   Compliance Required: No person shall subdivide or otherwise develop any
tract of land which is located wholly or in part within the City, except in
compliance with this Title, and with the development regulations adopted by the
City Council.
   B.   Applicability: No person shall sell or exchange or offer to sell or
exchange any parcel of land which is any part of a development of a larger
tract of land, nor offer for recording in the Office of the County Recorder any
deed conveying such parcel of land, or any interest therein, unless such
development has been created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions
of this title and local regulations; provided, that this title shall not apply
to any lot or lots forming a part of a development created and recorded
according to then applicable law prior to the effective date hereof, except as
specifically provided in this title.
   C.   Approval Required: No lot within a development created and recorded
prior to the effective date hereof nor any development thereafter approved by
the Administrative Land Use Authority and recorded in the County Recorder's
Office under the provisions of this Title, shall be further divided,
rearranged, added to or reduced in area, nor shall any boundaries of any lot be
altered in any manner so as to create more lots than initially recorded, or any
nonconforming lot, without first obtaining the approval of the Administrative
Land Use Authority as provided in this Title.
   D.   Restricted Lots: Any lot deemed to be restricted shall require a site
specific geotechnical review in accordance with Title 10, Chapter 12, Sensitive
Lands Overlay and Geologic Hazards prior to the issuance of a building permit.
All construction and grading on restricted lots shall incorporate specific
geotechnical design solutions as recommended by an approved geologic hazard
study. Lots shall be deemed restricted for any lot:
      1.   Located within the designated Sensitive Lands Area Overlay Zone;
      2.   Noted as restricted on a recorded subdivision plat;
      3.   Having an average slope of fifteen percent (15%) or greater;
      4.   With known, suspect or probable geologic hazards;
      5.   With critical wildlife habitat;
      6.   With critical drainage channels or other natural features; or
      7.   Containing other vital infrastructure. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-2-2: REQUIRED PLAT APPROVAL:
   A.   Content: If any land is laid out and platted, the owner of the land
shall cause an accurate plat to be made of them that sets forth and describes:
      1.   Any parcel of ground laid out and platted, by boundaries, course and
extent, and if they are intended for streets or other public uses, together
with any area that is reserved for public purposes; and
      2.   Any block or lot intended for sale or otherwise reserved for private
purposes and all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose, with all
dimensions, boundaries, and courses clearly shown and defined.
   B.   Acknowledgment Required:
      1.   The owner of the land shall acknowledge the plat and owner's
dedication before an officer authorized by law to take acknowledgment of
conveyances of real estate.
      2.   The surveyor of the plat shall certify that the surveyor:
         a.   Holds a license in accordance with Utah, Code Annotated, Title
58, Chapter 22 (as amended), Professional Engineers and Professional Land
Surveyors Licensing Act;
         b.   Has completed a survey of the property described on the plat in
accordance with Utah Code section 17-23-17 (as amended) and has verified all
measurements; and
         c.   Has placed monuments as represented on the plat.
      3.   The City Engineer shall sign the final plat, certifying that the
plat and other data submitted therewith, is substantially the same as it
appeared on the preliminary plan and any approved alterations thereof on that
the final plat is in conformity with City ordinances and adopted specifications
and standards.
      4.   The City Attorney shall be responsible for reporting to the Mayor as
to the form of the final plat or other recordable instruments evidencing any
action under this title. The City Attorney shall certify that any lands
dedicated to the public are dedicated in fee simple and that the person or
persons dedicating the land are the owners of record.
      5.   The designated Administrative Land Use Authority shall determine
whether the plat conforms with the preliminary plan approval, City ordinances
and adopted specifications and standards and shall sign the approved final plat
as provided by law.
      6.   The Mayor shall perform the non-discretionary and ministerial act of
signing the plat solely to accept offers of dedication.
   C.   Filing And Recording: After the plat has been acknowledged, certified
and approved, the City Recorder, or designee, shall file and record it in the
County Recorder's Office in the county in which the lands platted and laid out
are situated. The owner shall pay the expense of such recording.
   D.   Plat Expiration: The recording of the subdivision plat is to be done
within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of the completed approval from
the Administrative Land Use Authority. Failure to record the approved plat
within the allotted time required shall void all approvals for the subdivision.
Prior to the expiration of the plat approval, the owner or developer may
request a onetime extension of one hundred eighty (180) days, by submitting to
the Community Development Director a written request of the owner or developer,
explaining the reasons for the delay. The Community Development Director shall
consult with applicable city review staff to prepare an analysis of any
amendments to the City Code, regulations or standards and their effect on the
subdivision. If such amendments to the City regulations or standards are
essential to protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, the
Community Development Director shall not grant the extension unless the plat
conforms to the new regulations or standards.
   E.   Subdivision Approval Procedure: No one may file or record a subdivision
plat in the County Recorder's Office unless:
      1.   The subdivision plat has been approved by the designated
Administrative Land Use Authority; and
      2.   The required approvals and acceptance of any dedicated property or
right of way are entered in writing on the plat as designated in this
ordinance. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-2-3: TRANSFER OF LAND:
Subdivided land shall not be transferred, sold or offered for sale, nor shall a
building permit be issued for a structure thereon, until an approved
subdivision plat is recorded in the County Recorder's Office in accordance with
this title and any applicable provisions of state law, and until the
improvements required in connection with the subdivision have been constructed
or guaranteed as provided herein. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-2-4: TRANSFER OF LAND; VOIDABLE:
No person shall offer to sell, contract to sell, sell, deed or convey any
property contrary to the provisions of this title. A subdivision plat recorded
without the signatures required by Utah Code Annotated, section 10-9a-604 (as
amended) is void. A transfer of land pursuant to a void plat is voidable by the
land use authority. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-2-5: DEVELOPMENT CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Inspections: Following the approval of a final plat, the City Engineer,
or designee, shall inspect such use to ensure that development is undertaken
and completed in compliance with the approval.
   B.   Minimum Construction And Improvement Standards: Construction standards,
including drawings, tables, charts, references and regulations as adopted by
the City Council shall constitute land development standards supplementing this
title.
   C.   Conflicting Provisions: Where specific requirements are made or
exemptions allowed under other sections of the code, those requirements or
exemptions shall prevail over the land development standards supplementing this
title.
   D.   Improvement Construction Obligation Of Developer: Improvements required
by this title shall be constructed at the expense of the developer and shall
comply with the land development standards supplementing this title.
   E.   Commencement Of Construction: Site improvement or grading of any
proposed development site prior to preliminary plat approval by the
Administrative Land Use Authority is prohibited.
   F.   Phase Development:
      1.   Final plat and construction plan approval may be granted on less
than the entire project covered by preliminary plat approval and may be done in
phases as provided below. The development of the phases of project shall be
done in an orderly manner and in such a way that the required improvements of
each of the phases will be made available for the full effective and practical
use and enjoyment thereof by the lessees or the grantees of any of the lands
developed within the time hereinafter specified. The phases of any project
shall, when possible, be contiguous to previously approved phases or other
existing development.
      2.   Each phase must be approved by the Administrative Land Use
Authority. Preliminary plat approval for phase developments will remain valid
so long as an application for final plat and construction plan approval for a
single phase within the phase development is submitted each twelve (12) months
after preliminary plat approval and the applicant diligently pursues approval
of the application. In no event will preliminary plat approval for phase
developments remain valid beyond ten (10) years from the date of original
approval.
      3.   For developments subject to a development agreement with the City
Council, the agreement shall govern the validity of preliminary plat, final
plat and construction plan approvals for phase developments.
      4.   If the developer does not maintain the required bond, or if the
developer fails to complete all of the required on or off site essential
infrastructure improvements or if the developer is in default under any other
term or condition which was required for final plat and construction plan
approval, the Administrative Land Use Authority may deny any further request
for development of succeeding phases of the proposed development until the
outstanding defaults have been cured.
   G.   Appeals Procedure: Appeals from any administrative decision may be made
to the Hearing Officer as provided in City Code section
10-2-2.
   H.   Changes: Any significant changes made in an approved drawing require
resubmission of the drawing for approval by the Administrative Land Use
Authority.
   I.   Additional Required Information: The Administrative Land Use Authority,
development review staff, or City Attorney may require such additional
information as necessary to complete a proposal for the written record,
demonstrate capability, solve anticipated problems, or show geotechnical
solutions to site development.
   J.   Preconstruction Meetings: Prior to excavating or starting of the work,
the developer shall attend a preconstruction meeting with representatives from
city departments, as directed by the City Engineer, and any other special
service districts with jurisdiction over the infrastructure installation. The
developer shall bring to the meeting all contractors responsible to build the
improvements associated with the project. The purpose of this meeting shall be
to:
      1.   Verify recordation of the plat and final approval of the plans.
      2.   Determine schedule of construction.
      3.   Determine names, addresses and phone numbers of contractors,
inspectors and all persons involved.
      4.   Review plans and special conditions or requirements.
      5.   Review the process for bond reduction request.
      6.   Coordinate inspection and testing.
      7.   Discuss City Standards and Specifications.
   K.   Construction Review: Construction work involving the installation of
public improvements in subdivisions shall be subject to construction review by
the City Engineer, Public Works Inspector, and SWPPP Inspector.
      1.   Daily construction review shall be required on the following types
of work:
         a.   Laying of street surfacing.
         b.   Placing of concrete for curb and gutter, sidewalks and other
structures.
         c.   Laying of drainage pipe, water pipe, valves, hydrants and
testing.
         d.   Street grading and gravel base.
         e.   Excavations for curb and gutter and sidewalks.
         f.   Excavations for structures.
      2.   Requests for construction review shall be made to the City Engineer
or to the designated inspector as directed, by the person responsible for the
construction. Requests for construction review on work shall be made one (1)
working day prior to the commencement of the work.
   L.   Correcting Defective Work: Construction reviews shall be made by the
City Engineer, designee, or Inspector after various phases of the construction
work is completed. Any faulty or defective work shall be corrected by the
developer or contractor within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of
construction review wherein the faulty or defective work is noted and written
notice is given to the developer and/or contractor. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff.
7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-2-6: BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   No building permit shall be issued for any structure within a
subdivision until the subdivision plat is recorded in the County Recorder's
Office, a bond is provided acceptable to the City ensuring the adequate
installation of required essential infrastructure improvements and utilities,
and the required improvements and utilities have been installed and are
operable as provided herein and as deemed essential infrastructure (defined by
Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-802, as amended) which is necessary to meet the
requirements of the building code and fire code.
      2.   No building permit shall be issued for any structure within a
subdivision until all sanitary sewer, storm sewer, culinary water lines,
pressure irrigation (if applicable), fire hydrants, curb and gutter, streets,
other underground utilities located under the street surface, required grading
and drainage improvements, and paving, are installed and fully functional, as
determined by the City, providing continuous access or service to the lot.
   B.   Exception: The City's development review staff, with the approval of
the City Engineer and Fire Marshal, may approve the issuance of building
permits prior to the installation of permanent paving under the following
conditions:
      1.   The street improvements are being constructed during the months when
cold weather prohibits the laying of a hard surface on the street and within
months or in locations where the accumulation of snow is no longer likely to
occur prior to the scheduled paving.
      2.   The streets shall be completed with all utilities, rough grading,
and all weather road base sufficient for emergency vehicle access and
construction traffic. Sufficiency of the road base, including road base
gradation and thickness, shall be determined by the City Engineer upon review
and consideration of applicable soils reports, drainage factors and existing
topographic conditions of the property.
      3.   The developer enters into an agreement with the City that the
developer will take responsibility to ensure that the road is accessible for
emergency vehicles and construction traffic at all times, including snow
removal, if any, and other required maintenance.
      4.   The developer enters into an agreement with the City that developer
will hard surface the road as soon as weather permits and as authorized by the
City. If developer fails to do so, the City can declare the developer in
default of the applicable improvements bond agreement and may withdraw any or
all of the funds from the bond and cause the improvements to the street to be
constructed, completed or repaired in accordance with the terms and procedures
set forth in the bond agreement for the withdrawal of funds.
      5.   The building contractor, property owner and building permit
applicant enters into an assumption of risk agreement acknowledging the lack of
hard surface streets within the subdivision and an acknowledgement of the
developer's obligation regarding maintenance and access of the same and
assuming the risk of proceeding with construction under such circumstances
pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth herein.
      6.   Prior to hard surfacing road, the City Engineer shall inspect road
conditions for road base contamination, rutting, or other deficiencies. Any
deficiencies found shall be repaired in a manner required by the City Engineer
and approved prior to any paving.
      7.   No certificate of occupancy shall be granted for any structure
within the subdivision until all streets are hard surfaced.
   C.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, for lots fronting existing streets that
obtain access only from that street and have existing fully functional
utilities, the building official may issue permits, subject to compliance with
applicable requirements, including adequate access for emergency vehicles.
   D.   Model Homes: After recording of a subdivision plat, building permits
for model homes may be issued before completion of on and off site
improvements, subject to the following requirements:
      1.   The applicant must provide proof of ownership of the property where
the model home is proposed to be located.
      2.   The applicant must sign a statement acknowledging that the applicant
takes full responsibility for the risks being taken by constructing a model
home before on and off site improvements are completed.
      3.   All on and off site improvements for the full plat must be completed
within forty five (45) days of issuance of the first model home building
permit. If, in the opinion of the City Engineer or the Building Official, on
and off site improvements cannot be completed within forty five (45) days of
the issuance of a permit for a model home, then the City Engineer or the
Building Official may withhold approval of a model home building permit.
      4.   If all on and off site improvements for the full plat are not
completed within the forty five (45) day period, the City may suspend issuance
of additional permits until improvements are completed.
      5.   A maximum of two (2) model homes will be allowed in each plat.
      6.   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a model home, hard
surfaced roads must be completed such that they provide reasonable access to
the structure(s).
      7.   All fire protection requirements must be met as set and approved, in
writing, by the South Davis Metro Fire District.
      8.   No dwelling unit, including model homes, will be issued a
certificate of occupancy until all on and off site improvements are completed.
      9.   Model homes may be operated until a building permit is issued for
the last remaining lot within the development.
      10.   Issuance of any building permit for a model home before the
completion of on and off site improvements is subject to predicted weather
conditions. No building permit application for a model home prior to completion
of on and off site improvements will be accepted between September 15 and March
1. (Ord. 2011-06, 5-3-2011; amd. Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-2-7: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
No building within a subdivision shall be occupied until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued for such structure by the City. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for any structure within a subdivision until all
required improvements for the subdivision are complete, including the hard
surfacing of the streets, required street signs and traffic control signs,
house numbers on the structure, required utilities providing service to the
structure, and any other applicable ordinance provisions have been met. (Ord.
2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-2-8: PENALTIES:
Any person found in violation of this title shall be subject to civil penalty
as provided in Title 12 of this code or may be subject to criminal prosecution
as a class C misdemeanor. In addition to any criminal prosecution, the City may
pursue any other legal remedies provided by law to ensure compliance with this
title, including, but not limited to, instituting an injunction, mandamus,
abatement or other appropriate actions, or proceedings to prevent, enjoin,
abate or remove the unlawful use or act. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 3
CONCEPT PLAN
SECTION:
13-3-1: Conceptual Plan
13-3-2: Conceptual Plan Review Nonbinding
13-3-3: Vested Rights
13-3-4: Submission
13-3-5: Notification
13-3-6: Conceptual Plan Review
13-3-7: Completion Of Conceptual Plan Review
13-3-1: CONCEPTUAL PLAN:
A conceptual plan review is not required, but highly encouraged, for
subdivisions for one or two family dwelling and townhome developments.
Conceptual plan review shall be required for commercial, industrial, multi-
family subdivision and any subdivision of land which is subject to geologic
hazard review. Conceptual plan review provides the developer with an
opportunity to consult with and receive assistance from the city staff
regarding the regulations and design requirements applicable to the subdivision
of property and facilitates resolution of problems and revisions before the
preparation of a preliminary plan. The conceptual plan should be based on an
accurate survey showing boundaries, topography, important physical features,
adjacent properties and the proposed layout of the subdivision. The applicant
or applicant's duly authorized agent shall submit an application to the
Community Development Department for conceptual plan review and at the same
time, the applicant shall pay an application fee as provided in the City's
Comprehensive Fee Schedule. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-3-2: CONCEPTUAL PLAN REVIEW NONBINDING:
The conceptual plan process is designed to provide the developer with helpful
information and suggestions before the expense and time involved in preparing a
preliminary plan is incurred. Conceptual plan review shall be nonbinding on any
subsequent review steps nor binding upon the designated Administrative Land Use
Authority in the exercise of their authority or approval. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-
2024)
13-3-3: VESTED RIGHTS:
Submission of a conceptual plan shall in no way confer any vested rights upon
the developer. Vested rights may attach only upon the filing of a complete
preliminary plat plan application which meets the requirements of this title
and other applicable ordinances at the time of the application. However, if
there is a compelling, countervailing public interest or the City has initiated
proceedings to amend this title or other applicable ordinances at the time of
the application, then there shall be no vested rights. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-
2024)
13-3-4: SUBMISSION:
   A.   The developer shall submit the proposed conceptual plan which will
enable a review of a proposed project for general scope and conditions and its
impact on the City. The Community Development Department will determine if the
appropriate plan and application is submitted, if the application is complete
and if all the fees have been paid. If the application is deemed to be
incomplete the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days of
the application date, or as reasonably practical upon discovery of a
deficiency.
   B.   Document Requirements: The following items shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department for conceptual plan review:
      1.   An application form, as provided by the City, detailing the proposed
development and addressing the following:
         a.   A general explanation of the project size, scope, and land uses;
         b.   Identification of any potential impacts or conflicts with
adjacent land uses, along with proposed mitigation of any adverse aspect of the
plan;
         c.   Identification of any known or potential geologic hazards on the
property or within the development area in general;
         d.   A statement regarding the proposed development, its conformance
to the existing zoning and general plan or other adopted plans or policies, and
identifying any opportunity for the provision of housing which meet the goals
and objectives of the City's Moderate Income Housing Plan; and
         e.   Any additional pertinent information related to the project.
      2.   An electronic copy of the conceptual plan which is reproducible at a
printed size of twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36").
      3.   Conceptual plan set shall include the following:
         a.   Cover Sheet which includes the following:
            (1)   The proposed project name, approximate address of the
project, and the relevant parcels within the project;
            (2)   Vicinity Plan: An aerial map at a scale of one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100') or other competent base map showing the area
within six hundred feet (600') of the project boundaries giving context to the
proposed development;
            (3)   Drawing index;
            (4)   Developer name, address, and phone number;
            (5)   Property owner name, address, and phone number, if different
from the developer;
            (6)   General notes regarding the project;
            (7)   Boundaries of zoning districts, taxing and other special
districts; and
            (8)   The name, address, and phone number of the engineer or
surveyor who prepared the conceptual plan set.
         b.   Existing Conditions Or Demolition Plan: The following shall be
drawn to scale:
            (1)   Existing topographic contours at no greater interval than two
feet (2');
            (2)   A slope analysis shading all areas with existing slopes of
thirty to fifty percent (30-50%) and all areas with existing slopes greater
than fifty percent (50%).
            (3)   Existing buildings, utilities, and improvements;
            (4)   Location of existing culinary and irrigation water systems
and points of proposed connection and extension;
            (5)   Location and size of existing utility services and proposed
connection and extension (sewer, power, gas, telephone cable);
            (6)   Watercourses, impoundments, streams, springs, wells,
floodplains, and areas subject to continuous or occasional flooding, including
those portions of the property which are included in the most recent flood
insurance rate maps prepared by FEMA;
            (7)   Significant vegetative patterns;
            (8)   Geologic hazards, formations and soils type;
            (9)   Public and private easements related to site, including
trails and parks as identified within the adopted General Plan or other adopted
plans or policy documents; and
            (10)   Existing survey monuments.
         c.   Conceptual Site Plan: The following elements shall be drawn to a
scale of a minimum one inch equals thirty feet (1"=30'):
            (1)   North arrow and scale;
            (2)   Names of all abutting property owners;
            (3)   The dimensions of the site and total acreage, with proposed
density;
            (4)   A proposed lot layout showing approximate size of each lot;
            (5)   Location of existing and proposed streets, trails, and
sidewalks;
            (6)   Proposed buildings, or building envelopes, as applicable;
            (7)   Proposed public facilities and open spaces;
            (8)   Location of proposed parking;
            (9)   Preliminary location of all proposed on site uses and desired
improvements, including any off-site improvements if considered essential to
the project; and
            (10)   Any additional information which will convey information
that is necessary to determine feasibility and identify problems that need to
be addressed on the preliminary design plan, including topography and grading
for slopes which may exceed thirty percent (30%). (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-3-5: NOTIFICATION:
Upon receipt of a complete conceptual plan application, the Community
Development Director, or designee shall notify and distribute copies of the
conceptual plan application to the development review staff and other affected
entities or agencies, as applicable. Conceptual Plans that contain parks,
trails, public art or recreational amenities shall be distributed to the Parks,
Trails, Arts and Recreation Advisory Board. The board shall provide input to
the Administrative Land Use Authority prior to preliminary plan review
regarding the design, function, and relationship to existing facilities and the
parks master plan or other policy documents, as adopted. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-
2024)
13-3-6: CONCEPTUAL PLAN REVIEW:
Scope Of Review: Conceptual plan shall be reviewed for compliance with the City
General Plan, Land Use Ordinance, this title, and other appropriate
regulations. The Community Development Director, or designee, shall coordinate
review with the appropriate development review staff and affected entities, as
appropriate for the size, scope, and location of the proposed subdivision. The
Community Development Director, or designee, shall make findings regarding the
submitted conceptual plan, specifying any inadequacy in the information
submitted, noncompliance with City regulations, questionable or undesirable
design and/or engineering, and the need for any additional information which
may assist the developer in preparation of a preliminary plan application.
(Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-3-7: COMPLETION OF CONCEPTUAL PLAN REVIEW:
Once conceptual plan review has been completed, the developer may apply for
preliminary plan approval consistent with the conceptual plan. If preliminary
plan approval for any portion of an approved conceptual plan has not been
obtained within twelve (12) months of the date on which conceptual plan review
was completed, a resubmittal of the conceptual plan shall be required. (Ord.
2024-01, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 4
MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
13-4-1: Purpose
13-4-2: Requirements For Minor Subdivisions
13-4-3: Applicability
13-4-4: Conceptual Plan Review
13-4-5: Minor Subdivision Application
13-4-6: Development Review
13-4-7: Administrative Land Use Authority Action
13-4-8: Expiration Of Final Approval
13-4-9: Bond Agreement
13-4-10: Plat Requirements
13-4-11: Recording Of Plat
13-4-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of this chapter is to provide an efficient review process for minor
subdivisions. Minor subdivisions include those developments of less than ten
(10) lots which also meet the requirements set forth herein. In this process,
the preliminary and final plats, required for most subdivisions, are simplified
and combined. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-4-2: REQUIREMENTS FOR MINOR SUBDIVISIONS:
An owner of property located within the City of North Salt Lake may submit an
application for a minor subdivision; provided, that the property to be
subdivided meets the following conditions:
   A.   Less than ten (10) lots shall be created in the subdivision;
   B.   The subdivision shall not require the dedication of any land for public
streets or other public purposes, with the exception of the dedication of
required public utility easements;
   C.   The area to be subdivided shall be immediately adjacent to existing
public streets and utilities and shall not require the extension of any such
streets or utilities, other than extension of service laterals. The developer
shall be required to complete any essential infrastructure improvements on an
existing street which are not in place at the time the application to develop a
minor subdivision is filed. Such improvements shall include any necessary storm
drainage facilities, curb, gutter, sidewalk, trail, park strip, including
landscaping, and asphalt paving;
   D.   The subdivision is not traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed
street as shown in the General Plan that requires right of way dedication;
   E.   The proposed minor subdivision shall conform to the general character
of the surrounding area. New lot lines shall conform to the general pattern of
existing lot lines;
   F.   Lots created shall not adversely affect the remainder of the parcel or
adjoining property and shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance;
   G.   Utility easements shall be dedicated;
   H.   Property must not be located within the Sensitive Lands Overlay Area
Map or be property which is subject to geologic hazard review as required by
Section
10-12-3 for known or reasonably suspected geologic hazards such as landslides,
earthquakes, flooding, problem soils or rocks; and
   I.   Property must not be located within a Flood Hazard Area (FHA) as
identified on the Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) or Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-4-3: APPLICABILITY:
The procedures set forth in this chapter shall govern the processing of, and
the requirements pertaining to, minor subdivisions, and shall take precedence
over any other provisions to the contrary. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-4-4: CONCEPTUAL PLAN REVIEW:
Prior to filing a minor subdivision application, all developers of proposed
minor subdivisions are encouraged to complete a conceptual plan review as set
forth in this title. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-4-5: MINOR SUBDIVISION APPLICATION:
All developers of proposed minor subdivisions shall submit a minor subdivision
application on a form provided by the City. The application shall include an
electronic submission which is reproducible as a twenty four inches by thirty
six inches (24" x 36") plat suitable for recordation and all applicable
documents meeting the requirements of section
13-4-10 of this chapter. If essential infrastructure improvements, as specified
within this chapter, are required, the application shall be accompanied by
improvement drawings for such improvements. The City Engineer may require that
a soils report be provided which meets the requirements set forth in section
13-5-4 of this Title. At the time the application is submitted, the developer
shall pay the appropriate application fee as set forth in the City's
Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
The Community Development Department, or designee, will determined if the
appropriate plan and application is submitted, if the application is complete
and if all the fees have been paid. If the application is deemed to be
incomplete the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days of
the application date, or as reasonably practical upon discovery of a
deficiency. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-4-6: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW:
The Community Development Director, or designee, shall coordinate review with
the appropriate development review staff and affected entities, as appropriate
for the size, scope, and location of the proposed subdivision. Within fifteen
(15) business days of receipt of a complete application submittal, the
Community Development Director shall prepare findings regarding the minor
subdivision plan, specifying any inadequacy in the information submitted,
noncompliance with City regulations, questionable or undesirable design and/or
engineering, and the need for any additional information required prior to
final approval. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-4-7: ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY ACTION:
   A.   Scope Of Action: The Community Development Director, or designee, is
designated as the Administrative Land Use Authority for minor subdivisions and
shall coordinate review with the appropriate development review staff and
affected entities, as appropriate for the size, scope, and location of the
proposed subdivision. The Community Development Director, or designee, shall
assure that the plat is in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and
title, other applicable ordinances or regulations, and any conditions of
approval required by this title, city ordinance, or adopted specifications and
standards. If the proposed plat complies with those requirements the plat shall
be approved or approved with conditions.
   B.   Disapproval: If the Community Development Director, or designee,
determines that the proposed plat is not in conformity with the ordinances of
the City or required conditions imposed, the plat shall not be approved and the
developer shall be notified of the specific reasons for such disapproval. If a
proposed plat is disapproved, no further plat shall be submitted and a new
minor subdivision application shall be required to initiate minor subdivision
approval, including the payment of the required fee.
   C.   Appeal: Within ten (10) business days of notification of disapproval of
a minor subdivision, the developer may request a review by the Planning
Commission. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-4-8: EXPIRATION OF FINAL APPROVAL:
If the plat is not recorded within six (6) months from the date of final
approval, such approval shall be null and void. This time period may be
extended one (1) time for an additional six (6) month period by the Community
Development Director, or designee, with the consent of the City Engineer. The
developer must petition for an extension, prior to the expiration of the
original six (6) months, or an extension previously granted. An extension may
be granted only if it is determined that it will not be detrimental to the
City. If any of the fees charged as a condition of subdivision approval,
including, but not limited to, inspection fees, impact fees, as well as the
amounts the City uses to estimate bonds to ensure completion of improvements
have increased, the City Engineer may require that the bond estimate be
recalculated and that the developer pay any applicable increases as a condition
of granting the extension. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-4-9: BOND AGREEMENT:
In the event essential infrastructure improvements are required for the
subdivision, the developer shall comply with the bond requirements of section
13-5-14 of this Title. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-4-10: PLAT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Contents: Each plat submitted under this chapter shall, at a minimum,
contain the following:
      1.   The meets and bounds description of the parcel(s) of ground to be
subdivided using the Utah Coordinate System of bearing rotations, otherwise
known as NAD83; meets and bounds descriptions may also be provided in Davis
County coordinates with a rotation provided to NAD83 coordinates;
      2.   The number and address of the lots intended for sale, including the
area, boundaries, courses and dimensions of each lot;
      3.   Existing right of way and easement grants of record for underground
facilities, as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 54-8a-2, and for other
utility facilities;
      4.   An acknowledgment from the owner(s) of the property to be subdivided
acknowledging the preparation of the plat and the owner's consent to subdivide
the parcel as shown on the plat;
      5.   A certification from the surveyor preparing the plat; and
   B.   Coordinates shall be added to all angle points to the exterior boundary
of the subdivision in the coordinate system matching the metes and bounds
description. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-4-11: RECORDING OF PLAT:
Upon approval of a minor subdivision application under this chapter, and
approval of a proposed plat prepared in accordance with this chapter, the
developer shall provide the City with a current title report to be reviewed by
the City Attorney. A "current title report" is considered to be one which is
prepared and dated not more than thirty (30) days before the proposed
recordation of the final plat. Once title to the property has been approved by
the City Attorney, the approved plat shall be signed by the Mayor and all those
required. The City Recorder, or designee, shall present the mylar to the Davis
County Recorder's Office for recordation. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 5
STANDARD SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
13-5-1: Preliminary Plat Purpose
13-5-2: Pre-Application Meeting
13-5-3: Application And Fees
13-5-4: Preliminary Plat And Subdivision Improvement Plans
13-5-5: Staff Review Of Preliminary Plat Application
13-5-6: Administrative Land Use Authority Action; Preliminary Plat
13-5-7: Notification Of Action
13-5-8: Effect Of Approval Of The Preliminary Plat
13-5-9: Final Plat; Purpose
13-5-10: Filing Deadline, Application And Fees
13-5-11: Final Plat; Preparation And Required Information
13-5-12: Evaluation Of Final Plat
13-5-13: Administrative Land Use Authority Action; Final Plat
13-5-14: Disapproval Of The Final Plat
13-5-15: Security Bond; Developer
13-5-16: Delay Agreement
13-5-17: Recording Of Plat
13-5-1: PRELIMINARY PLAT PURPOSE:
The purpose of the preliminary plat is to require formal preliminary approval
of subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, in order to minimize
changes and revisions which might otherwise be necessary on the final plat. The
preliminary plat and all information and procedures relating thereto, shall, in
all respects, be in compliance with the provisions of this Title and any other
applicable ordinances. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-2: PRE-APPLICATION MEETING:
   A.   An applicant may request a pre-application meeting, prior to submittal
of a preliminary plat application. Within fifteen (15) business days after a
request for a pre-application meeting, the Community Development Department
shall schedule a meeting to review the proposed preliminary plat for the
subdivision and give initial feedback.
   B.   At the pre-application meeting, city staff shall provide or have
available on the City website the following:
      1.   Copies of applicable land use regulations;
      2.   A complete list of standards required for the project;
      3.   Preliminary and final application checklists; and
      4.   Feedback on the concept plan. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-3: APPLICATION AND FEES:
   A.   The developer of a subdivision shall file an application for
preliminary plat approval on a form provided by the City. The application shall
include an electronic submission of the preliminary plan set (preliminary plat
and preliminary subdivision improvement plans) reproducible as twenty four
inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") prints, all other documents required by
this Title and an application fee as published in the Comprehensive Fee
Schedule of the City.
   B.   The Community Development Department shall determine if the appropriate
application has been submitted, if the application is complete and if all
required application fees have been paid. Within fifteen (15) business days of
receipt of an application for preliminary plat review, a letter of
acknowledgment or notice of incomplete application will be provided to the
applicant.
   C.   Upon determination of a complete application, the Community Development
Department shall provide notification to and distribute the preliminary plan
set to the applicable development review staff and all appropriate public and
private affected entities for review and comment. The notice shall provide a
specific deadline for submittal of comments to the City, such that the initial
review can be provided to the applicant within fifteen (15) business days of
the date of determination of complete application.
   D.   Prior conceptual plan review shall be required for commercial,
industrial, and multi-family subdivisions, or for subdivision of lands within
the Sensitive Lands Overlay Area Map or those subject to geologic hazard review
as required by City Code section
10-12-3.
   E.   Prior to application for preliminary plan review, the applicant shall
complete a geologic hazards study and report in accordance with Title 10,
Chapter 12, Sensitive Area District and Geologic Hazards for properties within
the Sensitive Lands Overlay Area Map or those subject to geologic hazard review
as required by City Code section 10-12-3, for known or reasonably suspected
geologic hazards such as landslides, earthquakes, surface fault rupture, fire,
flooding, erosion, liquefaction, problem soils, debris flow or rock falls, or
any other natural or manmade hazards. The preliminary plan set shall be
designed in accordance with the approved geologic hazards study and the
findings and recommendations made therein. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-4: PRELIMINARY PLAT AND SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
   A.   Form: The preliminary plan set shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a
scale not less than one inch equaling one hundred feet (1" = 100'). The plat
shall be so drawn that the top of the sheet is either north or west, whichever
accommodates the drawing best. Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals thereof
and bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds.
   B.   Document Requirements: The following items shall be submitted in an
application for preliminary plat review:
      1.   A preliminary title report covering the entire land in the proposed
project, or other approved evidence of title insurability.
      2.   Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control and financial
capability over the land to effectuate the proposed use, such as an executed
purchase contract or an owner's certificate signed and acknowledged by all
parties having any record interest in the land subdivision, consenting to the
subdivision application.
      3.   When applicable, letters from the public agencies which will provide
water and sewer service to the proposed development. The letter should state
what type, if any, of interim system will be allowed until full service can be
provided by the public agency; and that potable water will be available to the
developer in quantities and quality as required by state requirements for the
project.
      4.   Statement of the estimated starting and completion dates for each
phase of development, including proposed grading work and any landscape work.
      5.   A copy of proposed protective covenants, articles of incorporation,
association or condominium, where applicable.
      6.   Tabulations showing the square footage and percent of total area
proposed in:
         a.   Off street parking;
         b.   Streets and impervious surfaces;
         c.   Developed parks, landscaped areas, and proposed sod; and
         d.   Natural open spaces or undeveloped parks.
      7.   Tabulations showing the square footage and percent of area covered
by buildings.
      8.   Tabulations showing the square footage and total floor space by type
of use, i.e., residential, commercial, industrial, etc.
      9.   Copies of any agreements with adjacent property owners relevant to
the proposed subdivision.
      10.   An adequate traffic report prepared by a qualified traffic engineer
when required by the City Engineer or Planning Commission.
      11.   For developments that are not within the sensitive lands area, a
soils data report from a registered soils engineer, engineering geologist or
other qualified person, based upon adequate test boring or excavations within
the proposed project. The soil report shall include a description of the soil
types and characteristics on the site, describe whether or not groundwater was
encountered in any of the test borings and at what elevation it was
encountered, and shall identify the location of any seismic zones or flood
zones on the property.
      12.   Soils Investigation Report: If the soil report indicates the
presence of critically expansive soils, high water table, the presence of toxic
or hazardous waste, or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead
to structural defects of the proposed buildings, damage to the buildings from
the water, premature deterioration of the essential infrastructure
improvements, or which would represent a public health hazard, a soil
investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the City
Engineer. The soil investigation shall recommend corrective actions intended to
prevent damage to proposed structures and/or essential infrastructure
improvements. The fact that a soil report has been prepared shall be noted on
the final plat and a copy attached to the preliminary plat application.
      13.   A geologic hazard study prepared in accordance with Title 10,
Chapter 12 for all developments on properties: within the sensitive lands
overlay area; with an average slope of fifteen percent (15%) or greater; with
native slopes of thirty percent (30%) or greater; with known, suspect, or
probable geologic hazards; critical wildlife habitat or natural features;
critical drainage channels; or other vital infrastructure.
   C.   Required Information: The following information and documentation shall
be included on the preliminary plat or preliminary subdivision improvement
plans, as applicable:
      1.   A vicinity map of the proposed subdivision, drawn at a scale of five
hundred feet to the inch (1" = 500'), which defines the location of the
subdivision within the City.
      2.   The proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or
nearly duplicate the name of any subdivision in the City or in the incorporated
and unincorporated area of Davis County, unless part of a multi-phased
subdivision.
      3.   The names and addresses of the developer, owner, or agent, as
applicable, the engineer and surveyor of the development, and the owners of the
land immediately adjoining the land to be developed. If the developer is
represented by an agent, there shall be a statement from the recorded owner
authorizing the agent to act on behalf of the property owner.
      4.   The date, north arrow, written and graphic scales.
      5.   The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, with all
dimensions shown and a legal description defining the location and boundaries
of the proposed subdivision.
      6.   The location, widths and other dimensions of proposed streets,
alleys, easements, or other public or private rights of way.
      7.   The location and size of all sites proposed to be dedicated or
reserved for parks, open spaces, common area, or other recreational uses. All
sites shall be clearly labeled as proposed for public or private dedication and
use.
      8.   Boundary lines of adjacent subdivisions and the names of owners of
adjacent unsubdivided land within one hundred feet (100') of the tract proposed
for subdivision, showing ownership and property monuments.
      9.   A contour map at one foot (1') intervals, for predominant ground
slopes within the subdivision between level and five percent (5%), and at two
foot (2') intervals, for predominant ground slopes within the subdivision over
five percent (5%), showing all unusual topographic features with verification
by a qualified engineer or land surveyor. Such contours shall be based on Utah
State Coordinate System of bearing rotations, otherwise known as NAD 83. The
closest Davis County section corner shall be used and its elevation called out
on the map. Survey monument information shall be obtained from the Davis County
surveyor or City Engineer. Davis County Coordinates may be used with a rotation
to NAD 83 coordinates provided.
      10.   Grading plan showing existing and proposed contour lines at no
greater than two foot (2') intervals at a scale of not less than one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). For subdivisions with slopes greater than
or equal to thirty percent (30%), shading identifying areas thirty percent
(30%) or greater and areas fifty percent (50%) (different color) or greater
must be provided, with contour lines no greater than five feet (5') in these
areas.
      11.   The boundaries of areas subject to 100-year flooding or stormwater
overflow, as determined by the Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM), and
the location, width and direction of flow of all watercourses, including all
existing and proposed irrigation and natural runoff channels and courses within
the subdivision or within two hundred feet (200') thereof, and all known wells
or springs (consult state engineer's office).
      12.   The existing use or uses and zoning of the property and the outline
of any existing buildings and their locations in relation to existing or
proposed street and lot lines drawn to scale.
      13.   The location, proposed names, widths and a typical cross section of
curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other improvements of the proposed street and
access easements, and names of all existing or recorded streets, alleys and
easements, both within the proposed project and within one hundred feet (100')
of the boundary thereof, showing whether recorded or claimed by usage.
      14.   The location and dimensions to the nearest existing benchmark or
monument, and section line.
      15.   The location and principal dimensions of all watercourses, public
utilities, and other important features and existing structures within the land
adjacent to the tract to be developed, including railroads, power lines and
exceptional topography.
      16.   Layout of all lots, including the minimum lot size, lot divisions
and consecutive numbering.
      17.   Existing and proposed off site and on site culinary and secondary
water facilities, sanitary sewers, storm drainage facilities, subdrains, fire
hydrants, and any other public or private utility within the tract or within
one hundred feet (100') thereof.
      18.   Location and size of all existing and proposed easements,
dedications, and deed restrictions, including solar, public utility lines,
water and sewage lines, storm drains and facilities, watercourses, irrigation
systems, land drains, etc.
      19.   Stormwater drainage plan and management plan in accord with City
Code section 8-5-21 by which the developer proposes to handle stormwater
drainage for an event with a ten (10) year return period for all storm drain
pipe, and for an event with a one hundred (100) year return period for all
storm drain detention basins. The calculation must size the detention basin,
size the orifice plate and determine the amount of flow which can be released
(the release rate can be 0.2 cfs/acre). Detention basin shall retain the
required twenty four (24) hour storm equivalent, as required under the Utah
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (UPDES) general discharge permit. All
development and redevelopment that warrants compliance with the Utah General
Construction Permit (UGCP) regulation must include a Low Impact Development
(LID) analysis that meets the objective of mirroring the predevelopment
hydrology and meets the objective of retaining on site, with no discharge, in
accordance with the adopted standard by the Utah Division of Water Quality.
      20.   If the site requires substantial cutting, clearing, grading or
other earthmoving operations in the construction of improvements, the
application shall include a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan
prepared by a registered civil engineer.
      21.   Dimensioned parking layout showing location of individual parking
stalls, driveways and other areas of ingress and egress.
      22.   Landscaping Plan: As applicable for subdivisions containing common
area, entry monuments, open space, and public or private parks, a landscape
plan for the site(s) and, if appropriate, information relating to the
landscaping on adjacent or surrounding areas affected by the proposed
development. Such landscaping plans shall be prepared by a qualified
professional team showing:
         a.   Conformance with Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscape
Standards;
         b.   Distribution of plant material, existing and proposed trees, and
work involved as related to slope control and/or physical environment;
         c.   Special effects and decorative materials;
         d.   Automatic irrigation systems (sprinkler, bubblier, etc.);
         e.   Recreation equipment.
      23.   If the location of the development is part of a larger tract or
parcel not included in the preliminary plat, the submittal shall include a
concept of the prospective future street system of the unsubdivided portion of
the property, and the street system of the part submitted shall be considered
in light of adjustments and connections with the future street system of the
surrounding area and in accordance with the City General Plan.
      24.   If it is contemplated that the development will proceed by phases,
the boundaries of such phases shall be shown on the phasing plan sheet along
with the estimated construction schedule for each phase.
      25.   Certification of the accuracy of the preliminary plat of the
development and any traverse to permanent survey monuments by a land surveyor,
registered to practice in the state.
      26.   The words "Preliminary Plat - Not To Be Recorded" shall be shown on
the plat.
      27.   Signature blocks for the approval of Land Use Authority, City
Engineer, City Attorney, and Mayor's acceptance.
      28.   All drawings shall meet the minimum requirements of the City's
adopted Specifications and Standards Manual. (Ord. 01-05, 4-3-2001; amd. Ord.
2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-5: STAFF REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION:
   A.   Single Family, Two Family And Townhome Subdivisions: Preliminary plat
review shall be limited to two (2) review cycles as follows:
      1.   Review cycle restrictions shall not apply to areas with suspected or
identified geologic hazards.
      2.   Initial review of the preliminary plan set shall be completed by the
Development Review Staff within fifteen (15) business days of certification of
complete application.
      3.   An incomplete application shall not prohibit review staff from
providing feedback on portions of the application submitted to assist in the
preparation of a complete application.
      4.   Review Cycle 1:
         a.   The review of the preliminary plat application shall include
redline corrections and requests for additional information which include
specific citations of adopted ordinances, standards and specifications and
shall be logged in a separate index of requested modifications or additions.
         b.   The applicant shall have a period of twenty (20) business days to
respond to each of the redline corrections or request for additional
information and shall provide corrected drawings and a written response
identifying and explaining the applicant's revision and reasoning for declining
to make revision, if any. The explanation shall be comprehensive and specific,
including citations to applicable standards and ordinances for the design and
an index of the revisions or additions for each required correction. 
         c.   If the applicant fails to address a review comment in the
response, the review cycle is not complete and the subsequent review cycle may
not begin until all comments are addressed.
      5.   Review Cycle 2:
         a.   The development review staff shall have a period of fifteen (15)
business days to review the re-submittal and corrections and shall review the
revised preliminary plat plan set and any modifications made in the first
review cycle for additional redline corrections and shall provide a second set
of redline corrections and requests for additional information which include
specific citations and a separate index of requested modifications.
         b.   The applicant shall have a period of twenty (20) business days to
respond to each of the redline corrections or request for additional
information and shall provide corrected drawings and a written response
identifying and explaining the applicant's revision and reasoning for declining
to make revision, if any. The explanation shall be comprehensive and specific,
including citations to applicable standards and ordinances for the design and
an index of the revisions or additions for each required correction. 
         c.   If the applicant fails to address a review comment in the
response, the review cycle is not complete until all comments are addressed.
         d.   The development review staff shall review the resubmittal to
determine that all redline corrections have been completed. Staff shall notify
the applicant within ten (10) business days of resubmittal of incomplete
corrections.
         e.   Upon determination of completion of redline corrections, the
preliminary plat application shall be forwarded to the Administrative Land Use
Authority for approval.
   B.   Commercial, Industrial, Or Multifamily Subdivisions: Preliminary plat
review shall be in accordance with the following:
      1.   Initial review of the preliminary plan set shall be completed by the
Development Review Staff for certification of a complete application.
      2.   An incomplete application shall not prohibit review staff from
providing feedback on portions of the application submitted to assist in the
preparation of a complete application.
      3.   Review:
         a.   Upon certification of a complete application, development review
staff shall review the preliminary plat and provide to the applicant any
redline corrections and requests for additional information, as required by
code or adopted standards and specifications.
         b.   The applicant shall respond to each of the redline corrections or
request for additional information and shall provide corrected drawings and a
written response identifying and explaining the applicant's revision and
reasoning for declining to make revision, if any. The explanation shall be
comprehensive and specific to the corrections requested.
         c.   The development review staff shall review the resubmittal to
determine that all redline corrections have been completed. Staff shall notify
the applicant of incomplete corrections.
         d.   Upon determination of completion of redline corrections, the
preliminary plat application shall be forwarded to the Administrative Land Use
Authority for approval. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-6: ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY ACTION; PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   The Planning Commission is designated as the Administrative Land Use
Authority for preliminary plat approval. If the Planning Commission finds that
the proposed plat complies with the adopted ordinances, standards and
specifications, it shall approve the plat, and may attach conditions for any
outstanding corrections. If the Planning Commission finds that the proposed
plat does not meet the requirements of this Title or other applicable
ordinances, it shall deny approval of such plat.
   B.   Findings: The Planning Commission may approve or deny the preliminary
plat and shall make findings regarding the submitted plat, specifying any
inadequacy in the information submitted, noncompliance with City regulations,
and the need for any additional information which may assist the Planning
Commission to evaluate the preliminary plat. The Planning Commission shall
approve only those preliminary plats which the commission finds:
      1.   To be developed in accordance with the intent, standards and
criteria specified in this Title and other applicable regulations.
      2.   To conform to an approved concept plan.
      3.   To create no substantial financial hardship to the City.
      4.   To create no substantial environmental consequence which will
adversely impact upon adjacent properties and the health, safety or welfare of
the inhabitants of the city.
   C.   The Planning Commission may condition preliminary plat approval with
specific conditions which are necessary to mitigate possible adverse impacts
from the proposed development. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-7: NOTIFICATION OF ACTION:
The Community Development Department shall notify the developer, in writing, of
the action taken by the Planning Commission. Notification of the approval of
the preliminary plat application shall be authorization for the developer to
proceed with the preparation of the final plat and final subdivision
improvement plans and specifications as required by City ordinances. (Ord.
2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-8: EFFECT OF APPROVAL OF THE PRELIMINARY PLAT:
Approval of the preliminary plat shall in no way relieve the developer of the
responsibility to comply with all required conditions and ordinances, and to
provide the improvements and easements necessary to meet all City standards.
The preliminary plat approval shall become null and void unless the developer
submits an application for final plat approval for all phases encompassing the
area of the preliminary plat within twelve (12) months after approval or
conditional approval by the Planning Commission, except as otherwise provided
for by written agreement with the City. This time period may be extended for up
to twelve (12) months for good cause shown if the developer petitions the
Community Development Director in writing requesting an extension prior to the
expiration date of the preliminary plat together with any applicable fees. Only
one (1) extension of the preliminary plat approval may be granted and is
subject to review for and compliance to any ordinance, standards, or fee
amendments which have occurred since the original approval. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-
16-2024)
13-5-9: FINAL PLAT; PURPOSE:
The purpose of the final plat is to require final review and approval of all
documents before a subdivision plat is recorded. The final plat and all
information and procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in
compliance with the provisions of this title. The final plat and improvement
plans submitted shall conform in all respects to those regulations and
requirements specified during the preliminary plat approval. Pursuant to Utah
Code Annotated section 10-9a-604.1, as amended, the Community Development
Director is designated as the Administrative Land Use Authority for final plat
approval with the advice and consent of the City Engineer and City Attorney.
(Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-10: FILING DEADLINE, APPLICATION AND FEES:
The developer shall file an application for final plat approval within twelve
(12) months of preliminary plat approval. Applications shall be filed with the
Community Development Department on a form and in an electronic format
prescribed by the City along with all required final plat fees. (Ord. 2024-01,
1-16-2024)
13-5-11: FINAL PLAT; PREPARATION AND REQUIRED INFORMATION:
   A.   The final plat and final subdivision improvement plans (final plan set)
shall provide technical and engineering solutions to all identified problems as
required by this Title. The following items shall be submitted to the Community
Development Department for final plat review:
      1.   An electronic file of the proposed final plat, including property
lines, easements, centerline of roads, etc.
      2.   An electronic file of the proposed final plan set.
      3.   One (1) electronic copy of all applicable documents or studies
required as a condition of preliminary plat approval or geologic hazards
review.
      4.   A certificate of title insurance for any land to be dedicated to the
City.
      5.   Trust agreement for perpetual care funds when required as a
condition of approval.
   B.   Final Plat Drawing Requirements:
      1.   Drawings shall be prepared and certification made as to plat
accuracy by a registered professional licensed to do such work in the state of
Utah, and will conform to current engineering and drafting practices. A poorly
drawn or illegible plan is sufficient cause for final plat rejection.
      2.   The final plat shall consist of a digital document designed to print
at twenty-four by thirty-six inches (24" x 36"). The plat shall be drawn that
the top of the sheet either faces north or east, whichever accommodates the
drawing best.
      3.   The plat shall be made to a scale large enough to clearly show all
details, and in any case not smaller than one hundred feet to the inch (1" =
100'), and workmanship on the finished drawing shall be neat, clean cut and
readable.
      4.   The title of each sheet shall consist of the approved name and phase
number of the subdivision, if any, at the top of the page followed by the words
"City of North Salt Lake".
      5.   An accurate and complete survey map in accordance with Utah State
Code shall be made of the land to be subdivided. The record of survey map shall
be filed in the office of the Davis County Surveyor prior to recording the
final subdivision plat. The exterior boundaries shown on the final plat shall
be consistent with the boundary lines as depicted on the filed record of survey
map and shall close mathematically within 0.01 feet.
      6.   The final plat shall show all survey, mathematical information and
data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace all interior
and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon, including bearing and distance
of straight lines, and central angle, radius, arc length, chord bearing and
distance of curves, and such information as may be necessary to determine the
location of the beginning and ending points of curves.
      7.   Every block, lot and parcel offered for dedication for any purpose
shall be delineated and designated with dimensions, boundaries and courses
clearly shown and defined in every case. Parcels to be conveyed to the City
other than dedication for streets or easements shall be designated by parcel
letter and conveyed by separate warranty deed to be recorded with the plat.
Sufficient linear, angular and curve data shall be shown to determine readily
the bearing and length of the boundary lines of every block, lot and parcel
which is a part thereof and shall close mathematically within 0.01 feet.
      8.   On curved boundaries and all curves in the plat, sufficient data
shall be given to enable the reestablishment of the curves on the ground. This
curve data shall include the following for circular curves:
         a.   Radius of curve;
         b.   Central angle;
         c.   Tangent;
         d.   Arc length;
         e.   Chord (bearing and length).
      9.   Excepted parcels shall be marked "not included in this development"
and the boundary completely indicated by bearings and distances.
      10.   The plat shall show the right-of-way lines of each street, and the
width of any portion being dedicated, and widths of any existing dedications.
The widths and locations of adjacent streets and other public properties within
two hundred feet (200') of the subdivision shall be shown with dotted lines. If
any street in the subdivision is a continuation or an approximate continuation
of an existing street, the conformity or the amount of nonconformity of such
street to such existing streets shall be accurately shown.
      11.   All streets within the project shall be numbered (named streets
shall also be numbered) in accordance with and in conformity with the adopted
street numbering system adopted by the City. Each lot shall show the street
addresses assigned thereto and shall be according to the standard addressing
methods approved by the City. In the case of corner lots, the address will be
assigned to the street frontage which the home is most likely to front. In the
event the home is faced to the alternate street frontage, the address shall be
reassigned, by the City Engineer, at the time of building permit application.
The City Engineer shall submit the address change to the Davis County
Recorder's Office by affidavit.
      12.   Sheets shall be so arranged that no lot is split between two (2) or
more sheets, and wherever practicable, blocks in their entirety shall be shown
on one (1) sheet.
      13.   Lot numbers shall begin with numeral "1" and continue consecutively
throughout the subdivision with no omissions or duplications. When a
subdivision is developed in phases, the phase number shall precede each lot
number. For example, phase 2 would be numbered 201, 202, 203, etc.
      14.   All lots shall include a ten foot (10') wide Public Utility
easement along all street frontages and at other locations and dimensions as
required by any Public Utility company entitled to the use of a Public Utility
easement pursuant to Section 54-3-27, Utah Code Annotated 1953, or successor
statute.
      15.   If a plat creates an easement, the plat shall include specific
conveyance language and purposes for said easement. The side lines of all
easements shall be shown by fine dashed lines. The widths of all easements and
sufficient ties thereto to definitively locate the same with respect to the
subdivision shall be shown. Any other easements shown on the plat shall specify
to whom the easement is being conveyed, and for what purpose.
      16.   The side lines of all easements shall be shown by fine dashed
lines. The width of all easements and sufficient ties thereto to definitively
locate the same with respect to the subdivision shall be shown. All easements
shall be clearly labeled and identified.
      17.   If the subdivision is adjacent to a waterway, the plat shall show
the line of high water with a continuous line and shall also show with a fine
continuous line, any Lots subject to inundation by a one hundred (100) year
flood as shown on the current Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
      18.   All lands within the boundaries of the plat shall be accounted for
either as lots, walkways, streets, alleys, excepted parcels, common areas,
building areas, parking areas, drainage facilities, landscape areas, or
permanent open space, etc.
      19.   All dimensions of irregularly shaped lots shall be indicated in
each lot.
      20.   All bearings and lengths shall be given for all lot lines, except
that bearings and lengths need not be given for interior lot lines where the
bearings and lengths are the same as those of both end lot lines.
      21.   Parcels not contiguous shall not be included in one (1) plat.
Contiguous parcels owned by different parties may be embraced in one (1) plat,
provided all owners join in dedication and acknowledgment.
      22.   Lengths shall be shown to hundredths of a foot, and angles and
bearings shall be shown to seconds of arc.
      23.   The information on the plat shall include description of project
boundaries, public streets and easements (utility, drainage, access, etc.), as
well as other design elements and the following:
         a.   Name of development, astronomic north arrow and basis thereof,
and date, and names of developer and engineer. The title of each sheet of the
final plat shall consist of the approved name and phase number of the
subdivision in bold letters, and if applicable, the words "a Planned Unit
Development (PUD)", followed by the words "City of North Salt Lake" at the top
of the sheet.
         b.   Name and address of owner or owners of record.
         c.   Total acreage of development project; total number of lots and
acreage of each.
         d.   Township, range, section (and quarter section, if portion).
         e.   Graphic scale.
      24.   The final plat shall contain the name of the surveyor, together
with the date of the survey, the scale of the map and number of sheets. The
following certificates, acknowledgments and descriptions shall appear on the
title sheet of the final plat, and such certificates may be combined where
appropriate:
         a.   Registered land surveyor's certificate of survey;
         b.   A statement by the surveyor certifying that the lots in the
subdivision comply with the applicable zoning ordinance in the area and
dimension at the date of the survey;
         c.   Owner's dedication certificate;
         d.   Notary public's acknowledgment for each signature on the plat;
         e.   A correct metes and bounds description of all property included
within the subdivision or project;
         f.   Plats shall contain blocks for signatures of the Administrative
Land Use Authority, City Engineer, City Attorney, and the Mayor with an
attestation by the City Recorder;
         g.   A block for the Davis County recorder shall be provided in the
lower right corner of the final plat;
         h.   Such other affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments,
endorsements and notaries seals as are required by law, by this Title or by the
City Attorney;
         i.   A description of all property being subdivided with reference to
maps or deeds of the property as shall have been previously recorded or filed
(Each reference in such description shall show a complete reference to the book
and page of records of the county. The description shall also include reference
to any vacated area with the vacation ordinance number indicated, as
applicable);
         j.   The owner's dedication certificate, registered land surveyor's
certificate of survey, and any other certificates contained on the final plat
shall be in the form prescribed by the City Subdivision Standards and
Specifications;
         k.   The plat shall fully and clearly show all stakes, monuments and
other evidence indicating the boundaries of the subdivision as found on the
site. Any monument or benchmark that is disturbed or destroyed before
acceptance of all improvements, shall be replaced by the developer under the
direction of the City Engineer. The following required monuments shall be shown
on the final plat:
            (1)   The location of all monuments placed in making the survey,
including a statement as to what, if any, points were reset by ties;
            (2)   All right of way monuments at angle points and intersections
as approved by the City Engineer.
      25.   Prior to recordation of the plat, the developer shall submit a
current title report to be reviewed by the City Attorney. A "current title
report" is considered to be one which correctly discloses all recorded matters
of title regarding the property, and which is prepared and dated not more than
thirty (30) days before the proposed recordation of the final plat.
      26.   When a subdivision contains lands which are reserved in private
ownership for community use, including common areas, the developer shall submit
with the final plat the name, proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws of
the owner, or organization empowered to own, maintain and pay taxes on such
lands and common areas.
   C.   Final Subdivision Improvement Plan (Construction Plans) Requirements:
      1.   Complete and detailed construction plans and drawings of all
improvements shall be prepared in conformance with the requirements of this
Title and the adopted City Design Standards & Specifications Manual. Final
approval of the project shall not be granted until the final construction plans
have been reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. No construction shall be
started until the final plat and final construction plans have been approved by
the City. Plans for all utilities located in the street right of way shall be
contained in the same plan set.
      2.   The following standards are set for the purpose of standardizing the
drawings and to obtain uniformity in appearance, clarity, size and
reproduction:
         a.   All drawings shall be clear and legible and conform to good
engineering and drafting practice. Electronic files shall be prepared to be
reproducible at a print size of twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x
36") (trim line) with one-half inch (1/2") border on top, bottom and right
sides, left side one and one-half inches (1½").
         b.   The plans shall include the following information:
            (1)   A qualified and licensed engineer's stamp and signature;
            (2)   North arrow;
            (3)   Elevations referenced to NAD 83 datum;
            (4)   Stationing and elevations for profiles;
            (5)   Title block located in lower right corner of sheet, to
include, project title (subdivision, etc.),specific type and location of work,
and name of equals two feet (1" = 2'), four feet (4') or five feet (5')
vertical. Variations in scale may be accepted when conditions warrant;
            (7)   Both plan view and profiles for curb and gutter plans shall
be shown for each side of the street, street centerline profile may be
eliminated, top of curb elevations with curve data must be shown for all curb
returns;
            (8)   Size and location of culinary water lateral mains, meters,
valves, elbows, air vacs, pressure reducing stations, and hydrants;
            (9)   Type of pipe;
            (10)   Size and location of irrigation lateral mains, meters,
valves, fittings, drains, etc.;
            (11)   Size, location and profile of sewer, storm drains and
subdrains and their manhole cleanouts. Approval of sewer infrastructure by
South Davis Sewer District is required to be submitted with final plans.
            (12)   Detention and retention basins, including pertinent
elevations, orifice diameter sizes, headwall details, etc.
            (13)   Calculation and traverse sheets giving bearings, distances
and coordinates of the boundary of the subdivision and blocks and lots as shown
on the final plat;
            (14)   Design data, assumptions and computations for proper
analysis in accordance with sound engineering practice, along with appropriate
plan, section and profile sheets for all essential infrastructure improvements.
      3.   As needed, separate sheet of details for structures which are to be
constructed. All structures shall be designed in accordance with minimum
requirements established by the adopted ordinances and standards of the City.
(Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-12: EVALUATION OF FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Community Development Department: The Community Development Department
will determine if the final plat submission is complete and if all the fees
have been paid. If all requirements are met, a letter of acknowledgment will be
provided by the Community Development Department, and shall distribute plans,
accompanied by the letter, for comment to all appropriate public and private
entities.
   B.   Single Family, Two Family, And Townhome Subdivisions: Final plat review
shall be limited to two (2) review cycles as follows:
      1.   Review cycle restrictions shall not apply to areas with identified
or suspected geologic hazards;
      2.   Initial review of the final plat and final subdivision improvement
drawings shall be completed by the Development Review Staff within fifteen (15)
business days of certification of complete application;
      3.   An incomplete application shall not prohibit review staff from
providing feedback on portions of the application submitted to assist in the
preparation of a complete application;
      4.   Review Cycle 1:
         a.   The review of the final plat application shall include redline
corrections and requests for additional information which include specific
citations of adopted ordinances, standards and specifications and shall be
logged in a separate index of requested modifications or additions;
         b.   The applicant shall have a period of twenty (20) business days to
respond to each of the redline corrections or request for additional
information and shall provide corrected drawings and a written response
identifying and explaining the applicant's revision and reasoning for declining
to make revision, if any. The explanation shall be comprehensive and specific,
including citations to applicable standards and ordinances for the design and
an index of requested revision or additions for each required correction.
         c.   If the applicant fails to address a review comment in the
response, the review cycle is not complete and the subsequent review cycle may
not begin until all comments are addressed.
      5.   Review Cycle 2:
         a.   The development review staff shall have a period of fifteen (15)
business days to review the re-submittal and corrections and shall review the
revised final plat plan set and any modifications made in the first review
cycle for additional redline corrections and shall provide a second set of
redline corrections and requests for additional information which include
specific citations and a separate index of requested modifications.
         b.   The applicant shall have a period of twenty (20) business days to
respond to each of the redline corrections or request for additional
information and shall provide corrected drawings and a written response
identifying and explaining the applicant's revision and reasoning for declining
to make revision, if any. The explanation shall be comprehensive and specific,
including citations to applicable standards and ordinances for the design and
an index of requested revision or additions for each required correction.
         c.   If the applicant fails to address a review comment in the
response, the review cycle is not complete and final plat may not be approved
until all comments are addressed.
         d.   The development review staff shall review the resubmittal to
determine that all redline corrections have been completed. Staff shall notify
the applicant within ten (10) business days of resubmittal of incomplete
corrections.
         e.   Upon determination of completion of redline corrections, the
final plat application shall be forwarded to the Administrative Land Use
Authority for approval.
      6.   If the applicant makes material change to a plan set during any
review cycle, the City shall have the discretion to restart the review process
at the first review cycle.
   C.   Commercial, Industrial, or Multifamily Subdivisions: Final plat review
shall be in accordance with the following:
      1.   Initial review of the final plat and final subdivision improvement
drawings shall be completed by the Development Review Staff for certification
of complete application;
      2.   An incomplete application shall not prohibit review staff from
providing feedback on portions of the application submitted to assist in the
preparation of a complete application;
      3.   Review:
         a.   Upon certification of a complete application, development review
staff shall review the final plat and provide to the applicant any redline
corrections and requests for additional information, as required by code or
adopted standards and specifications.
         b.   The applicant shall respond to each of the redline corrections or
request for additional information and shall provide corrected drawings and a
written response identifying and explaining the applicant's revision and
reasoning for declining to make revision, if any. The explanation shall be
comprehensive and specific to the corrections requested.
         c.   The development review staff shall review the resubmittal to
determine that all redline corrections have been completed. Staff shall notify
the applicant of incomplete corrections.
         d.   Upon determination of completion of redline corrections, the
final plat application shall be forwarded to the Administrative Land Use
Authority for approval. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-13: ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY ACTION; FINAL PLAT:
   A.   The Community Development Director, acting as the Administrative Land
Use Authority shall review the final plat application for conformance to City
Ordinance and any conditions of preliminary plat approval and shall verify the
approvals from the City Engineer, City Attorney, applicable development review
staff and affected entities. Upon verification of final plat approvals, the
director shall send notice of approval to the applicant in writing and
authorize the final plat mylar to be printed. The City shall provide the
applicant a signed and dated copy of the approved Subdivision Improvement
Plans.
   B.   The applicant shall submit an executed final plat mylar complete with
the surveyor's certification and signed owner's dedication accompanied by the
following:
      1.   Final title report updated within the previous thirty (30) days;
      2.   Any executed documents required for recordation with the plat, such
as easements, owner's association incorporation bylaws or protective covenants;
      3.   Stormwater Management Agreement;
      4.   Subdivision Improvement Agreement;
      5.   Acceptable assurance document in accordance with section
13-5-15 for the installation of essential improvements:
         a.   The developer may elect to install any required public
landscaping improvements or infrastructure improvement prior to recordation of
the plat in accordance with Utah State Code 10-9a-604.5, as amended; or
         b.   Post an improvement completion assurance equivalent to one
hundred percent (100%) of the estimated costs of the required public
landscaping improvements or infrastructure improvements which are incomplete,
not inspected or unaccepted at the time of recording the final plat.
      6.   A CAD (Computer Aided Draft) file of the final plat and approved
construction drawings;
      7.   Payment of all applicable outstanding subdivision review fees,
geologic hazard review fees, and subdivision improvement inspection fees in
accordance with the City's Comprehensive Fee Schedule;
      8.   Payment of all applicable water or storm water impact fees and
connections fees associated with improvements to common areas in accordance
with the City's Comprehensive Fee Schedule;
      9.   Any other applicable agreement or fee as required by this Title,
adopted Standards and Specifications Manual, approved development agreement,
ordinance, regulation, or law.
   C.   Upon receipt of the mylar and associated documents, the Community
Development Department shall obtain the required signatures of the City
Engineer, City Attorney, Community Development Director, and Mayor.
   D.   The signed and executed final plat mylar and associated document
required for recordation, shall be delivered to the office of the Davis County
Recorder for their review and recordation by the City Recorder. The County
Recorder and County Surveyor shall review the final plat for correctness and
provide notification to the City of any deficiencies in the plat and the
required recordation fees owed. The City shall forward the County Recorder
corrections and notice of payment due to the applicant upon receipt. The
applicant shall be responsible to provide any required corrections requested by
the County Recorder and payment of all recordation fees directly to the County
Recorder's Office.
   E.   The final plat approval shall become null and void unless the final
plat is recorded within twelve (12) months after approval, except as otherwise
provided for by written agreement with the City. This time period may be
extended for up to six (6) months for good cause shown if the developer
petitions the Community Development Director in writing requesting an extension
prior to the expiration date of the final plat together with any applicable
fees. Only one (1) extension of the final plat approval may be granted and is
subject to review for and compliance to any ordinance, standards, or fee
amendments which have occurred since the final plat approval. An extension may
be granted only if it is determined that it will not be detrimental to the
City. If any of the fees charged as a condition of subdivision approval,
including, but not limited to, inspection fees, parks fees, flood control fees,
as well as the amounts the City uses to estimate bonds to ensure completion of
improvements, have increased, the Community Development Director may require
that the bond estimate be recalculated and bond security be increased as
required, and that the developer pay any applicable fee increases as a
condition of granting the extension. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-14: DISAPPROVAL OF THE FINAL PLAT:
If the Administrative Land Use Authority determines that the final plat is not
in conformity with this title or other applicable ordinances, or any reasonable
conditions imposed, it shall disapprove the plat specifying the reasons for
such disapproval. Within one (1) year after the disapproved plat, the developer
may file with the Community Development Department a plat altered to correct
the deficiencies. No plat shall have any force or effect until the same has
been approved by the Administrative Land Use Authority and has been recorded in
the Office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-15: SECURITY BOND; DEVELOPER:
Prior to the installation of or any work on any required essential
infrastructure improvements, the developer shall enter into a subdivision
improvement agreement including an acceptable security bond, as described in
this section, to the City to insure completion of all essential infrastructure
improvements required to be installed in the subdivision. The agreement shall
be in a form and contain such provisions as approved by the City Attorney. The
agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Incorporation: Incorporation by reference of the final plat and all
accompanying data required herein which is used to compute the cost of the
improvements by the City Engineer.
   B.   Completion Of Improvements: Completion of the improvements within a
period of time not to exceed two (2) years from the date the agreement is
executed.
   C.   Satisfactory Completion: The improvements shall be completed to the
satisfaction of the City and according to City standards specified in this
Title.
   D.   Amount: The bond amount shall be equal to one hundred percent (100%) of
the City Engineer's estimated cost of the essential infrastructure improvements
to be installed.
   E.   Exclusive Control By The City: The bond proceeds may be released only
upon written approval of the City Engineer.
   F.   Reduction: The bond proceeds may be reduced upon request of the
developer as the improvements are installed. The amount of the reduction shall
be determined by the City. Such requests may be made only once every thirty
(30) days and no reductions shall be authorized until such time as the City has
inspected the improvements and found them to be in compliance with City
standards and approved improvement plans. All reductions shall be with the
written authorization of the City Engineer. The bond shall not be reduced below
ten (10%) of the engineer's estimate, until such time that all improvements
have been accepted and upon the expiration of the one (1) year warranty period.
The warranty period shall begin once as built drawings in CAD format have been
submitted to the City, and all improvements have been completed and approved by
the City Engineer, with the exception of the required preservation treatment.
   G.   Deficiency In Bond Proceeds: If the bond proceeds are inadequate to pay
the cost of the completion of the improvements according to City standards for
whatever reason, including previous reductions, the developer shall be
responsible for the deficiency and no further building permits shall be issued
in the subdivision or development until the improvements are completed or new
bond, satisfactory to the City, has been executed and delivered to the City to
ensure completion of the remaining improvements.
   H.   In the event the developer defaults or fails or neglects to
satisfactorily install the required improvements within two (2) years from the
date of approval of the development by the City Council or to pay all liens in
connection therewith, the City Council may declare the bond or other assurance
forfeited and the City may install or cause the required improvements to be
installed using the proceeds from the collection of the bond or other assurance
to defray the expense thereof, including attorney fees and court costs. After
the required improvements have been made, any balance after expenses shall be
returned to the developer at the end of the assurance period.
   I.   Reimbursement To City: Upon receipt of the bond proceeds, after the
expiration of the time period, the costs of completion shall include
reimbursement to the City for the costs of administration incurred by the City
in obtaining the completion of the improvements.
   J.   Nonliability: The developer shall agree to hold the City harmless from
any and all liability which may arise as a result of the improvements which are
installed until such time as the City certifies the improvements as complete.
   K.   Type Of Bond Agreement: The bond agreement shall be one of the
following types as dictated by the City and in a form approved by the City
Attorney:
      1.   A cash bond agreement accompanied by a cashier's check, or a money
market certificate made payable only to the City;
      2.   An escrow bond agreement and an escrow account with a financial
institution federally insured;
      3.   A letter of credit bond agreement accompanied by an irrevocable
letter of credit with a financial institution federally insured; or
      4.   A corporate surety performance bond in favor of the City.
   L.   Right Of Rejection: The City reserves the right to reject any bond. The
bonds required by this section are for the sole benefit of the City. The bonds
are not for the benefit of any individual citizen or identifiable class of
citizens, including the owners or purchasers of lots within the subdivision or
project.
   M.   Extension: The time period for the completion of the required essential
infrastructure improvements may be extended in the following manner upon
approval of the City Engineer:
      1.   The developer may submit a new bond for approval;
      2.   The existing bond may be extended upon payment, by the developer, of
the actual administrative costs incurred in reevaluating the sufficiency of the
bond amount;
      3.   Subject to review for and compliance to any ordinance, standards, or
fee amendments which have occurred since the original approval. (Ord. 2024-01,
1-16-2024)
13-5-16: DELAY AGREEMENT:
In lieu of the bond requirements outlined above, at the City's sole option, the
developer may be permitted to execute an agreement, in a form acceptable to the
City attorney, delaying the installation of any or all of the essential
infrastructure improvements required pursuant to this Title. The agreement
shall specify that the infrastructure improvement which is to be delayed is
subject to ordinances, standards, and specifications adopted at the time of the
installation. The agreement shall specify that the infrastructure improvement
which is to be delayed is subject to ordinances, standards, and specifications
adopted at the time of the installation. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-5-17: RECORDING OF PLAT:
After Land Use Authority approval, completion of the required essential
infrastructure improvements or filing of the bond agreement described herein,
and signing of the plat by all those required, the plat shall be presented by
the City Recorder to the Davis County Recorder for recordation. (Ord. 2024-01,
1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 6
PLANNED UNIT, CONDOMINIUM, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
13-6-1: Planned Unit Developments; Special Requirements
13-6-2: Condominium Subdivisions
13-6-3: Mobile Home Parks, Mobile Home Subdivisions And Recreational Vehicle
Parks: Special Requirements
13-6-1: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS; SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of planned unit development (PUD) is to permit
flexibility in land use regulations and for the consolidation of open spaces by
clustering dwelling units, in order to preserve natural features, allow a
variety of land uses, provide meaningful and usable open spaces, and to make
efficient use of essential infrastructure and public facilities. The
application of planned unit development concept is intended to encourage
neighborhoods, housing, design, open space and facilities compatible with the
present living environment in the City as described by the General Plan, while
at the same time ensuring compliance with practices which will assure the
health, safety and public welfare of the future inhabitants of the planned unit
development, as well as maximizing the energy utilization efficiency of the
project. In exchange for the additional services provided by the developer in a
planned unit development, this chapter will allow for increased intensity of
buildings and more flexible uses of the land.
   B.   The PUD approach is expected to result in development that is superior
to what could be obtained through ordinary lot-by-lot development. It is not
intended to circumvent conventional land use regulations. The City may apply
the flexibility of the planned unit development regulations, when the
development, through its design and establishment, will provide benefits that
may include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:
      1.   The stabilization and preservation of the existing or planned land
uses in abutting areas and surrounding residential neighborhoods;
      2.   Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such
as natural topography, vegetation and geologic features, and the prevention of
soil erosion;
      3.   Preservation of buildings which are architecturally or historically
significant or contribute to the character of the City;
      4.   Maximizing and preserving vegetation and open space and/or other
special development amenities to provide light, air and privacy, to buffer
abutting properties and to provide active and passive recreation opportunities
for residents of the planned development and/or the community;
      5.   Minimize significant through traffic impacts on adjacent residential
neighborhoods;
      6.   Provide an appropriate transition or buffering between uses of
differing intensities both on site and off site; and
      7.   Provide safe and convenient vehicle and pedestrian connections
between adjacent uses.
   C.   In return for greater flexibility in site development, the PUD
introduces some special requirements and standards for design approval. These
conditions will be employed to maximize quality of site design. They will not
be used to cause undue delays nor unwarranted increase in costs, when compared
to more conventional development. The PUD process will not be used as a device
to force a decrease in residential density below that otherwise allowed by the
comprehensive plan and underlying zoning.
   D.   Planned Unit Developments Approval: A development which is to be
developed as a PUD shall be processed in the same manner as subdivisions. PUD
developments shall comply with the underlying zoning requirements except as
specifically varied by this section.
   E.   Deviation From Design And Improvement Standards: Requests for design
deviations, other than those outlined in this section or as approved by
development agreement in conjunction with a P-District rezone, may only be
approved as a legislative decision by the City Council. Where, in the opinion
of the City Council, the literal enforcement of the design and improvement
standards in this Title would result in an unreasonable utilization of land and
water or undue hardship due to unique circumstances compliance with one or more
of the design and improvement standards may be waived, according to the
following procedure:
      1.   Application: Application for a modification of design standards
shall be made on a form provided by the City and shall include:
         a.   A description of the land to be developed;
         b.   An identification of the title provision from which the
modification is requested;
         c.   A description of the peculiar physical conditions pertaining to
the land in question and which do not pertain to other lands in the general
area;
         d.   A description of the hardships which will accrue to the detriment
of the property owner if the requested modification is not granted;
         e.   A nonrefundable modification review fee, where established and
payable to the City, in accordance with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule as
adopted by resolution of the City Council.
      2.   Public Hearing; Notice: The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing before making a recommendation on the requested modification. Notice of
said public hearing shall be given in accordance with USC 10-9a-205 as a class
B notice.
      3.   Recommendation To City Council: The Planning Commission shall review
the modification application and shall submit its written recommendations for
approval or disapproval of such application to the City Council, along with
written reasons therefore within thirty (30) calendar days from receipt of said
application at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission may at its own discretion conditionally approve a
preliminary plat subject to approval of the modification by the City Council,
or may table action on a preliminary plat until the City Council has acted on
the modification request.
      4.   Decision Of City Council: The City Council may approve the requested
modification upon making a finding based upon the record submitted that the
issuance of the modification will not be detrimental to the interest of the
public safety, health or welfare, the proposed development substantially
complies with the City General Plan and adopted Zoning Ordinance, and the
proposed modification will result in improved overall development design.
      5.   Records Maintained: A record of all correspondence, recommendations,
submissions and official action regarding all design modifications applications
shall be maintained permanently by the City as a public record.
   F.   P-District Developments: PUD developments in conjunction with a Planned
(P) District rezone shall also require the approval of a development agreement
by the City Council which includes all design standard variations.
   G.   Planned Unit Developments To Meet Use Limitations Of Districts Wherein
Located:
      1.   Land uses permitted within a PUD subdivision shall comply with the
underlying zone district or the negotiated terms contained in an approved P-
District development agreement. Multi-family attached dwellings shall only be
allowed to the extent permitted in the underlying zone.
      2.   The density allowed in a residential PUD shall be determined by
calculating the net developable area of the development divided by the minimum
land area required per dwelling unit within the zone district. Net developable
area is defined as the total development parcel less the area required for
private or public road rights of ways and including the required adjacent
pedestrian walkways and park strips.
   H.   Development Standards:
      1.   Area: No planned unit development shall have an area less than that
approved by the Planning Commission as adequate for the proposed development.
      2.   Arrangement Of Structures:
         a.   Open Space: The Planning Commission shall require such
arrangements of structures to consolidate and maximize usable open spaces for
the enjoyment and convenience of future tenants of the development. Care shall
be taken to assure that adjacent properties will not be adversely affected.
         b.   Perimeter Setback: All structures within a PUD shall be setback
from the perimeter boundary of the development a minimum of fifteen feet (15').
         c.   Increased Perimeter Setback Relative To Structure Height: The
perimeter setback shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') for structures
with greater than two (2) stories adjacent to a property line shared with
single or two family dwellings or single and two family zones. An additional
five feet (5') shall be required for each story above three (3) stories.
         d.   Front Setback (Street): All front facades of buildings which face
a private or public street right of way shall be setback a minimum distance of
twenty feet (20') from the edge of the right of way, including any required
sidewalk and park strip.
         e.   Front Setback (Other): All front facades of buildings which face
a perimeter development boundary or other physical feature or barrier, such as
a retaining wall greater than four feet (4') in height, shall be setback from
the perimeter boundary or wall a minimum distance of twenty-five feet (25').
         f.   Building Separation (Front Facade(s)): Residential structures
which front a courtyard or other shared common open space have a minimum
building separation of thirty feet (30'). Front porches, patios, awnings, or
above ground decks may extend into the separation distance up to five feet
(5'). Fenced limited common area may extend up to ten feet (10') into the
separation distance. Pedestrian walkways within the front separation shall be a
minimum of five feet (5') in width.
         g.   Building Separation (Rear Facades): Residential structures
without rear garage or rear alley access, shall have a minimum separation
distance of thirty feet (30'). Fenced limited common area may extend up to
fifteen feet (15') into the separation distance.
         h.   Building Separation (Side Facades): Adjacent side building
facades shall have a minimum separation distance of twenty-five feet (25').
Adjacent side yards may be used for common open space, pedestrian circulation,
or landscaping. Prohibited use in adjacent side yards shall be parking and
fenced limited common area. Pedestrian walkways within the side separation
shall be a minimum of five feet (5') in width.
         i.   Building Separation Increased Relative To Structure Height: The
required building separation increased by a minimum of five feet (5') for each
story above the second story. The Planning Commission may reduce the required
additional separation for facades which face a street or alley.
         j.   Rear Setback (Alley Loaded): Residential structures with alley
loaded garages shall be setback from the private street right of way a minimum
of distance of five feet (5').
      3.   Street And Alley Widths In Townhome Or Multi-family Subdivisions:
         a.   Public Streets: Public streets shall be designed and constructed
to meet the minimum width standards as established for the designated street
type.
         b.   Private Street/Alley Width: The minimum street right of way width
for a private street shall be twenty-six feet (26') with a minimum of twenty-
two feet (22') of pavement.
         c.   Alley Width: One-way single loaded alleys (one side only) may be
reduced in right of way width to twenty-four feet (24') with a minimum of
twenty feet (20') of pavement. One-way alleys which do not provide direct
access to a unit's driveway or garage may be reduced to fifteen feet (15') of
pavement in those areas.
         d.   Town Center Street Design: All public streets within the Town
Center shall have the following improvements:
            (1)   Increased park strip and sidewalk width as shown on the
adopted cross sections within the Town Center Master Plan.
            (2)   Street trees in accordance with Title 7, Chapter 9, Community
Forestry.
            (3)   Street amenities as in accordance with the Town Center Master
Plan and as provided in the adopted Standards and Specifications Manual for
tree grates, planter box, seating, and street lights.
         e.   Improvements To Existing Public Streets: Existing public streets
which do not meet the adopted standards and designated street type in relation
to the approved cross section design, shall be required to be improved as part
of the development including right of way dedication. Where planned right of
way improvements for widening or narrowing of the street right of way the City,
at its sole discretion and as recommended by the City Engineer, may choose to
delay installation of the improvements in the following circumstances:
            (1)   Installation of the improvements would not be practical
because the roadway design has not been completed by the City and the location
or elevations of curb and gutter are unknown or the development and the
required improvements are located in the middle of a block and would
significantly affect the functionality of the storm water system or other
utilities;
            (2)   The proposed improvements are shown on the City's adopted
Capital Facilities Plan for future installation within five (5) years; and
            (3)   The City Engineer recommends to the Planning Commission that
the developer be allowed pay to the City a fee in lieu of installation, which
fee shall be equivalent to the projected and estimated construction cost of the
improvement. Said fee will be held in trust by the City and used for the
construction of the improvement required with the larger capital improvement
for the project.
         f.   The minimum width shall be increased when required by the Fire
Marshal to meet the minimum standards of the International Fire Code or when
required by the City Engineer to meet minimum turning radius requirements.
         g.   Private streets or alleys adjacent to a perimeter property
boundary shall be required to have a minimum eight foot (8') landscape buffer
between the private street/alley and the abutting property line.
      4.   Parking:
         a.   Parking Design: All parking facilities shall be designed in
accordance with Title 10, Chapter 6, Off Street Parking Facilities, unless
specifically modified by this section.
         b.   Driveways, Residential: Where individual residential units have
driveways provided or are required by the Planning Commission, the minimum
driveway length shall be twenty-two feet (22').
         c.   Parking, Multi-Family Residential:
            (1)   A minimum of one (1) covered parking space per unit shall be
provided for the exclusive use of the residents of said unit and shall be
provided for the use of tenants and included within the terms of any lease
agreement.
            (2)   Total parking shall be provided based upon bedroom count for
the project as outlined in the table below:
 
Unit Type            Parking
Studio/1 bedroom     1.5
2 bedroom            2.0
3 or greater bedroom 2.5
 
         d.   Parking, Non-Residential: The minimum parking required shall be
established based upon the proposed uses as outlined in Section
10-6-5, Minimum Off Street Parking Stall Requirements for Specific Uses.
         e.   Shared Parking: Where multiple uses will share parking
facilities, the total required parking may be reduced by determining the
minimum requirement for the highest use time period based upon the following
schedule:
Use      Weekdays                       Weekends
Category
         12:00 am- 8:00 am- 6: 6:00 pm- 12:00 am- 9: 9:00 am- 6: 6:00 pm- 12:
         8:00 am   00 pm       12:00 am 00 am        00 pm       00 am
Use Category   Weekdays                       Weekends
               12:00 am- 8:00 am- 6: 6:00 pm- 12:00 am- 9:00 am- 6: 6:00 pm-
               8:00 am   00 pm       12:00 am 9:00 am   00 pm       12:00 am
Entertainment/ 5%        20%         100%     5%        50%         100%
Recreation
Hotel          100%      65%         100%     100%      65%         100%
Office         5%        100%        5%       0%        5%          0%
Residential    100%      50%         80%      100%      75%         75%
Restaurant     25%       80%         100%     35%       70%         100%
Retail/Service 0%        100%        80%      0%        100%        60%
 
         f.   Bike parking or storage facilities shall be provided at the rate
of one (1) bike for every twenty (20) vehicle parking spaces in visible and
sheltered locations near entrance doors.
         g.   Electric vehicle charging (level 2 or greater) shall be provided
for all developments with twenty or more units at a rate of two (2) charging
stations per twenty (20) vehicles.
         h.   Additional Modification Of Parking Requirements: As outlined in
Section E above, the City Council may approve parking less the required minimum
established in this section when supported by a parking study from a qualified
professional, demonstrating that due to the nature of the development,
proximity to transit, off site shared parking facilities, or other unique
circumstances, the reduced parking requirement is sufficient to meet the needs
of the future tenants. The City Council may require as a condition of
modification, a development agreement, covenant or other guarantee outlining
parking management practices required for the development.
      5.   Public/Community Spaces:
         a.   Outdoor spaces such as plazas, patios, courtyards, window
shopping areas, and pedestrian ways intended to provide outdoor dining shall be
designed to offer attractive and inviting pedestrian scale features, spaces and
amenities.
         b.   Entrances and parking lots shall be configured to be functional
and inviting with walkways conveniently tied to logical destinations.
         c.   Bus stops and drop-off/pick-up points shall be considered as
integral parts of the configuration.
         d.   Pedestrian ways shall contain design features such as towers,
arcades, porticos, pedestrian light fixtures, bollards, planter walls and other
architectural elements that define circulation ways and outdoor spaces.
         e.   Developments which do not provide thru street access or
developments with ten (10) or more dwelling units shall be provided with common
trash removal in the form of community dumpsters. Developments which provide
individual garbage collection from each unit shall provide designated areas for
the placement of individual trash and recycling containers at each unit's
private street access.
      6.   Pedestrian Access And Building On Cross Slopes:
         a.   Buildings fronting on a public or private street shall be
constructed with pedestrian entry doors a minimum of six inches (6") and a
maximum of thirty-six inches (36") above the finished curb height of the
adjacent street.
         b.   Commercial, office, or other retail shall provide pedestrian
entrances at a rate of one (1) entrance for every thirty feet (30') of facade.
The Planning Commission may reduce this requirement based upon the projected
ground floor use for larger retail storefronts and slope of the road.
         c .    Cross Slopes: all structure s shall be stepped in elevatio n on
cross slopes as shown in the figure below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/af8e44c1beaddd44ad27559af2273b5f8c7eb5a8/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2888.jpg]
      7.   Outdoor storage, trash collection and loading areas:
         a.   Loading areas and outdoor storage areas shall be screened,
recessed, or enclosed when visible from adjoining properties and/or public
streets.
         b.   Appropriate locations for loading and outdoor storage areas
include areas between buildings, where more than one (1) building is located on
a site and the buildings are not more than forty feet (40') apart, or on those
sides of buildings that do not have customer entrances.
         c.   Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or
compaction, loading or other such uses shall not be visible from adjacent
properties or public right-of-way.
         d.   No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction,
loading or other such uses shall be located within thirty-five feet (35') of
any public street, public sidewalk or internal pedestrian way.
         e.   Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility meters,
HVAC equipment, trash collection, trash compaction and other service functions
shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the
landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are
fully contained and out of view from adjacent properties and public streets.
Screening materials shall be of similar color and quality of the principal
materials of the building and landscape.
      8.   Additional Design Considerations:
         a.   Lot area, width, yard, height and coverage requirements shall be
determined by approval of the preliminary design plan.
         b.   Where feasible, buildings or landscaping shall not prohibit the
free flow of air or direct exposure to sunlight, specifically in regard to
solar heating or cooling structures by solar energy systems.
         c.   The development will be planned so as to provide solar access to
all of the residential units, unless waived by the Planning Commission.
      9.   Plan Preparation: All plans must be prepared by a qualified
professional team.
   I.   Preservation, Improvement, Maintenance And Ownership: Preservation,
maintenance and ownership of required open spaces within development shall be
accomplished by:
      1.   Improvement of open spaces shall be designed, installed, and
maintained in accordance with Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscaped
Standards.
      2.   Dedication: Dedication of the land to the City as a public park or
parkway system, including a certificate of title insurance; or
      3.   Easement:
         a.   Granting to the City a permanent, open space easement on and over
the said private open spaces to guarantee that the open space remains
perpetually in recreational or park use, with ownership and maintenance being
the responsibility of an owners' association established with articles of
association and bylaws which are satisfactory to the City Council; or
         b.   Granting to the City a permanent, open space easement on and over
the said private open spaces to guarantee that the open space remains
perpetually in recreational or park use, to be maintained from the proceeds of
a Perpetual Maintenance Trust Fund established by the developer in an amount
satisfactory to the City Council; or by
         c.   Condominium Ownership Act: Complying with the provisions of the
Condominium Ownership Act, Utah Code Annotated title 57, chapter 8, as amended,
which provides for the payment of common expenses for the upkeep of the common
areas and facilities.
      4.   The developer shall provide the following:
         a.   Adequate and reasonable guarantees as determined by the Planning
Commission for permanent retention of open spaces and for the maintenance of
roadways, storage facilities, service facilities and landscaping resulting from
the application of these regulations.
         b.   The developer shall record against the property a declaration of
covenants, conditions, restrictions, and easements (CCRs) which shall provide
for an owner's association (HOA or other entity) responsible for the
maintenance of all common areas and private infrastructure.
         c.   The declaration shall provide provisions for the creation of an
initial operating budget, as well future yearly budgets, long term reserves,
annual maintenance, and required payments of dues and fees by lot owners of the
PUD for both yearly maintenance and long range reserve projects or maintenance.
         d.   The developer shall implement any reasonable steps in the
creation of the appropriate accounts and funding sources for the HOA yearly
operations and maintenance costs prior to occupancy of any units in the PUD.
The developer shall ensure that said accounts are funded in a manner to cover
ongoing maintenance costs during construction of all HOA common facilities and
units, so long as the developer remains the declarant in control of the HOA to
the extent that the HOA is not self-sustaining.
         e.   The declaration shall require a reinvestment fee, or other
mechanism as permitted by law, for the purposes of funding the HOA in
perpetuity. The reinvestment fee shall apply to all closings within the HOA in
perpetuity, including initial closings from the developer to a buyer and all
subsequent closings. The reinvestment fee shall be used to fund the reserve and
operating funds of the HOA.
         f.   The developer shall provide to the Planning Commission a
management plan and a first year budget at build out demonstrating the
viability of the HOA to meet its obligations including a proposed HOA monthly
or annual assessment. The management plan developed by the applicant shall
outline standards of operation, and remedies for failure to comply with those
standards. A letter from a qualified HOA management company shall be provided
confirming that any submitted HOA budgets are reasonable.
      5.   Tax Liability For Private Open Space: Ownership for tax liability of
private open space reservations shall be established in a manner acceptable to
the City Council and made a part of the conditions of the plan approval.
   J.   The City and the Developer may enter into a formal Development
Agreement when specific PUD performance standards are imposed or deviation in
design standards have been approved. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd.
Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-6-2: CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   The procedures and requirements of this section shall apply to and
govern the processing of condominium record of survey maps pursuant to the
requirements of the condominium ownership act, Utah Code Annotated title 57,
chapter 8. Said procedures and requirements shall supplement zoning, site
development, health, building and other ordinances applicable to a particular
condominium project, and shall apply to the approval of such projects involving
new construction, as well as those involving the conversion of existing
structures. In addition, condominium projects which contemplate dedication of
real property or improvements for the use of the public, or condominium
projects in which units are not contained in existing or proposed buildings,
shall also be considered subdivisions requiring compliance with all applicable
codes of the City.
   B.   It is the intent of this chapter to establish a reasonable process
whereby the City can assess the impact of mixing collective and individual
ownerships, as presented in a particular condominium project, upon the public
health, safety, convenience and general welfare of present and future
inhabitants of the City. In the case of commercial or residential conversions
of existing buildings, corrections of building code violations, the upgrading
of vehicle parking facilities and safety of common functional elements of the
structure or structures are of prime importance. It is also recognized the
conversion of existing apartments or similar multi-family rental dwelling
structures present the potential of relocation hardship to existing tenants,
especially senior citizens, and warrants that reasonable notice and disclosure
requirements be established by the City to minimize said hardships.
   C.   Application Requirements: The owner or developer of a proposed
condominium project desiring approval shall file an application with the
Community Development Department in accordance with applicable subdivision
process or plat amendment. In addition to the subdivision application
requirements the following shall also be submitted:
      1.   Proposed map accurately drawn to scale as required by Utah Code
Annotated section 57-8-13, as amended, which shall be made by a registered Utah
land surveyor. In addition, said map or an additional site plan shall include
diagrammatic floor plans identifying boundaries of the project units,
convertible and expandable areas or spaces and common areas. Said map or plan
should designate the intended use of common areas (e.g., storage, recreational,
parking for guests as opposed to unit owners, open space, etc.) and should
indicate whether such common areas are to be open to the public, assigned to
specific units or semiprivate and available only to unit owners. Said map or
site plan shall also identify and describe in detail the location of existing
or proposed driveways, pedestrianways, curb cuts, walls, structures, fences,
landscaping and sprinkling systems.
      2.   The proposed condominium declarations and bylaws.
      3.   Where conversion of an existing building is proposed as part of the
condominium project, a property report and code analysis, prepared by a
licensed architect or engineer, including the following information with the
plan for proposed improvements, renovations and repairs:
         a.   The age of the building or buildings.
         b.   The general conditional, useful life and capacity of the
building's structural elements, including the roof, foundations, mechanical
system, electrical system, plumbing system, boiler, and other structural
elements.
         c.   The age and condition of all underground utility systems,
including meters, and identifying utility improvements required to provide
separate meters and services to individual units.
         d.   All known conditions constituting deficiencies requiring repair
to meet existing Building Codes.
         e.   All known conditions which may require repair or replacement
within the next succeeding five (5) year period.
         f.   The property report shall certify that the structure or
structures conform to the International Building Code minimum standards, or the
owner shall present plans to bring the structure or structures into conformity
with said standards prior to issuance of certificates of occupancy.
         g.   Where it is determined that physical conditions in an existing
building do not allow the strict application of the International Building Code
standard, the City Board of Appeals, as provided for in the International
Building Code, shall review all requests to vary from these standards and may
grant variances or approve alternates where it is determined the intent of the
requirement will be met. In any event, there shall be disclosure to buyers of
any conditions that do not meet code or standards set by the City.
      4.   Proof of notice to tenants as required by section K below shall be
required before final approval, but may be submitted, at the owner/developer's
option, after preliminary plat approval is obtained from the Planning
Commission.
      5.   To assist the City to defray costs involved with the review of the
project, fees shall be submitted with a preliminary plat application as
outlined in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
   D.   Copies Routed: Upon receipt of a completed application for approval of
a condominium project, the Community Development Department staff shall route
copies of the application and development plans in the same manner as a
standard subdivision as outlined in chapter 5 of this title.
   E.   Review: Additional preliminary review by the planning staff, Fire
Marshal and the Building Inspection Department shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   Planning Staff Review:
         a.   Letter Of Intent: A letter of intent shall be submitted
indicating proposed concept of project for review. The condominium declarations
and bylaws shall be reviewed as part of the final approval process and will
include provisions addressing and fixing responsibility for the maintenance,
upkeep and repair of common areas, including common walls, electrical,
mechanical, plumbing or utility systems, recreational areas, landscaping and
parking areas. The declarations shall also restrict the use of any individual
residential dwelling unit to single "families", as defined in section
10-1-47 of the City Code. The staff shall also review said declaration to
require appropriate disclosure of any unusual circumstances, variances or
conditions placed upon the condominium project for approval.
         b.   Plans And Related Documents: The staff shall review the plans and
related documents to determine whether the project conforms to applicable
requirements of this Title, the status or extent of nonconforming rights,
applicable conditions imposed upon the building or use by ordinance, variance,
conditional use permit and/or prior approval under a PUD, clustered or group
dwelling plan. If the planning staff finds there are violations of applicable
zoning ordinances or requirements, the staff may recommend denial of the
condominium project until such violations have been corrected or requirements
completed or bonded for prior to final approval by the Planning Commission.
      2.   Building Inspection Staff Review:
         a.   Upon receipt of the application for approval of a condominium
project, the Building Inspection Department shall review the proposed building
plans for new construction and/or in the case of a conversion project, the
property report and plan of improvement, renovations and repairs to determine
conformance with applicable building codes. In the case of a conversion, the
department shall require inspections of the property and may require
supplementation, revision and resubmission of the property report where
necessary.
         b.   In the preliminary review report to the Planning Commission, the
Building Official shall note corrections, repairs and replacements which must
be made to bring the structures into code compliance, together with a list of
renovation improvements proposed by the owner/developer which are not required
by code. The Building Official shall also list any requirements of the
International Building Code that needs Board of Appeals consideration due to
unique circumstances associated with the structure, as provided in City Code
9-3-1. The Building Official may then recommend denial until such time as
existing violations of code are corrected or may recommend preliminary approval
of the project and building report subject to correction of the violations
prior to final approval.
      3.   Fire Marshal Review: The Fire Marshal shall inspect each structure
proposed for conversion and shall submit a report thereon to the City outlining
the conditions of the structures as they relate to fire safety. The Marshal
shall stipulate those conditions requiring improvement, prior to occupancy, in
the report.
   F.   Planning Commission Consideration: Upon completion of the
recommendations of the development review staff, the matter shall be set for
consideration by the Planning Commission in the same manner prescribed for a
subdivision or plat amendment as provided in this Title.
   G.   Findings For Approval: The Planning Commission may grant approval of
the project if it finds that the project is:
      1.   In full compliance with applicable city ordinances;
      2.   Meets the requirements of the condominium ownership act;
      3.   That proper notice to tenants has been given; and
      4.   That in every way the project is ready for preliminary approval.
   H.   Preliminary Approval: If the Planning Commission finds that the project
substantially complies with the above mentioned criteria but that certain facts
of the proposal require changes or modifications prior to final approval, or
that tenant notification has not been completed, the Planning Commission may
grant conditional preliminary approval to the project with instructions as to
what criteria must be met prior to submission for final approval by the
Community Development Director.
   I.   Disapproval: If the Planning Commission finds the project in conflict
with the ordinances of the City and/or the state and is not in the best
interests of the City as a whole and/or specific neighborhood in which the
project is proposed to be located, or if it is not satisfied with the site
development plans of the project, the Planning Commission may disapprove the
project specifying in detail the reasons for disapproval.
   J.   Notice: As part of the application for approval of a condominium
project, when said project involves the conversion of an existing structure
where the structure has been occupied by residential or commercial tenants
prior to application for conversion, the owner/developer shall provide notice
of intended conversion to said tenants by certified mail. This notice
requirement shall not apply to a structure that was vacant and remained so
during the year prior to filing of the developer's application for conversion.
Such notice shall include:
      1.   The proposal for the conversion of the building to a condominium
project;
      2.   The established dates of construction period and termination of
occupancy which shall not be less than sixty (60) days from the date notice is
served upon occupants or expiration of individual leases, whichever is longer;
      3.   The disclosure of the sales price for each unit shall be no greater
than the price initially advertised and offered to the general public at such
time as when the condominiums are offered for public sale;
      4.   Relocation information for the tenants specifying available
alternative housing relocation resource agencies and organizations and a plan
of any services to be voluntarily provided by the owner/developer.
   K.   Dissemination Of Notice: A copy of said notice, together with a list
prepared by the owner/developer identifying names, apartment or unit numbers,
approximate ages, rental rates and other known special disabilities or factors
affecting relocation needs of the tenants, shall be submitted to the Davis
County Housing Authority and any applicable social services department of the
County or State to advise said agencies of the conversion and/or solicit their
assistance with relocation services. No final approval of such a conversion
project shall be granted by the Planning Commission until the owner/developer
has provided proof of notice by certified mail or subsequent proof of actual
delivery by method of services allowed under state law of such notices and
relocation information as required above, and any plans for relocation services
to be voluntarily provided by the owner/developer and the time designated
therein (a minimum of sixty (60) days) has expired.
   L.   Protest Review Procedure: When a tenant of a residential dwelling has
received written formal notice of eviction without cause and without at least
sixty (60) days notice of conversion required above and has reason to believe
that notice was issued because of a proposed condominium project, he may,
within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice of eviction, initiate an
appeal regarding the issue of proper notice to the Community Development
Director, or designee. The filing of such a protest shall stay the issuance of
any approval or issuance of any permits for the structure in question for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days and the matter shall be set for hearing
before the Planning Commission.
   M.   Investigation: Upon filing a tenant appeal, the City staff shall
institute an investigation to determine if the notice requirements set forth
above were satisfied. They shall then report their findings to the Planning
Commission within ten (10) days of filing of the appeal. (Ord. 93-5, 7-6-1993,
eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2012-07, 4-30-2012; Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-
2024)
13-6-3: MOBILE HOME PARKS, MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
PARKS: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The procedures and requirements of this section shall apply to and
govern the processing of mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions and
recreational vehicle parks. The owner or developer of a proposed mobile home or
recreational vehicle project desiring approval shall file an application with
the Community Development department in accordance with applicable subdivision
process or plat amendment. Applications will be processed in the manner
described within Chapter 5 Subdivisions or Chapter 7 Plat Amendments, as
applicable, and shall be in conformance to purpose and intent of the
regulations contained within this section.
   B.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose and intent of this section is to:
      1.   Permit variety and flexibility in land development for residential
purposes by allowing the use of mobile homes and recreational vehicles under
certain conditions.
      2.   Require that mobile home and recreational vehicle developments will
be of such character as to promote the objectives and purposes of this Title;
to protect the integrity and characteristics of the district contiguous to
those in which mobile home parks are located; and to protect other land use
values contiguous to or near mobile home or recreational vehicle developments.
   C.   Location:
      1.   Mobile Homes: No mobile home shall be located anywhere within the
corporate boundaries of the City except in a licensed mobile home park or
approved mobile home subdivision. Emergency or temporary parking of any
unoccupied mobile home outside a licensed mobile home park or mobile home
subdivision will be permitted for a period not exceeding twenty four (24)
hours. This limitation does not apply to unoccupied mobile homes in licensed
mobile home sales areas.
      2.   Recreational Vehicles:
         a.   Recreational vehicles which do not include facilities necessary
to be "mobile homes", as defined in section 10-1-47 of this code, shall not be
used at any place within the corporate boundaries of the City, at any time, for
living quarters except in designated camping areas or recreational vehicle
parks.
         b.   Recreational vehicles which are unoccupied for living space may
be stored on an owner's private residential lot, provided the parking complies
with the regulation in section 10-6-6 of this Title. Long term commercial
storage of recreational vehicles, maintenance operations, reconstruction or
construction activities are permitted within zoning districts allowing such
uses.
   D.   Standards And Requirements:
      1.   Determination Of Compliance: The Planning Commission shall review
the proposed development plan to determine its compliance with all portions of
the City General Plan and, among other things, shall attempt to make sure that
such development will constitute a residential environment of sustained
desirability and stability and that it will not adversely affect amenities in
the surrounding area. Standards higher than the minimum standards contained in
this Title may be required if necessary for local conditions of health, safety
and protection of property, and to ensure that the development will mix
harmoniously with contiguous and nearby existing and planned uses.
      2.   Required Facilities: The Planning Commission shall not approve any
application for mobile home park, recreational vehicle park or mobile home
subdivision if the developer cannot provide required water supplies and
facilities, waste disposal systems, storm drainage facilities, access or
improvements, or if the developer cannot assure that the development will be
completed within twelve (12) months, or if the Planning Commission determines
there would be unusual danger of flood, fire or other hazard, or if the
proposed development would be of such character or in such a location that it
would:
         a.   Create excessive costs for public services and facilities;
         b.   Endanger the health or safety of the public;
         c.   Unreasonably hurt or destroy the environment;
         d.   Cause excessive air or water pollution, or soil erosion; or
         e.   Be inconsistent with any adopted general or specific plan of the
area in which it is to be placed.
      3.   Standards And Requirements Specified; Exception: The development
shall conform to the following standards and requirements, unless modified by
an approved planned unit development plan:
         a.   The area shall be in one (1) ownership, or if in several, the
application for approval of the development shall be filed jointly by all
owners of the property included in the plan.
         b.   A strip of land at least fifteen feet (15') wide surrounding the
entire park shall be left unoccupied by mobile homes, recreational vehicles,
storage buildings, service buildings, garages or any accessory buildings or
uses, and shall be planted and maintained in lawn, shrubs or trees, with an
approved durable permanent wall or fence designed to afford privacy to the
development.
         c.   All storage and solid waste receptacles outside the confines of
any mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be housed in a closed structure
compatible in design and construction to the mobile homes, and to any service
buildings within the development; all patios, carports, garages and other
additions shall be compatible in design and construction with the mobile home.
The service buildings shall be constructed in accordance with standard
commercial practice and kept in good repair. In mobile home developments where
units will be situated with long axis perpendicular to the street, streets will
run in a north-south direction to the greatest extent possible. This is to
promote solar orientation of the units.
         d.   In addition to meeting the above requirements and conditions, and
conforming to the other laws of the City, all mobile home parks, recreational
vehicle parks, and mobile home subdivisions shall also conform to all
applicable state regulations. In the event of any conflict between said
regulations and this chapter, this chapter shall take precedence where its
regulations are more strict, and the provisions of the state regulations shall
take precedence where such regulations are more strict.
      4.   Utilities Underground: Every mobile home park, recreational vehicle
park and mobile home subdivision shall provide and maintain underground utility
service to every mobile home stand or lot including, but not limited to, water,
sewer, power, natural gas (mobile home parks only), and telecommunications.
      5.   Inspection And Special Regulation Of Mobile Homes: Mobile homes are
considered by the City to be less durable and less resistant to deterioration
than are conventional homes; therefore, all mobile homes which are used for
human habitation, whether conforming or nonconforming, and whether located in
mobile home parks, in mobile home subdivisions or on bona fide farms and
ranches, shall be subject to the following special regulations:
         a.   Permits are required for mobile home set up, plumbing and
electrical hookups, and such hookups shall be made only by licensed plumbers
and electricians.
         b.   A certificate of compliance is required for all mobile homes
within the City, whether occupied or awaiting occupancy, and may be obtained
from the building official following an inspection wherein the mobile home is
found to meet the safety, sanitary and structural standards adopted by the
City. The state or federal inspection certificate will be honored in lieu of a
certificate of compliance.
      6.   Compliance With Other Regulations: Any mobile home or recreational
vehicle located in any permitted area shall comply with and conform to all
other zoning laws, rules and regulations, and building, plumbing, electrical
and fire prevention codes, and all other codes and requirements applicable to a
structure or building erected within the district in which said mobile home or
recreational vehicle is located.
      7.   Guarantees:
         a.   For mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, adequate
and reasonable guarantees must be provided for permanent retention of open
spaces and for the maintenance of roadways, storage facilities, service
facilities and landscaping resulting from the application of these regulations.
The developer shall provide the following:
            (1)   Adequate and reasonable guarantees for permanent retention of
open spaces and for the maintenance of roadways, storage facilities, service
facilities and landscaping resulting from the application of these regulations.
            (2)   The developer shall record against the property a declaration
of covenants, conditions, restrictions, and easements (CCRs) which shall
provide for a home owner's association (HOA) or management entity responsible
for the maintenance of all common areas and private infrastructure.
            (3)   The declaration shall provide provisions for the creation of
an initial operating budget, as well future yearly budgets, long term reserves,
maintenance, and required payments of dues and fees by lot owners of the park
for both yearly maintenance and long range reserve projects or maintenance.
            (4)   The developer shall implement any reasonable steps in the
creation of the appropriate accounts and funding sources for the HOA yearly
operations and maintenance costs prior to occupancy of any units in the park.
The developer shall ensure that said accounts are funded in a manner to cover
ongoing maintenance costs during construction of all common facilities and
units, so long as the developer remains in control of the park.
            (5)   The declaration shall require a reinvestment fee, or other
mechanism as permitted by law, for the purposes of funding the improvements in
perpetuity. The reinvestment fee shall apply to all closings within the park in
perpetuity, including initial closings from the developer to a buyer and all
subsequent closings. The reinvestment fee shall be used to fund the reserve and
operating funds for the park.
            (6)   The developer shall provide a management plan and a first
year budget at build out demonstrating the viability of the park to meet its
obligations including proposed monthly or annual assessment. The management
plan developed by the applicant shall outline standards of operation and
remedies for failure to comply with those standards, as well as a single
responsible person or entity for its administration and communication with the
City.
            (7)   The City and the Developer may enter into a formal
Development Agreement when specific PUD performance standards are imposed or
deviation in design standards have been approved.
         b.   In any case, when a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park
is owned by more than one (1) person, the owners shall establish and appoint a
park manager. The manager shall be authorized to receive, process and represent
fully the interests of the owners in respect to continuing management and
maintenance of the park.
         c.   A prerequisite to the operation of any mobile home park or
recreational vehicle park in the City shall be the obtaining of an annual
business license from the City.
         d.   In the event a mobile home or recreational vehicle park is not
completed according to approved plans, or operated and maintained according to
the approved management plan, the annual business license may be denied or
revoked. The mobile homes or recreational vehicles and associated property and
facilities shall be removed, and all services discontinued before any part of
the land within the development planning area may be used for any other
purpose, or be subdivided.
         e.   The premises on which any mobile home is located, used or
occupied shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The
accumulation of any rubbish, waste, weeds, inoperative vehicles or other
unsightly material thereon shall constitute a public nuisance and a violation
of this Title. Reasonable guarantees to assure compliance with this requirement
will be required of the developer and/or owner as a condition of conditional
use permit approval and ultimately the issuance of the annual City business
license.
   E.   Additional Requirements For Mobile Home Parks: In addition to the
requirements for mobile home parks outlined in this section, mobile home parks
shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Number Permitted: The number of mobile homes shall be limited to
seven (7) units per acre and may be limited to fewer units, depending on mobile
home size, topography, and other factors of the particular site. The mobile
homes may be clustered; provided, that the total number of units does not
exceed the number permitted on one (1) acre, multiplied by the number of acres
in the development. The remaining land not contained in individual lots, roads
or parking shall be set aside and developed as parks, playgrounds and service
areas for the common use and enjoyment of occupants of the development, and the
visitors thereto.
      2.   Distance Between Structures: No home or addition shall be located
closer than ten feet (10') from the nearest portion of any other home or add
on. All such homes and additions shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from
road curbs or walks. If the mobile home tongue remains attached, it shall be
set back a minimum of six feet (6') from road curbs or walks. All mobile homes,
storage buildings, service buildings, garages, carports or other additions,
etc., shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15') from any boundary of the
mobile home park.
      3.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall be provided at the rate
of two (2) parking spaces per mobile home space, and each such parking space
shall have a minimum width of ten feet (10') and minimum depth of twenty feet
(20'). In no case shall the parking space be located farther than one hundred
feet (100') from the mobile home space.
      4.   Bulk Storage Areas: One-story bulk storage areas shall be provided
within a mobile home park, equivalent to sixty (60) square feet per mobile home
space. The area designated for said bulk storage shall be improved, landscaped
and screened.
      5.   Residential Accommodations: Not less than ten percent (10%) of the
gross land area shall be set aside for the joint use and enjoyment of occupants
in a parklike setting with both active and passive recreational accommodations.
The land covered by vehicular roadways, sidewalks, off street parking and
required setbacks shall not be construed as part of this ten percent (10%)
common area required; provided, however, that in initial stages of development
or special smaller developments, the minimum area shall be not less than one
(1) acre or ten percent (10%), whichever is greater.
      6.   Yard Lighting: Yard lighting with a minimum of 0.2 foot-candle of
light shall be required for protective yard lighting the full length of all
driveways and walkways.
      7.   Landscaping: All areas not covered by mobile homes or recreational
vehicles, hard surfacing or buildings shall be landscaped in accordance with
Title 10, Chapter 22 Water Efficient Landscape Standards and such landscaping
shall be permanently maintained.
      8.   Surfacing Of Parking Spaces And Driveways: All off street parking
spaces and driveways shall be hard surfaced before the adjacent spaces may be
occupied.
      9.   Roadways: The private roadways shall be designed to accommodate
anticipated traffic, including the following standards, unless modified by an
approved planned unit development plan:
         a.   One-Way Traffic: A minimum of fifteen feet (15') in width, plus
extra width as necessary for maneuvering mobile homes.
         b.   Two-Way Traffic: A minimum of thirty feet (30') in width.
         c.   Entrance Roadways: A minimum of thirty six feet (36') in width.
         d.   Roadways: All roadways shall be hard surfaced and bordered by
twenty four inch (24") rolled gutters or an approved equivalent.
         e.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be installed on all main roadways
within the development and to public streets adjacent to the development. The
sidewalk width shall meet the minimum ADA requirements. Interior circulation
sidewalks not adjacent to roadways shall be required to be a minimum of five
feet (5') in width.
         f.   Access: Each park shall have at least two (2) accesses to public
streets, unless more than one (1) access is prohibited by a responsible public
agency.
      10.   Skirting: Within forty five (45) days of occupancy, each mobile
home shall be skirted, or if shields are used, they are to be fireproof, well
painted or otherwise preserved.
      11.   Storm Drainage Facilities: Storm drainage facilities shall be so
constructed as to protect residents of the development as well as adjacent
property owners. Such facilities must be of sufficient capacity to ensure rapid
drainage and prevent the accumulation of stagnant pools of water in or adjacent
to the development and shall be provided in accordance with Title 8, Chapter 5,
Stormwater Management.
      12.   Character; Acreage; Construction And Phase Completion Plan: The
mobile home park shall:
         a.   Be in keeping with the general character of the district in which
it is to be located.
         b.   Be located on a parcel of land not less than ten (10) acres, or
on two (2) or more parcels separated by a street or alley only, and totaling
ten (10) acres, unless modified by an approved planned unit development plan.
         c.   Have at least twenty five (25) spaces completed, ready for
occupancy, or an approved financing plan for construction and phase completion,
together with approved security to assure compliance, before first occupancy is
permitted.
      13.   Laundry Facility: A laundry for convenience of park occupants, but
not for the general public, may be included in mobile home parks.
      14.   Term Of Occupancy: No mobile home space shall be rented for a
period of less than thirty (30) days, and occupancy shall be by written lease.
Leases shall be made available for inspection by the officials of the City upon
demand.
      15.   Access: Access shall be provided to each mobile home stand for
maneuvering mobile homes into position. The accessway shall be kept free from
trees and other immovable obstructions. Paving under mobile homes will not be
required if adequate support is provided as required by state regulations. Uses
of planks, steel mats or other means to support the mobile home during
placement shall be allowed, so long as the same are removed upon completion of
placement.
   F.   Additional Requirements For Recreational Vehicle Parks: In addition to
the requirements for recreational vehicle parks outlined in this section,
recreational vehicle parks shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Location: Recreational vehicle parks shall generally be located:
         a.   Adjacent to or in close proximity to a major traffic artery or
highway.
         b.   Near adequate shopping facilities.
         c.   Within or adjacent to a mobile home park.
      2.   Recreational Area: Not less than ten percent (10%) of the gross land
area shall be set aside for the joint use or enjoyment of occupants. The land
covered by vehicular roadways, sidewalks and off street parking shall not be
construed as part of the ten percent (10%) common area required for parks and
playgrounds for occupants; provided, however, that in initial stages of
development or in special smaller developments, the minimum area shall not be
less than one-half (1/2) acre or ten percent (10%), whichever is greater.
      3.   Yard Lighting: Yard lighting with a minimum of 0.2 foot-candle of
light shall be required for protective yard lighting the full length of all
driveways and walkways.
      4.   Landscaping: All areas not covered by recreational vehicles, hard
surfacing or buildings shall be landscaped and permanently maintained pursuant
to a plan approved by the Planning Commission.
      5.   Surfacing Of Parking Spaces And Driveways: All off street parking
spaces and driveways shall be paved with asphalt or concrete before the
adjacent recreational vehicle spaces may be occupied.
      6.   Roadways: The private roadways shall be designed to accommodate
anticipated traffic, including the following standards, unless modified by an
approved planned unit development plan:
         a.   One-way traffic: A minimum of fifteen feet (15') in width, plus
extra width as necessary for maneuvering recreational vehicles.
         b.   Two-way traffic: A minimum of thirty feet (30') in width.
         c.   Entrance roadways: A minimum of thirty six feet (36') in width.
         d.   Roadways: All roadways shall be hard surfaced and bordered by
twenty four inch (24") rolled gutters or an approved equivalent.
         e.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be installed on all main roadways
within the development and to public streets adjacent to the development. The
sidewalk width shall meet the minimum ADA requirements. Interior circulation
sidewalks not adjacent to roadways shall be required to be a minimum of five
feet (5') in width.
         f.   Access: Each recreational vehicle park shall have at least two
(2) accesses to public streets, unless more than one (1) access is prohibited
by a responsible public agency.
      7.   Term Of Occupancy: No individual space in a recreational vehicle
park shall be used by one individual recreational vehicle for more than ninety
(90) days consecutively, nor shall such space be rented or leased to any one
individual for a period longer than ninety (90) days in any one calendar year.
      8.   Use As Permanent Living Quarters Prohibited: Recreational vehicles
may be stored where permitted, but not used for permanent living quarters.
      9.   Sales Lots: Recreational vehicles may be stored, displayed, sold and
serviced, but not used for living quarters, in a sales lot in an appropriate
zoning district when such use is a permitted or a conditional use.
      10.   Screening; Access: Recreational vehicles may be accommodated in an
approved and licensed mobile home park; provided, that:
         a.   The recreational vehicle park portion of the development is
separated by barriers, screens or otherwise from the area of mobile homes.
         b.   The recreational vehicle use area shall have direct access to a
collector or arterial street.
         c.   Separate ingress and egress shall be provided for recreational
vehicles when required by the Planning Commission.
      11.   Area; Construction And Phase Completion Plan: Recreational vehicle
parks may be approved in locations permitting such use in this Title. Before
such approval is given, the Planning Commission shall find that the proposed
development will:
         a.   Be placed on a parcel of land of not less than five (5) acres, or
within a mobile home park, unless modified by a planned unit development plan.
         b.   Before first occupancy, have at least twenty five (25) spaces
completed (ten (10) if in a mobile home park), or an approved schedule of
financing, construction and phase completion, and approved security, to assure
compliance.
   G.   Additional Requirements For Mobile Home Subdivisions: In addition to
the requirements for mobile home subdivisions outlined in this section, mobile
home subdivisions shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Area; Lots; Homeowners' Association: Mobile home subdivisions may be
approved in locations permitting such use in this title. Before such approval
may be granted the Planning Commission shall find that the proposed development
will:
         a.   Be located on a parcel of land containing not less than five (5)
acres.
         b.   Contain lots with a minimum net area of five thousand (5,000)
square feet and a minimum width of fifty feet (50').
         c.   Be organized in a homeowners' association, if mobile home lots
are to be sold to individual owners.
      2.   Security Compound: The Planning Commission may require a security
compound for the storage of vehicles, boats and other large items, to be
provided equivalent to a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of paved
area per mobile home lot, to be maintained by a homeowners' association in the
mobile home subdivision.
      3.   Skirting: Each mobile home shall be skirted or shielded within forty
five (45) days of occupancy. If shields are used, they are to be fireproof and
painted, or otherwise preserved.
      4.   Street Widths: Street widths shall be as required by the development
regulations, except as may be modified by an approved planned unit development
plan.
      5.   Term Of Occupancy: No mobile home in a mobile home subdivision shall
be rented or leased for a period of less than ninety (90) days. (Ord. 93-5, 7-
6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 7
PLAT AMENDMENTS AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
SECTION:
13-7-1: Plat Amendments
13-7-2: Exemption From Plat Requirement
13-7-3: Routine And Uncontested Lot Line Adjustments
13-7-1: PLAT AMENDMENTS:
   A.   The application for a proposed plat amendment shall be submitted to the
Community Development Department and shall contain the following:
      1.   A complete application on form created by the City;
      2.   An electronic copy of the proposed plat amendment designed to print
at twenty-four by thirty-six inches (24"x36") showing the lots to be amended,
properly and accurately drawn to scale, certified as accurate by a registered
land surveyor;
      3.   Plat amendments shall be prepared in conformance to the standards
outlined in this Title for a final plat submission, and shall include all
notes, conditions, easements, or other pertinent information included upon the
subdivision plat to be amended;
      4.   For plat amendments which vacate or amend a public right of way or
public trail, the applicant shall provide stamped, addressed envelopes for:
         a.   Property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the boundary
of the plat;
         b.   All property owners that access their property from the proposed
vacated right of way; and
         c.   All property owners within the boundary of the proposed amended
plat.
      5.   For plat amendments which amend the location or vacate a public
utility easement:
         a.   The applicant shall provide evidence that no public utilities
have been located within the existing easement; and
         b.   Shall provide letters from all public utilities who may use the
easement consenting to the amendment to said public utility easement.
      6.   Fees: The petitioners shall pay, with the amendment petition, the
appropriate fees pursuant to the Comprehensive Fee Schedule for the City.
   B.   Review Process:
      1.   Applicability:
         a.   Residential, commercial, industrial or agricultural subdivision
amendments that cannot be processed as routine and uncontested lot line
adjustments, shall be processed pursuant to this subsection.
         b.   Plat amendments that create one (1) or more additional lots to
the subdivision, shall not be processed as a plat amendment, but shall be
processed as new subdivision.
      2.   City Internal Review:
         a.   The Community Development Department shall obtain comments
regarding the amendment petition from all the development review staff.
         b.   If the development review staff determines that the proposed
amendment petition may have an adverse material impact on traffic, it may
require the applicant to submit a professionally prepared traffic impact study.
         c.   The development review staff comments shall be transmitted to the
applicant for revisions as applicable.
      3.   Planning Commission Review:
         a.   Plat amendments which vacate or amend a public right of way,
public trail, or public utility easement shall be noticed for public hearing
before the City Council as a class A notice in accordance with USC 10-9a-208,
as amended.
         b.   For plat amendments which vacate or amend the location of a
public utility easement, notice of the public hearing before the City Council
shall be mailed to all individuals and affected entities with interest in the
easement.
         c.   The Planning Commission shall review the recommendation from the
development review staff, comments from the applicant and affected parties, and
shall approve or deny the amendment application with specific findings of fact,
according to the standards for approval set forth in this section.
         d.   For plat amendments which vacate or amend a public right of way,
public trail, or public utility easement, the Planning Commission shall
consider the recommendation from the development review staff, comments from
the applicant and the public, and shall recommend to the City Council the
approval or denial of the amendment application with specific findings of fact,
according to the standards for approval set forth in this section. The City
Council shall hold a public hearing and shall consider the plat amendment
application recommendation and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application, according to the same standards and in accordance with state code,
as applicable.
      4.   Standards For Approval Of Plat Amendment: A plat amendment
application shall be approved only if it meets all of the following
requirements:
         a.   The amendment will be in the best interests of the City;
         b.   All lots comply with all applicable land use and subdivision
standards;
         c.   All necessary and required dedications are made;
         d.   Provisions for the construction of any required essential
infrastructure improvements are included;
         e.   The amendment complies with all applicable laws and regulations;
         f.   The amendment does not materially injure the public or any person
and there is good cause for the amendment: and
         g.   For plat amendments which vacate some or all of a public street
or public utility easement, the City Council shall find that:
            (1)   Good cause exists for the vacation; and
            (2)   Neither the public interest nor any person will be materially
injured by the vacation.
      5.   Appeals From Planning Commission Decision Not Involving Public Right
Of Way Or Public Trail:
         a.   If the petitioner, or any affected individual or organization
disagrees with the Planning Commission decision, a written objection, clearly
specifying the reasons therefor, shall be filed with the City Recorder within
fourteen (14) days following the Planning Commission decision.
         b.   The objection shall be heard before the City Council, subject to
the standards for approval set forth in this section.
      6.   Appeal From City Council Decision:
         a.   If the petitioner, or any notified individual or organization
disagrees with the City Council decision, a written objection, clearly
specifying the reasons therefor, shall be filed with the City Recorder within
ten (10) days following the City Council decision.
         b.   The objection shall be heard before the hearing officer at a
scheduled meeting.
      7.   Recordable Instrument: If the amendment application is approved, the
City Recorder shall execute and record the final amended subdivision plat and
such other documents as may be required with the Davis County recorder's
office. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-7-2: EXEMPTION FROM PLAT REQUIREMENT:
A subdivision plat amendment is not required for a lot line or boundary
adjustment as defined in Utah Code Section 10-9a-523, as amended, but shall be
processed as outlined in the following section. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-7-3: ROUTINE AND UNCONTESTED LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to enable routine and
uncontested lot line adjustments between two (2) lots to be considered and
approved administratively by the City's Development Review Staff.
   B.   Applicability: This section applies to routine and uncontested lot line
adjustments between two (2) legally existing agricultural, residential,
commercial or industrial subdivision lots. Applications processed pursuant to
this section shall:
      1.   Meet all applicable land use code requirements.
      2.   Receive the consenting signatures of all affected property owners.
      3.   Not affect any street right of way.
      4.   Not create any new lots.
      5.   Not affect any trail right of way.
      6.   Not affect any public utility easement.
   C.   General Application Contents: The application for routine and
uncontested lot line adjustments shall include:
      1.   The signatures of approval of all affected property owners whose
property line will be amended.
      2.   An electronic copy of a survey drawing, showing the lots involved
and the lot line to be adjusted, properly and accurately drawn to scale,
certified as accurate by a registered land surveyor, and the proposed form of a
deed or boundary line agreement for the lot line adjustments.
   D.   Fees: The petitioners shall pay an application review fee consistent
with the Comprehensive Fee Schedule for the City.
   E.   City Internal Review: The development review staff shall review the
application for completeness and for compliance to the regulations of this
Title. Upon review of the application and survey drawing, the development
review staff shall approve the lot line adjustment if the application conforms
to the adopted standards and regulations of the land use ordinance or deny the
lot line adjustment if it does not.
   F.   Lot line adjustments that are denied by the development review staff
may be amended for reconsideration or may be appealed to the Planning
Commission by filing a request with the Community Development Department.
   G.   Recordable Instrument: If the lot line adjustment is approved, the City
Recorder or designee shall provide a letter of approval signed by the City
Engineer and Community Development Director, certifying that the lot line
adjustment conforms to the requirements of the City's land use regulations and
approving the recordation of an appropriate deed or boundary line agreement
with the Davis County Recorder's Office containing the legal description of
each new lot and stating any conditions of approval. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
CHAPTER 8
SUBDIVISION DESIGN
SECTION:
13-8-1: General Standards
13-8-2: Subdivision Layout
13-8-3: Lots
13-8-4: Flag Lots
13-8-5: Blocks
13-8-6: Streets
13-8-7: Landscaping
13-8-8: Utilities And Easements
13-8-9: Watercourses
13-8-10: Dedications Of Streets And Trails
13-8-11: Restrictions For Solar And Other Energy Devices
13-8-12: Mail Delivery Boxes
13-8-1: GENERAL STANDARDS:
When applicable, the following general standards shall apply to subdivisions,
unless specifically modified as provided in this Title.
   A.   Ownership: The development shall be in single or corporate ownership at
the time of application, or the subject of an application filed jointly by all
owners of the property or their representative.
   B.   Landscaping, Fencing And Screening: Landscaping, fencing and screening
within the site and as a means of integrating the proposed development into its
surroundings shall be planned and presented to the Administrative Land Use
Authority for approval, together with other required plans for the development
and shall be in conformance with Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient
Landscape Standards.
   C.   Signs And Lighting: The size, location, design and nature of signs, if
any, and the intensity and direction of area lighting or floodlighting shall be
detailed in the application.
   D.   Grading And Drainage Plan: A grading and drainage plan shall be
submitted with the application.
   E.   Planting Plan: A planting plan showing the proposed tree, shrubbery and
lawn plantings shall be prepared for those portions of the development proposed
as common area, limited common area, open space, recreational amenities, or
public dedications.
   F.   Nondetrimental Use: It shall be shown that under the circumstances of
the particular case, the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health,
safety or general welfare of persons residing in the vicinity of the
development.
   G.   Water And Sewer Systems: All buildings used for human occupancy when
completed shall be served by a central water system and central sewage disposal
system which have been approved by the City Engineer and South Davis Sewer
District and South Davis Water District, where applicable, and which are in
compliance with applicable local and state law.
   H.   Design Of Development: In the event that the land contained within a
development is traversed by a proposed major street, water line, sewer line or
drainage channel shown on the General Plan, Capital Facilities Plan or any
other official City map, said development shall be designed in accordance
therewith. The right of way across the development for said major streets, or
other right of way, shall be dedicated to the public.
   I.   Environment Of Residential Areas: Grouping and spacing of buildings and
dwellings in residential areas shall provide for a restful and uncrowded
environment. Landscaped areas shall be encouraged as the dominant features of
the development. Areas not covered by buildings or by off street parking space
or driveways shall be in conformance with Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient
Landscape Standards, and otherwise landscaped and maintained in accordance with
good landscape practice as approved on the final plan. Permanent automatic
irrigation systems shall be installed to provide for maintenance of planted
areas.
   J.   Conformance To Standards: Details of plans, plats and documents to be
submitted showing the size material, and length of water lines, sewer lines and
other domestic sewage disposal facilities, garbage and trash disposal, the
quality of material and improvements, protection from adverse influences,
lighting, landscaping, off street parking, grading and other details of design
and construction shall conform to the North Salt Lake Standards and
Specifications manuals as adopted by the City Council.
   K.   Ordinance Standards: The development shall meet all standards and
requirements of this Title and all requirements of applicable ordinances.
   L.   Character Of Development: The development shall be in keeping with the
general character of the district within which it is to be located.
   M.   Plan Preparation: Plans for the development shall be prepared by a
qualified professional team.
   N.   Storm Drainage Facilities: Storm drainage facilities shall be so
constructed as to protect residents of the development as well as adjacent
property owners and the City.
   O.   Inspections: All structures required by this Title to have building
permits and all uses required to have use permits shall be inspected by the
Building Official in accordance with procedures established by the
International Building Code, as adopted by the City, and this Title.
   P.   The design of a development shall preserve insofar as possible the
natural terrain, natural drainage, existing topsoil and trees.
   Q.   Land subject to hazardous conditions, such as slides, mudflow,
rockfalls, snow avalanches, possible mine subsidence, shallow water table,
liquefaction, faults, open quarries, floods, and polluted or nonpotable water
supplies, shall be identified and shall not be developed until the hazards have
been mitigated or will be mitigated by the development and construction plans.
   R.   Existing pipelines and high-voltage powerline easements: Subdivisions
with existing underground pipelines or overhead high-voltage powerlines shall
be designed in a manner that utilizes these easements for open space or other
compatible land uses and are excluded from individual residential lots. (Ord.
93-5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022; Ord.
2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-8-2: SUBDIVISION LAYOUT:
   A.   Conformance To General Plan: Where a proposed subdivision includes
property identified within the City General Plan or other Master Planning
documents to include specific essential infrastructure improvements, such as
trails, active transportation improvements, or right of way improvements; the
developer shall provide a lot layout which accommodates the improvement.
   B.   Preservation Of Features: Where trees, groves, waterways, scenic
points, historic spots or other City assets and landmarks, as determined by the
City, are located within a proposed subdivision, every reasonable means shall
be provided to preserve these features.
   C.   Adjoining Existing Street: Whenever a tract to be subdivided adjoins or
contains any part of an existing or proposed street so designated on the street
plan, such part of the public way shall be platted, dedicated and improved by
the developer in the location and at the width specified. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-
2024)
13-8-3: LOTS:
   A.   General Requirements: All subdivisions shall result in the creation of
lots which are developable and capable of being built upon. A subdivision shall
not create lots, and no building permit shall be issued for any lots which
would make improvement impractical due to size, shape, steepness of terrain,
location of watercourses, problems of sewerage or driveway grades, or other
physical conditions.
   B.   Lots:
      1.   No single lot shall be divided by a municipal or county boundary
line.
      2.   A lot shall not be divided by a road, alley or other lot.
      3.   No wedge shaped lot shall have less than the required width for lot
frontage required in the zoning district.
      4.   Side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street which the lot
fronts or approximately radial to the center of street curve or cul-de-sac on
which the lot faces. The City Engineer may allow exceptions to this requirement
where considerations are warranted for solar orientation or topography.
      5.   All lots created by the subdivision shall front on a public street,
or on an approved private street, which is improved to the standards
hereinafter required, and shall have frontage equal to the minimum frontage
requirement for the zone unless modified as part of a planned unit development.
      6.   Double Frontage: Lots having double frontage shall not be approved
except where necessitated by topographic or other unusual conditions. The
Administrative Land Use Authority may require that vehicular access be
restricted for portions of double fronted lots, where access would be deemed
difficult due to topography or pose a traffic hazard.
      7.   Corner lots shall be so designed as to provide for the same quality
and size of building area as interior lots by increasing the minimum width by
ten feet (10') to accommodate the required side street setbacks.
      8.   Lot Size Standards: All lots shall conform to area requirements of
any existing zoning regulations.
      9.   Slope of Lots: All residential lots shall have an average slope of
less than thirty percent (30%). Slopes which are thirty percent (30%) and
greater shall be excluded from the building envelope designated on the plat.
All approved lots twelve thousand square feet (12,000 sf) and smaller shall
have no area of slope greater than thirty percent (30%).
      10.   For lots twelve thousand square feet (12,000 sf) and larger, the
buildable area or the building envelope as designated on the plat shall be at
least five thousand square feet (5,000 sf) in size with no single dimension of
less than fifty feet (50') and shall exclude required setbacks and easements.
      11.   Remnants parcels of property shall not be left which do not conform
to lot requirements or are not required or suitable for common open space,
private utility or public purpose.
   12.   Lot numbers shall begin with the number "1" and shall continue
consecutively through the subdivision, with no omissions or duplications. No
block designations shall be used. When a subdivision is developed in ph   ases,
the phase number shall precede each lot number. For example, phase 2 would be
numbered "201, 202, 203" etc. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-8-4: FLAG LOTS:
In older areas of the City, certain residential properties have evolved over
time with irregular shapes and sizes, some with deep rear lots. As the City
continues to see these lots subdivided, there may exist a need to develop these
deeper lots. Flag lots are one alternative to such development. However, many
problems can result from the misuse of flag lots, including increased points of
traffic access on busy or narrow streets, large paved areas created to access
rear units, a mass of new units incompatible with an existing neighborhood, and
the compromising of adequate and safe fire protection to rear dwelling units.
These problems threaten the character and stability of existing neighborhoods.
For these reasons, the following restrictions and prohibitions are established
to better control increasing residential density in predominantly single-family
neighborhoods through the use of flag lots:
   A.   Circumstances Permitting: The City discourages and restricts the
creation of flag lots. A flag lot should be permitted only under certain
limited circumstances. Flag lots are prohibited except:
      1.   Where necessary to reduce access onto major streets and
thoroughfares;
      2.   To reasonably utilize irregularly shaped land;
      3.   To reasonably utilize land with severe topography;
      4.   To provide for the protection of significant natural or
environmentally sensitive areas;
      5.   To allow a property owner reasonable use and benefit of a parcel of
land not otherwise developable; or
      6.   To achieve affordable housing goals as outlined it the City's
Moderate Income Housing Plan.
   B.   Prohibited Flag Lots: Flag lots are expressly prohibited where:
      1.   The creation of the flag lot will increase the number of access
points onto a major thoroughfare;
      2.   The density created by the flag lot would exceed the average
existing density in the immediately adjacent developed residential area; or
      3.   Flag lots for non-residential use.
   C.   The applicant proposing a flag lot must have demonstrated to the
Planning Commission that because of topographical features and/or unique
situations as set forth in subsection A of this section, creation of a flag lot
should be allowed.
   D.   Design Requirements For Flag Lot:
      1.   A flag or L-shaped lot shall be comprised of a staff portion
contiguous with the flag portion thereof.
      2.   The staff portion of said lot shall front on and be contiguous to a
dedicated public street. The minimum width of the staff portion of each flag
lot shall be thirty feet (30'). Two (2) staffs may be placed side by side and
be a minimum width of fifteen feet (15') each with a minimum shared paved
driveway width of twenty feet (20'). The staff shall not be longer than one
hundred fifty feet (150').
      3.   The flag portion of the lot shall meet the minimum lot size
requirement for the zone in which it is located. The staff portion shall not
count as part of the land area needed to meet the lot area requirement.
      4.   Flag lots must be similar in shape of the buildable area (i.e.,
rectangular or pie shaped if on a cul-de-sac) to the majority of the lots in
the immediately adjacent developed residential area.
      5.   The front side of the flag portion of the lot shall be deemed to be
that side nearest to the dedicated public street upon which the staff portion
fronts. The staff portion shall be deemed to end and the flag portion shall be
deemed to begin at the extension of the front lot line.
      6.   Flag lot units located away from the street shall be oriented to the
street or front property line.
      7.   Identification Signs:
         a.   Address Identification: All new and existing structures shall be
provided with approved address identification that is legible and visible from
the street fronting the property. Address characters shall be Arabic numbers
(shall not be spelled out) or alphabetical letters not less than four inches
(4") high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (½") (IFC 505.1).
         b.   The building address for the structure shall be posted
conspicuously at the driveway entrance via sign, monument, mailbox, and be
maintained in good condition and in a visible location not obstructed by
vegetation, landscaping features, walls, or fences, or other obstruction.
         c.   Any lighting provided for address identification shall be
provided in a manner where the sign is either backlit, illuminated by street
light or driveway light or if directly lit shall be in a manner that the
lighting will not shine directly into the yard or window of an adjacent
residence, and shall not be a hazard for street traffic.
         d.   A fire lane sign shall be posted near the entrance of all access
roadways and driveways reading "No Parking-Fire Lane". The sign shall be a
minimum of twelve inches by eighteen inches (12" x 18") with four inch (4")
block letter with one-half inch (½") stroke and have red letters on a white
reflective background (IFC D103.6).
         e.   Access driveways and private roadways shall not be named or
posted in a manner similar to approved street signs (color or design). All
private roadway signs shall be approved by the public works department prior to
placement at the intersection of a city street and private driveway.
      8.   All minimum required setbacks for the zone in which the flag lot is
located shall apply and all front setback distances shall be measured from the
flag portion of the lot and not from the street. Orientation, setbacks and
private yards shall conform to the following criteria:
         a.   All units shall orient to the street.
         b.   Each unit shall have both a "front" and "rear" yard on opposite
sides of the lot.
      9.   An access driveway with a minimum paved width of twenty feet (20')
shall be provided with landscaping on each side and a maximum slope of ten
percent (10%) (IFC D103.2). Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with
Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscape Standards. The access driveway
shall be asphalt or concrete with adequate drainage and shall be properly
maintained on a continuous basis. Where two (2) flag lots are adjacent to each
other, a common driveway for both units is required. Shared driveways shall
have a platted cross easement access and maintenance agreement. The minimum
width of the shared driveway shall be twenty feet (20') unless additional width
is required by the International Fire Code (IFC).
      10.   The access road or driveway shall be maintained by the property
owner or possessor of the premises in good condition and repair and with
adequate snow removal so as to provide free and uninhibited access by emergency
service vehicles.
      11.   Emergency Access Easements: The property owner/developer shall
grant unto the City an access easement and public utility easement along the
full width of the stem portion of the lot, permitting access to the City for
emergency and service vehicles as well as inspection personnel.
      12.   Fire Protection For Flag Lot Units: All flag lots must be reviewed
by the local fire protection agency for compliance with the International Fire
Code (IFC), for emergency vehicle access requirements prior to subdivision
approval and the issuance of a building permit. No primary residential
structure may be located on a flag lot more than five hundred feet (500') from
a public street. All measurements shall be taken from the edge of the public
right of way along the centerline of the driveway or private access driveway to
the nearest point of the primary structure.
      Upon recommendation of the Fire Marshal and in conformance to the
International Fire Code, as adopted, the Planning Commission may require one
(1) or more of the following conditions to be met as a condition for building
permit approval:
         a.   An access road or driveway which meets the following standards:
            (1)   An asphalt or concrete surface capable of supporting the
imposed load of fire apparatus weighing up to seventy five thousand (75,000)
pounds (IFC D102.1) extended to within one hundred fifty feet (150') of all
portions of the exterior walls of the first story of any building (IFC
503.1.1). If constructed of asphalt, the access road or driveway shall be a
minimum of two and one-half inches (2 ½") of asphalt over a minimum of six
inches (6") of compacted road base. If constructed of concrete, the access road
or driveway shall have a minimum of five inches (5") of concrete over a
compacted road base.
            (2)   Where such access road or driveway is adjacent to required
fire hydrants, the width shall be increased to a minimum of twenty six feet
(26')(IFC D103.1). Such required widths shall be unobstructed, including
parking of vehicles, and shall have a minimum vertical clearance of thirteen
and one-half feet (13 ½') (IFC 503.1.1).
            (3)   Reduction of the maximum grade allowed by this section for
any access road or driveway.
            (4)   The construction of a turnaround approved by the fire marshal
at a location recommended by the fire marshal (IFC 503.2.4).
            (5)   Each access road or driveway shall be identified and marked
by the property owner to the satisfaction and approval of the fire marshal (IFC
503.3).
         b.   Water Line And Hydrants:
            (1)   Installation of one (1) or more fire hydrants at the expense
of the property owner and connected by a water line from the water main sized
to meet the minimum fire flow requirements required by the IFC (IFC 507.1). The
hydrant(s) shall be located to the satisfaction and approval of the fire
marshal and city engineer. Required fire hydrant(s) shall be located on all
access roads or driveways within five feet (5') of the paved surface.
            (2)   If, in the opinion of the fire marshal, fire hydrants are
vulnerable to vehicular damage, appropriate impact protection shall be required
(IFC 507.5.6). No obstruction shall exist within a three foot (3') working area
of each fire hydrant (IFC 507.5.5).
            (3)   Hydrant shutoff valves shall be located as per city
specifications.
            (4)   The fire hydrant, water line and access road or driveway
shall be located within a public utility easement of at least twenty feet (20')
in width such that emergency and utility service vehicles and personnel have
unimpeded access to the improvements.
         c.   The installation at the time of construction, and keep
continuously maintained, a pressurized fire suppression system that complies
with the minimum standards of the International Fire Code and approved by the
fire marshal.
         d.   Other conditions as warranted and in conformance to the
International Fire Code or Urban Wildland Interface, where adopted and
applicable.
      13.   In addition to the above minimum requirements, the Planning
Commission may, as part of the conditional use permit or preliminary or final
subdivision plat approval, impose additional conditions to mitigate impacts of
the flag lot(s), such conditions include the following:
         a.   Fencing and screening requirements, including location, height,
materials, colors, and landscaping;
         b.   Limitations on lot grading, cuts and fills, drainage, retaining
wall construction, including location, materials, vegetation, and height;
         c.   Building envelope or setback restrictions;
         d.   Dwelling height; and
         e.   Vegetation and landscape requirements or restrictions; and
         f.   Other conditions, as warranted and permitted by law. (Ord. 07-12,
6-5-2007; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2021-08, 10-19-2021; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022;
Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-8-5: BLOCKS:
   A.   Block Lengths: Block lengths shall be reasonable in total design to
provide for convenient access and circulation for emergency vehicles. Blocks
shall be a minimum of three hundred feet (300') with maximum length of seven
hundred feet (700').
   B.   Midblock Pedestrian Access: Where blocks exceed six hundred feet (600')
in length, a dedicated walkway through the block at approximately the center of
the block is required where feasible. Such walkways shall have a pedestrian
easement not less than sixteen feet (16') in width. Walk improvements (paving
or concrete) of not less than eight feet (8') in width shall be placed within
the easement. The use of bollards or other similar mechanism shall be required
to prevent the use of the walkway by passenger vehicles. Ownership and
maintenance of walkways shall be the responsibility of the development's
homeowner association (HOA).
   C.   Width; Variation: The width of each block shall be sufficient for an
ultimate layout of two (2) tiers of lots therein of a size required by the
provisions of this Title, unless the general layout of the vicinity, lines of
ownership, topographical conditions or locations of arterial streets or
freeways justify or make necessary a variation from this requirement. (Ord.
2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-8-6: STREETS:
   A.   Street Requirements:
      1.   The street layout shall conform to the General Plan of the City.
      2.   Minor streets shall be laid out to discharge through traffic.
      3.   Stub streets shall be provided where needed to connect to adjacent
undeveloped land, and new streets must be provided where needed to connect to
existing stub streets in adjacent developments. Not more than six (6) lots
shall front on a stub street, except where a temporary cul-de-sac turnaround is
provided.
      4.   Intersections of minor streets with major collector streets shall be
kept to the minimum.
      5.   Minimum right of way widths and pavement widths for public and
private streets shall be provided in accordance with the City Standards and
Specification Manual as adopted by the City Council for various categories of
streets, but shall in no case be less than the following:
 
Street Category        Minimum ROW Minimum Pavement Width
Minor arterial         80 feet     57 feet
Major collector street 66 feet     43 feet
Minor collector street 60 feet     37 feet
Local (minor) street   50 feet     27 feet
 
      6.   Minimum right of way and pavement widths for private streets within
single or two-family developments shall be the same as for public streets of
the same use category. Minimum right of way and pavement widths for townhome or
other multi-family development may be reduced in accordance with the standards
outlined in subsection 13-6-1H3 for Planned Unit Developments.
      7.   Alleys: The Land Use Authority may approve service access to the
interior of blocks where deemed to be in the public interest, in which case
such alleys must be indicated in the preliminary design plans and on the final
plat.
      8.   No half streets are permitted.
      9.   Dead end streets, including stub streets, shall be permitted only to
provide future access to adjoining property, except for dead end street systems
in cluster developments, such as planned unit developments and condominium
developments, or when necessary due to topography, other natural environmental
feature, or geologic hazard.
      10.   Streets which provide frontage and access for thirty (30) or more
lots or dwelling units are required to have a minimum of two (2) separate means
of egress.
      11.   The following standards apply to all temporary and permanent cul-
de-sacs:
         a.   Cul-de-sacs shall be terminated by a turnaround of not less than
one hundred feet (100') in right of way diameter, and the face of curb or
pavement edge radius shall be thirty eight and one-half feet (38½') or more.
         b.   Temporary cul-de-sacs shall be paved with a minimum of two inches
(2") of hot mix asphalt.
         c.   Permanent cul-de-sacs shall be paved with a minimum of three
inches (3") of hot mix asphalt.
         d.   Downhill cul-de-sacs are strongly discouraged and may only be
allowed if it can be demonstrated that surface drainage and street grade will
be controlled in a manner acceptable by the City Engineer. A surface overflow
drainage outlet will be designed to protect adjacent properties in the event
the curb face inlet(s) become obstructed or clogged.
         e.   Cul-de-sac length shall be measured from the centerline of an
intersecting street, excluding other cul-de-sacs, along the centerline of the
cul-de-sac, to a point at the center of the closed end of the cul-de-sac.
         f.   Residential Zoning Districts:
            (1)   A cul-de-sac shall not serve more than twenty (20) lots or
exceed six hundred feet (600') in length.
            (2)   The Planning Commission may recommend a deviation from design
standards to the City Council in the manner provided in subsection 13-6-1E to
increase to the maximum length of a cul-de-sac, up to one thousand feet
(1,000') in total length, when the following conditions exist:
               (A)   Physical conditions exist which preclude the ability to
establish any other practical means of access. Such conditions may include:
topography; environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands, ponds, streams,
rivers, or lakes; or manmade structures that cannot be altered, moved or
relocated;
               (B)   Construction of a through street will result in undesired
cuts and fills or will damage natural terrain or drainage; or
               (C)   Buildings or existing developments block access to the
site, which would result in landlocked property or an inefficient development
plan; and
               (D)   Such an exception has received a favorable recommendation
from the South Davis Metro Fire District and the City's development review
staff.
            (3)   Exceptions to cul-de-sac length may also be subject to the
following as needed:
               (A)   Possible modified construction standards such as pavement
width and cul-de-sac diameter, quantity of fire hydrants, placement of fire
hydrants on alternating side of street, looped water lines, emergency egress
routes or plans, drainage, pedestrian easements or other reasonable measures to
ensure public safety.
         g.   Nonresidential Zoning Districts:
            (1)   A cul-de-sac shall not exceed six hundred feet (600') in
length. Cul-de-sacs longer than six hundred feet (600') may be recommended by
the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council if the development
review staff recommends that such a cul-de-sac would better preserve the
natural terrain and vegetation in the area or provide a superior street design
or provide needed access to landlocked parcels.
            (2)   The Planning Commission may require public accessways from a
cul-de-sac to provide safe circulation for pedestrians and bicyclists.
      12.   No more than four (4) streets shall enter an intersection.
      13.   Streets shall intersect at ninety degrees (90°), except where
otherwise approved as necessary by the Planning Commission upon favorable
recommendation of the City Engineer.
      14.   The centerlines of two (2) subordinate streets meeting a through
street from opposite sides shall extend as a continuous line, or the
centerlines shall be offset at least one hundred fifty feet (150').
      15.   Protection strips are not allowed adjacent to or on public streets
and rights of way.
   B.   Street Names: The following principles shall govern street names in a
subdivision:
      1.   Streets shall be numbered based on the adopted grid system wherever
practical. Alphabetic names may be considered for streets of a meandering or
diagonal nature or for other streets as specifically approved by the Land Use
Authority.
      2.   All new street names must be reviewed with the County Recorder and
the development review staff to avoid duplication or near duplication to any
streets in the City or area that may lead to confusion of response by public
safety agencies.
      3.   Each street which is a continuation of, or an approximate
continuation of, any existing dedicated street shall be given the name of such
existing street.
      4.   The words "Street", "Avenue", "Boulevard", "Place", "Way", "Court",
or other designation of any street shall be spelled out in full on the plat.
Any street name incorporating one (1) of the terms used above shall conform to
the established definition of that term. Any named street shall also have the
proper numerical coordinate as approved by the City Engineer.
      5.   Street names shall not be permitted that contain a cardinal
direction, such as north, south, east, or west, for example "South Bay Drive".
      6.   Street names which reflect the history or character of the City are
strongly encouraged.
   C.   Curvature And Alignment:
      1.   To ensure adequate sight distances, street roadway line connections
shall be made by horizontal curves. The minimum centerline radii for minor
streets shall be one hundred feet (100') and of all other streets shall be
three hundred feet (300'). On collector streets, a minimum tangent of one
hundred feet (100') shall be required between a curve and street intersection;
a minimum tangent of one hundred feet (100') shall be required between reverse
curves.
      2.   Vertical curves shall be used at all changes of grade exceeding one
percent (1%) and shall be designed to provide minimum sight distances of two
hundred feet (200') for minor streets and three hundred feet (300') for all
other streets, except that vertical curves for major streets shall be as
determined by the current specifications of the state department of
transportation.
   D.   Construction Standards For Paved Roadways For Public And Private
Streets: Minimum roadbed grading and paving for all street types shall be
established within the City Standards and Specifications Manual approved by the
City Council.
   E.   Street Grades: All street grades shall be designed as follows:
      1.   Streets shall be limited to a maximum grade of ten percent (10%).
      2.   Cul-de-sacs and streets which intersect with a collector or arterial
shall terminate with a grade not to exceed three percent (3%) for the last
twenty feet (20') of traveled surface. For roads with grades that exceed seven
percent (7%), the distances may be enlarged as approved by the City Engineer.
      3.   A street intersection shall have a vertical alignment such that the
grade shall not exceed three percent (3%) for a minimum distance of fifty feet
(50') each way from the centerline of the intersection.
      4.   All changes that exceed one percent (1%) in vertical alignment shall
be made by vertical curves with minimum length of fifty feet (50') for local
(minor) streets and one hundred feet (100') for collector streets.
   F.   Sidewalks, Curbs And Gutters: Sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be
provided on both sides of all streets to be dedicated to the public. Private
streets and private alleys shall provide for sidewalk and park strip at a
minimum of one side of the street. Private alleys with dual rear access garages
shall not be required to provide sidewalks and park strips. Sidewalks, curbs
and gutters may be required by the City Engineer on existing streets bordering
the development.
   G.   Pedestrian Midblock Street Crosswalks: Where blocks exceed six hundred
feet (600') in length, or where a dedicated walkway is required through the
block, a midblock street crosswalk of not less than ten feet (10') in width may
be required.
   H.   Study May Be Required: Where the potential impacts on the existing
street systems are considered to be great, or in the case of unique
circumstances concerning access, topography or street layout, a transportation
planning/engineering study may be required.
   I.   Private streets shall not be permitted unless the Land Use Authority
finds that the most logical development of the land requires that lots be
created which are served by a private street or other means of access, and
makes such findings in writing with the reasons stated therein. All private
streets shall meet North Salt Lake development standards as it pertains to
standard street intersections, typical cul-de-sac and standard roadway
sections. This includes, but is not limited to, submittals, quality control,
site preparation, grading, excavating, backfilling and compaction, base course,
asphalt/concrete, curbs, gutters, drive aprons and walks, slurry sealing,
restoration of existing improvements, storm drainage systems, boundary markers
and survey monuments, geotextiles and concrete reinforcement. Land designated
as public right of way shall be separate and distinct from lots adjoining such
right of way and shall not be included in the area of such lots. (Ord. 2024-01,
1-16-2024)
13-8-7: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Special Treatment: Whenever, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the
cuts and fills in a hillside subdivision are of sufficient size or visibility
to demand special treatment, the developer shall be required to landscape such
areas with suitable permanent plant materials and to provide for their
maintenance.
   B.   Preservation: The subdivision shall be so designed as to either
preserve, or provide for, the greatest amount of onsite vegetation.
   C.   Geologic Hazards Areas: Subdivisions subject to Title 10, Chapter 12,
Sensitive Area District and Geologic Hazards shall comply with all provisions
of that section and with the recommendations set forth in an approved Geologic
Hazards Study with respect to landscaping and irrigation restrictions.
Restrictions on landscaping and irrigation methods shall be required to be
noted on the plat and within the development covenants recorded with the plat.
   D.   All landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
Title 10, Chapter 22, Water Efficient Landscape Standards.
   E.   Landscape Design Standards For Highway 89 And Town Center:
      1.   The landscape design shall conform to the Town Center Master Plan
and any urban design standards for the Town Center as adopted the City Council.
      2.   Fencing shall only be permitted to be constructed of decorative
metal with masonry or other decorative pillars spaced no greater than ten feet
(10') apart on center.
      3.   Pedestrian access shall be provided to street at convenient
locations for pedestrian travel in both directions with a maximum separation
distance of one hundred fifty feet (150').
   F.   Landscaping Design Standards For Redwood Road:
      1.   For development along the west side of Redwood Road, the following
development standards are adopted:
         a.   The area behind the curb and gutter of Redwood Road and the
property line shall include an area not less than twenty four feet (24') wide
containing improved and irrigated landscaping and an eight foot (8') wide
meandering asphalt multiuse trail. If any portion of the required twenty-four
foot (24') landscaped area is outside the dedicated right of way, a public
trail easement and street tree easement shall be dedicated to the City upon the
recorded plat.
         b.   Within the twenty-four foot (24') wide area, trees shall be
planted in accordance with the requirements of Title 7, Chapter 9, Community
Forestry.
         c.   Residential developments along Redwood Road may include fencing
or a solid wall, as a buffer along the entire length of frontage along Redwood
Road. The following restrictions shall apply:
            (1)   Any wall shall be constructed of masonry or other hard,
permanent materials and shall be a sight obscuring wall with a combination of
berms, rocks, and planted materials to lessen the visual impact of the wall.
Any solid walls constructed pursuant to this subsection shall also be treated
with an antigraffiti treatment approved by the City.
            (2)   Fencing material shall be of decorative metal and shall
include masonry or other decorative pillars.
            (3)   Pedestrian access shall be provided to the Redwood Road Trail
at convenient locations for pedestrian travel in both north and south
directions with a maximum separation distance of one hundred fifty feet (150').
      2.   For developments along the east side of Redwood Road, the same
development standards apply except that there shall be a five foot (5') wide
concrete sidewalk provided in lieu of an eight foot (8') wide meandering
asphalt multiuse trail.
      3.   Landscape design shall conform to Title 10, Chapter 22, Water
Efficient Landscape Standards. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-8-8: UTILITIES AND EASEMENTS:
   A.   Utility easements shall follow rear and every other side lot lines
whenever practical and shall have a minimum total width of sixteen feet (16')
apportioned equally in abutting properties, eight feet (8') each lot.
   B.   Front property line utility easements are required and shall have a
minimum of ten feet (10').
   C.   Development perimeter easements shall be not less than eight feet (8')
in width, extending throughout the peripheral area of the development.
   D.   All easements shall be designed so as to provide efficient installation
of utilities or street plantings. Special guying easements at corners may be
required if any existing utilities are overhead. Public utility installations
shall be so located as to permit multiple installations within the easements.
The developer shall establish final utility grades prior to utility
installations.
   E.   The City Engineer may require additional easements, or increased width
of easements, as necessary to provide for adequate utility service and/or
drainage within the subdivision and to or from adjoining parcels.
   F.   Utilities To Be Underground: All utilities, including those existing
overhead, shall be provided underground, unless the Planning Commission
recommends a deviation from the design standards to the City Council in the
manner provided in subsection
13-6-1E. The City Council shall review the application by the developer and
recommendation of the Planning Commission and City Engineer to determine if the
deviation shall be granted.
   G.   Utility easement width may be reduced as approved by the Planning
Commission for lots within a Planned Unit Development with recommendation from
the City Engineer. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-8-9: WATERCOURSES:
The developer shall dedicate a right of way for storm drainage conforming
substantially to the lines of any natural watercourse or channel, stream,
creek, irrigation ditch or floodplain that enters or traverses the subdivision,
as determined by Davis County flood control and/or the City Engineer. The
developer shall also dedicate acceptable rights of way for any pipe, conduit,
channel, and retention or detention area as approved by the City Engineer for
flood control. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-8-10: DEDICATIONS OF STREETS AND TRAILS:
   A.   Requirement: Maps and plats, when made, acknowledged, filed and
recorded according to procedures specified in this section, operate as a
dedication of all streets, trails and other public places, and vest the fee of
those parcels of land in the City for the public for the uses named or intended
in those maps or plats.
   B.   Nonliability For Unimproved Dedications: The dedication established by
this section does not impose liability upon the City for streets, trails and
other public places that are dedicated in this manner but unimproved. (Ord.
2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-8-11: RESTRICTIONS FOR SOLAR AND OTHER ENERGY DEVICES:
   A.   Regulations May Be Adopted: The City Council, in order to protect and
ensure access to sunlight for solar energy devices, may adopt regulations
governing legislative subdivision development plans that relate to the use of
restrictive covenants of solar easements, height restrictions, side yard and
setback requirements, street and building orientation and width requirements,
height and location of vegetation in respect to property boundary lines, and
other permissible forms of land use controls.
   B.   Refusal To Approve: The Land Use Authority may refuse to approve or
renew any plat or subdivision plan, or dedication of any street or other
ground, if the deed restrictions, covenants or similar binding agreements
running with the land for the lots or parcels covered by the plat of
subdivision prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting reasonably sited and
designed solar collectors, or other energy devices based on renewable resources
from being installed on buildings erected on lots or parcels covered by the
plat or subdivision. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-8-12: MAIL DELIVERY BOXES:
Provision for the permanent placement of mail delivery boxes shall be made as
follows:
   A.   For subdivisions containing eight (8) or more lots, cluster mailboxes
shall be installed at designated locations within the subdivision as shown on
the final plat and in accordance with the standards and specifications of the
U.S. Postal Service. The requirement for cluster mailboxes may be waived if the
developer presents the City with a letter from the U.S. Postal Service
authorizing individual mailboxes.
   B.   Preferred Locations: Common area with available off street parking
shall be utilized for cluster mailboxes where feasible.
   C.   Cluster mailboxes shall not be located on collector roads or adjacent
to streets where parking is prohibited due to pavement width. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-
16-2024)
CHAPTER 9
ESSENTIAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
13-9-1: Design Standards And Specification Manual
13-9-2: Required Improvements
13-9-3: Curb, Gutter, Sidewalk And Asphalt Paving
13-9-4: Storm Drainage
13-9-5: Underground Utilities And Sanitary Sewer
13-9-6: Culinary Water
13-9-7: Fencing Or Piping Of Hazards
13-9-8: Monuments
13-9-9: Completion
13-9-10: Payback Agreements For Improvements
13-9-1: DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATION MANUAL:
   A.   Preparation: The City Engineer and public works department shall
prepare and recommend to the City Council for adoption by resolution or
ordinance the Design Standards & Specifications Manual for the design,
construction, specifications, and inspection of essential infrastructure,
whether publicly dedicated or privately owned. The manual shall include street
and trail improvements, street trees, water distribution systems, storm
drainage, flood control facilities, and other specifications as deemed
necessary. The design standards shall be prepared in cooperation and
coordination with the South Davis Sewer District, South Davis Metro Fire
Agency, and any private special service district or water company providing
service within the City.
   B.   The developer shall provide evidence of design approval from any such
outside agencies, prior to final plat approval. Additional design standards
prepared by private utilities shall be the responsibility of the individual
agency. All such standards for design and construction of essential
infrastructure improvements and amendments thereto shall be approved and
adopted by the City Council before becoming effective. All developers shall
comply with the approved standards required herein.
   C.   Streets, Blocks, Etc.: The design of the subdivision in relation to
streets, blocks, lots, open spaces, and other design factors shall be in
harmony with design standards recommended by the Planning Commission and other
City staff and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-9-2: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Scope Of Requirements: The developer shall improve, or agree to
improve, all streets, pedestrian ways or easements in the subdivision and on
streets which abut, or serve as access to, the subdivision. Permanent
improvement work shall not commence until improvement plans and profiles have
been approved by the City and, if applicable, an improvement agreement,
including security bond, has been executed between the developer and the City
as specified in this title.
   B.   Roadway Surface Treatment: It shall be required, as part of the public
street improvements, that the developer deposit with the City sufficient sums
to provide an appropriate roadway surface treatment for the streets, such as a
slurry seal, chip seal, or mineral bond, as required by the City Engineer based
on road type. The City shall install the surface treatment at the end of the
warranty period and in conjunction with other city street preservation
projects. The developer shall be responsible for the placement of the
appropriate roadways surface treatment for all private streets within the
development, upon the prior to the expiration of the warranty period.
   C.   Street Signs: The developer shall install all street signs and
regulatory signs which the City determines are required for the subdivision.
   D.   Installation; Inspection: Improvements shall be installed to permanent
line and grade to the satisfaction of the City and in accordance with the
standard specifications adopted by the City Council. Cost of inspection shall
be paid by the developer as outlined in the Comprehensive Fee Schedule.
   E.   Non-Responsibility Of City: Notwithstanding the fact that the land on
which the improvements will be located is dedicated at the time of the
recording of a plat, the City shall not be responsible for the improvements,
their construction or maintenance, until the warranty period specified in the
bond agreement has expired, the improvements have been inspected, and the City
certifies that they meet City standards. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-9-3: CURB, GUTTER, SIDEWALK AND ASPHALT PAVING:
High back curbs, gutters, sidewalks and asphalt paving shall be provided in
front of all commercial and residential lots. High back curb, gutter and paving
shall be required on all industrial property. At the discretion of the Planning
Commission, sidewalks may also be required for industrial property. (Ord. 2024-
01, 1-16-2024)
13-9-4: STORM DRAINAGE:
   A.   Required Systems: Complete drainage systems for the entire development
area shall be designed by a professional engineer, licensed in the state and
qualified to perform such work, and shall be shown graphically. All existing
drainage features which are to be incorporated in the design shall be so
identified. If the final plat is to be presented in sections, a general
drainage plan for the entire area shall be presented with the first section,
and appropriate development stages for the drainage system for each section
indicated. All drainage systems shall be designed for retention of the
eightieth percentile storm precipitation in accordance with the adopted
Standards and Specifications Manual, as well as any other regulations adopted
by the State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ).
   B.   Design: The drainage systems shall be designed with:
      1.   Adequate Drainage: Ensure adequate drainage of all low points.
      2.   Designated Floodplain Regulations: Ensure applications of the
following regulations regarding development in designated floodplains:
         a.   Construction of buildings shall not be permitted in a designated
floodway with a return frequency more often than a one hundred (100) year
storm.
         b.   Building construction may occur in that portion of the designated
floodplain, as designated by FEMA, where the return frequency is between a one
hundred (100) year and a maximum probable storm provided all usable floor space
is constructed above the designated maximum probable flood level.
         c.   Where flow velocities in a floodplain are generally determined to
be under five feet (5') per second and maximum flood depth will not exceed
three feet (3'), such uses as cultivated agriculture, nurseries, parks and
recreation facilities and accessory parking may be permitted.
         d.   Any use of land is prohibited where flooding would create a
public health hazard or problem. This includes shallow wells, noncased deep
wells, sanitary landfills, septic tanks and on lot sewage disposal systems,
water treatment plants, and also sewage disposal systems not completely
protected from inundation.
         e.   Any contemplated floodplain encroachment or channeling shall be
thoroughly analyzed and its effect on stream flow determined before such
encroachment is undertaken. Any construction, dumping and filling operations in
a designated floodway constitute an encroachment and must be approved by the
Army Corps of Engineers, the Floodplain Manager and the City Engineer before
accomplishment.
         f.   No lot one (1) acre or less in area shall include any portion of
a one hundred (100) year floodplain when computing the size of the lot. All
lots containing more than one (1) acre shall contain not less than forty
thousand (40,000) square feet of land which is at an elevation at least two
feet (2') above the elevation of the one hundred (100) year recurrence interval
flood, or, where such data is not available, five feet (5') above the elevation
of the maximum flood of record.
      3.   Drainage Basin: The drainage basin as a whole shall accommodate not
only runoff from the development area but also, where applicable, the system
shall be designed to accommodate the runoff from those areas adjacent to and
"upstream" from the development itself, as well as its effects on lands
downstream. Basins by which the developer proposes to handle stormwater
drainage shall be designed for an event with a ten (10) year return period for
all storm drain pipe, and for an event with a one hundred (100) year return
period for all storm drain detention basins. The calculation must size the
detention basin, size the orifice plate and determine the amount of flow which
can be released (the release rate can be 0.2 cfs/acre).
      4.   Surface Drainage Structures: All proposed surface drainage
structures shall be indicated on the plans.
      5.   Construction Materials And Elevations: All appropriate designs,
details and dimensions needed to clearly explain proposed construction
materials and elevations shall be included in the drainage plans.
      6.   Permits: All necessary permits shall be obtained from applicable
local, state and federal agencies (i.e., state engineer, U.S. army corps of
engineers, state division of health, etc.).
      7.   Low Impact Development (LID):
         a.   All development and redevelopment that warrants compliance with
the Utah General Construction Permit (UGCP) regulation must include an LID
analysis that meets the objective of mirroring the predevelopment hydrology and
meets the objective of retaining on site. Detention basins shall retain the
required twenty four (24) hour storm equivalent, as required under the Utah
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (UPDES) general discharge permit.
         b.   Low impact development (LID) is an approach to land development
that uses various land planning and design practices and technologies to
simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource systems and reduce
infrastructure costs. LID still allows land to be developed, but in a cost
effective manner that helps mitigate potential environmental impacts.
         c.   As part of the City of North Salt Lake permit, the City requires
use of an LID approach, which includes the implementation of structural BMPs,
where practicable, that infiltrate, evapotranspire or harvest and use
stormwater for the site to protect water quality.
         d.   All development or redevelopment that warrants compliance with
the Utah general construction permit (UGCP) regulation must include an LID
analysis that meets the objective of mirroring the predevelopment hydrology and
meets the objective of retaining on site, with no discharge, the 0.6-inch,
twenty four (24) hour rainfall event. Groundwater recharge may be considered to
meet the onsite retainage requirement, where applicable and feasible. If
meeting the retention standard is technically infeasible, a rationale shall be
provided on a case by case basis for the use of an alternative design criteria.
         e.   No LID limits are defined except designs must not negatively
impact surrounding properties. The LID analysis must identify LID options
considered and list the reasons why it will be incorporated or why the
considered LIDs are not practical for the site use or conditions. Submit a
report with stormwater calculations that summarizes the analysis and results.
         f.   Suggested and preferred LIDs are outlined in the City's
"Stormwater Best Management Practices Handbook".
      8.   Postconstruction Stormwater Maintenance Plan And Agreement:
         a.   The purpose of the postconstruction stormwater maintenance plan
and agreement is to control stormwater runoff and reduce pollutants in
stormwater runoff after construction is complete and the developed site is in
operation. This is achieved by accomplishing the following:
            (1)   Controlling erosion.
            (2)   Controlling discharge of sediment into stormwater drainage
facilities or off site.
            (3)   Preventing illicit discharges into on site soils, storm
drainage facilities or off site.
            (4)   Prevention of debris and garbage from entering the stormwater
system.
         b.   A postconstruction stormwater maintenance plan must be prepared
and submitted with the plans for approval for all privately owned or maintained
facilities that warrant compliance with the UGCP regulation. The plan shall be
contained on a plan sheet of its own, rather than being a part of another plan
sheet, and is to contain at least the following:
            (1)   The site plan, including vicinity map, proposed contours,
permanent stormwater features, and landscaping.
            (2)   BMPs to accomplish the purpose of the plan. Examples of
appropriate BMPs may include those addressing operation and maintenance of
storm drainage quality control facilities, operation and maintenance of
stormwater discharge control facilities, maintenance of landscaping, good
housekeeping practices, etc.
            (3)   Showing the following for each BMP specified:
               (A)   Location and extent of specified BMPs, as appropriate.
               (B)   Detailed schedule of execution for each specified BMP, in
terms of starting time, duration, frequency, etc., as appropriate.
               (C)   Any information in addition to or different from that
shown on the BMP fact sheets as necessary to employ the BMPs on the site.
         c.   The owner of development that warrants compliance with the UGCP
regulation must submit a signed stormwater maintenance agreement using the City
of North Salt Lake agreement template. The postconstruction maintenance
agreement needs to be recorded at the Davis County recorder's office. (Ord. 93-
5, 7-6-1993, eff. 7-15-1993; amd. 2012 Code; Ord. 2012-04, 2-7-2012; Ord. 2012-
07, 4-30-2012; Ord. 2014-01, 1-7-2014; Ord. 2016-06, 5-17-2016; Ord. 2016-12,
8-16-2016; Ord. 2019-11, 9-17-2019; Ord. 2022-03, 6-7-2022; Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-
2024)
13-9-5: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES AND SANITARY SEWER:
   A.   Utilities, Sewers, Drains: All underground utilities, sanitary sewers
and storm drains installed in streets or alleys should be constructed prior to
the surfacing of such streets or alleys. Connections for all underground
utilities, water lines, pressure irrigation lines, and sanitary sewers for each
lot should be laid to a point which will eliminate the necessity for disturbing
the street or alley improvements, when service connections thereto are made.
   B.   Wires, Cables: All telephone, electric power, cable television or other
wires or cables shall be placed underground. Equipment appurtenant to the
underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted
terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts may be above ground. The
developer shall make all necessary arrangements with the utilities involved for
the installation of the underground facilities.
   C.   Sanitary Sewage Disposal; General Requirements:
      1.   The developer shall provide, or have provided, a piped sanitary
sewerage system to the boundary line of the development. Every lot in the
development shall be provided a lateral, which shall be extended from the main
line to a minimum of five feet (5') behind the property line. The sewerage
system shall meet the minimum standards and requirements of the City, the South
Davis Sewer District and the regulating health department. The approval of
South Davis Sewer District shall be required prior to the City Engineer signing
the final plat.
      2.   In all, sanitary disposal facilities for sewage shall be provided
for every lot or parcel by a complete community or public sanitary system. All
sewer mains shall be a minimum of eight inches (8") in diameter.
   D.   Test Procedures: Test of sanitary sewer mains, laterals and house
connections shall be conducted in accordance with local and state health
requirements. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-9-6: CULINARY WATER:
   A.   Water In Sufficient Quantity To Be Obligation Of Developer:
      1.   The procurement of water, whether by purchase of water rights, water
shares, exchange or service agreement, shall be the responsibility of the
developer; and the water shall be provided for the use of the development in an
amount sufficient to meet minimum flows of two hundred fifty (250) gallons per
person, per day, plus outside irrigation and minimum static pressures of fifty
(50) pounds per square inch (psi), unless it can be proved to the City Engineer
that a lesser amount is adequate.
      2.   However, in no event shall the quantity of water provided by the
developer be less than that required to meet fire flow standards as established
by the fire department and the City Council, and the City shall be given first
right of refusal to purchase any excess water formerly used on the land.
   B.   Culinary Water System: The culinary water delivery system shall extend
to the boundary line of the development. Every lot shall be provided a lateral,
which shall be extended from the main line to a minimum of five feet (5')
behind the property line. All laterals shall be capable of delivering the flows
and pressures as required. All water mains shall be a minimum of eight inches
(8") in diameter.
   C.   Water mains and fire hydrants connecting to the water system owned by
the City shall be installed as approved by the City. Mains and individual lot
services shall be of sufficient size to furnish an adequate water supply for
each lot or parcel in the subdivision and to provide adequate fire protection
as determined by the Fire Marshal and as required under any applicable law,
rule or regulation.
   D.   Irrigation Systems (Including Drainage Facilities):
      1.   Where an existing irrigation system consisting of open ditches is
located on or adjacent to or within one hundred feet (100') of a proposed
development, complete plans for relocation, piping, covering or other safety
precautions shall be submitted with an application for preliminary approval of
a plat.
      2.   In all developments in which the smallest lot is less than one (1)
acre, all irrigation systems shall be underground.
      3.   All pressure irrigation systems in or within one hundred feet (100')
of a proposed development shall be identified and otherwise color coded as to
pipe and valve color to meet state standards and regulations. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-
16-2024)
13-9-7: FENCING OR PIPING OF HAZARDS:
   A.   Requirements: The developer shall install a six foot (6') non-climbable
chain link fence along all canals, waterways, non-access streets, open
reservoirs or bodies of water, railroad rights of way, property in agricultural
use or zoned for agricultural use and other such features of potentially
hazardous nature which are on, cross or are contiguous to, the property being
subdivided, except on those features which the City Engineer shall determine
would not be a hazard to life, or where the fence itself would create a hazard
to the safety of the public. Fences required by this section shall comply with
construction standards established by the City.
   B.   Irrigation Ditches: All irrigation ditches shall be piped, unless this
requirement is waived by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-9-8: MONUMENTS:
Permanent monuments shall be furnished, accurately established, and set by the
developer at such points as are necessary to definitely establish all lines of
the plat except those defining rear property corners of individual lots which
will be semi-permanent. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-9-9: COMPLETION:
A complete improvement plan "as-built" shall be filed with the City upon
completion of said improvements. The "as-built" plans shall be drawn on
reproducible copies of the original tracings and certified as to accuracy and
completeness by the developer's licensed engineer. An electronic CAD submittal
of "as-builts" shall also be submitted prior to final acceptance of the
essential improvements. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
13-9-10: PAYBACK AGREEMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Scope Of Agreement: A payback agreement entered into between the City
and the developer who installs the improvements or facilities for water, storm
sewer or roads is authorized, where the improvements installed are intended to
extend, expand or improve the City's water system, storm sewers or roads beyond
the improvements required to service or benefit the subdivision or development
proposed by the developer. Such payback agreements shall be for project
improvements and not system improvements as defined in the Utah impact fees
act. The payback agreement is not mandatory, but may be used at the option of
the City Manager, upon approval of the payback agreement by the City Council.
The amount of the payback to the developer shall be determined by the City
Council after receiving a recommendation from the City Engineer after
considering the improvements or facilities required or benefitting developer's
development, and those facilities or improvements that are specifically
oversized to provide for future development of adjacent projects.
   B.   Non-Liability Of City: The City shall, in all cases, be immune and not
liable for any payments to the developer if the payback agreement is determined
to be unenforceable. The payback agreement shall not confer a benefit upon any
third party and shall be in a form approved by the City Council. The
responsibility for payment of the required improvements or facilities shall
rest entirely with the developer. The City shall not be responsible for
collection of amounts from third parties. (Ord. 2024-01, 1-16-2024)
