SAN JUAN COUNTY, UTAH
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2024-04A, passed 8-19-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588 www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE #2022-07
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE BOARD OF SAN JUAN COUNTY
COMMISSIONERS, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the County and for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Utah empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form
as defined in UCA § 17-53-2; and
   WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has
authorized a general compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances
of the Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication
of such ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
County and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and general welfare of the County that this ordinance take effect at an early
date.
   NOW, THEREFORE, THE BOARD OF SAN JUAN COUNTY COMMISSIONERS ORDAINS AS
FOLLOWS:
   Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of San Juan County a Political
Subdivision of the State of Utah”
   Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following Titles:
         a.   Title I: General Provisions
         b.   Title III: Administration
         c.   Title V: Public Works
         d.   Title VII: Traffic Code
         e.   Title IX : General Regulations
         f.   Title XI: Business Regulations
         g.   Title XIII: General Offenses
         h.   Title XV: Land Usage
         i.   Table of Special Ordinances
   Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
   Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Board of San Juan County Commissioners and the
Clerk of San Juan County is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of
such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk. Ordinances will also be
located on the County website available to the public.
   Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places
of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties, and regulations
therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly
signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and
notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of this County and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
   PASSED AND ADOPTED by action of the Board of San Juan County Commissioners
for San Juan County in an open meeting this 6th day of December 2022.
Voting Aye: Willie Grayeyes, Bruce Adams
Voting Nay:
ATTEST:                                        SAN JUAN COUNTY BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS
/s/ Lyman Duncan                            /s/ Willie Grayeyes
Lyman Duncan, Clerk/Auditor                           Willie Grayeyes, Chair
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND APPEALS
      
12.   LAND USE APPEALS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.001   Title of code
   
10.002   Interpretation
   
10.003   Application to future ordinances
   
10.004   Construction of code
   
10.005   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.006   Severability
   
10.007   Reference to other sections
   
10.008   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.009   Errors and omissions
   
10.010   Reasonable time
   
10.011   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.012   Limitation periods
   
10.013   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.014   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.015   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.016   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
 
   
10.999   General penalty
§ 10.001 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the county, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “San Juan County
Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified ordinances” or
“code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.002 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.003 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.004 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto, and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or amendment
thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and effect, as if it
had not been repealed by this code. All rules and regulations adopted under
laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless
repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.
§ 10.005 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and
usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural,
and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOARD. The San Juan County Board of Commissioners.
      CLERK/AUDITOR. The Clerk of San Juan County.
      COUNTY. San Juan County, Utah.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person or the person’s
mark.
      STATE. The State of Utah.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.006 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does
not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid section
or application.
   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code containing a
non-severability provision, each division or part of every section is
severable. If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:
      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with and
so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter or section are severable as provided in division (B) above
does not affect the operation of division (B) above with respect to that
chapter, subchapter or section.
§ 10.007 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.008 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the municipality
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Board
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
§ 10.009 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.010 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided,
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.
      (2)   If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall
be excluded.
§ 10.011 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   (A)   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former
section or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section
or law is not revived unless it so expressly provides.
   (B)   The repeal of any section shall not extinguish or release any penalty,
forfeiture or liability incurred under the section, unless the repealing
section so expressly provides.
   (C)   The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the
purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of
the penalty, forfeiture or liability.
§ 10.012 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall not be affected
by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.013 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.014 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.015 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (UCA §             )
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
   Statutory reference:
Inspection of public records, see UCA §            
§ 10.016 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.999 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this code for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be subject
to the fines, imprisonment or other penalties that apply to a conviction of a
Class B misdemeanor pursuant to UCA § 76-3-301(1)(d) or, if the violation would
constitute a Class C misdemeanor, then the lesser Class C fines pursuant to UCA
§ 76-3-301(1)(e), imprisonment or other penalties. If the violation would
constitute an infraction, then the person shall be subject to the lesser fines
or other penalties for such an infraction pursuant to UCA § 76-3-205.
      (2)   Any firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the fines, imprisonment or other penalties which apply to a
conviction of a Class B misdemeanor pursuant to UCA § 76-3-302(3) or, if the
violation would constitute a Class C misdemeanor, then the lesser Class C fines
pursuant to UCA § 76-3-302(4) or other penalties. If the violation would
constitute an infraction, then the firm or corporation shall be subject to the
fines or other penalties for such an infraction pursuant to UCA § 76-3-302(4).
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   If a penalty for a violation of an ordinance includes any possibility
of imprisonment, the county shall, under UCA § 78B-22-301, provide for indigent
defense services, as that term is defined in UCA § 78B-22-102.
CHAPTER 11: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND APPEALS
Section
   
11.001   Purpose and intent
   
11.002   Scope
   
11.003   Existing law continued
   
11.004   Definitions
   
11.005   Request for administrative review
   
11.006   Notification of administrative hearing
   
11.007   Administrative Law Judge; appointment, qualifications and powers
   
11.008   Process and procedures for administrative review
   
11.009   Failure to attend administrative hearing
   
11.010   Administrative order; failure to comply
   
11.011   County employee appeal procedures
   
11.012   Land use appeal
§ 11.001 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The Board of County Commissioners (Board) finds that the enforcement
of this code, the adopted rules and regulations and applicable state statutes
altogether referred to herein as “code”) is an essential public function. Code
enforcement is vital to the protection of the public’s health, safety and
quality of life. The Board therefore recognizes that enforcement starts with
the drafting of precise regulations that can be effectively applied in
administrative code enforcement hearings, judicial proceedings, land use
decisions, administrative processes affording a hearing and personnel
decisions. The Board finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that
uses a combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain
compliance with these regulations. Failure to comply with an administrative
code enforcement order may require the county to file a criminal or civil
action to gain compliance. For specified county action, or a decision made by a
county official, as more particularly defined and designated in published
county ordinances or policies, in which an adverse administrative decision by
the county results in detriment to a person, it is the purpose and intent of
the county to afford that person due process of law by way of an administrative
hearing. Due process shall require proper notice of the nature of the
administrative decision and the opportunity to be heard, a hearing before a
fair and impartial Administrative Law Judge, the right to present evidence, the
right to cross-examination, the right to be represented by an attorney or other
advocate, the right to receive an adequate explanation of the reasons
justifying any resulting administrative order.
   (B)   The Board of County Commissioners further finds that an effective
county administrative review process gives property owners, citizens,
businesses, and the county an opportunity for an independent review of
administrative decisions. An effective administrative review allows the appeal
authority to revisit and establish the relevant facts and information, and
ensure the proper legal standards are applied. An effective administrative
appeal process provides an opportunity for the parties to mediate settlement
alternatives, as appropriate. The county administrative review process
safeguards the rights of businesses, property owners, citizens, and
associations; identifies and addresses errors in administrative decisions; and
reduces the potential for county legal costs and financial liability associated
with protracted litigation.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 11.002 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter may be applied to all violations of
this code, the adopted rules and regulations and applicable state statutes. It
has been designed as an additional remedy for the county’s use in achieving
compliance with county ordinances and in achieving compliance with the rules
and regulations.
   (B)   The appeal remedies contained in this chapter apply to all county
administrative decisions or actions, whether such decisions or actions are
based on the county code, on adopted rules and regulations, or applicable state
statutes, unless the county code provision relevant to the administrative
decision or action provides for an alternative appeal remedy.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 11.003 EXISTING LAW CONTINUED.
   The provisions of this chapter do not invalidate any other provisions of
this code, other county ordinances, but shall be read in conjunction therewith
as an additional remedy. By establishing performance standards and obligations
to act, it is the intent of the Board that county employees and officers, as
well as employees and officers of county districts, exercise discretionary
authority in pursuit of an essential governmental function and that any such
standards or obligations shall not be construed as creating a ministerial duty
for purposes of tort liability.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020)
§ 11.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION. A citation issued to a responsible person that
gives notice of a violation and the civil fee for such violation.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING. A hearing held pursuant to the procedures
established by this chapter and at the request of a person charged with a
violations or appealing a decision made by the Board, county officers, as well
as employees and officers of county districts.
   ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER. An order issued by an Administrative Law Judge. The
order may include an order to enter upon private property to abate a violation
of Ch. 152 of this code of ordinances, to pay civil fees and administrative
costs, to reverse or modify decisions of the county as provided in published
county ordinances or policies, or take any other action as authorized or
required by this chapter and applicable state codes.
   ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS. A process decision of which a hearing is appropriate
for items of administrative decisions such as property nuisance violation,
abatement actions, landfill ordinance violations, right-of-way encroachment
permit denials, authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) and Fire Chief decisions
based on Fire Code violations, or challenges to county bids and contract
awards.
   ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE. A person appointed or designated to preside over
administrative hearings.
   APPELLANT. The individual requesting a hearing to appeal a decision made.
   BOARD. The Board of San Juan County Commissioners representing the
legislative and executive body of the county.
   COUNTY. San Juan County, Utah.
   COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR. The Chief Administrative Officer of the county.
   COUNTY ACTION. A notice of violation and summons, an administrative
citation, an itemized statement of costs, a notice of emergency abatement or
other notice of any other adverse county decision for which the right to an
administrative hearing is specifically provided by ordinance.
   COUNTY OFFICIAL. An elected official, commissioners, county chief
administrative officer, county department director or the county’s Building
Inspector.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. Any person authorized to enforce violations of any
applicable laws or the adopted rules and regulations including, but not limited
to, code enforcement officers, fire marshals, fire wardens, sheriff deputies,
inspectors, building inspectors, the Building Official, health inspectors,
health officials or any other county employee charged with issuing violations
of county or state statutes.
   ITEMIZED STATEMENT OF COSTS. A written notice to a responsible person,
itemizing the county’s actual costs and administrative cost of abating a code
violation, ordering payment of those costs and advising the responsible person
of the right to contest the reasonableness of the costs at an administrative
hearing.
   NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE. A document issued by the county representing that a
property complies with the requirements outlined in the notice of violation,
and that all outstanding civil fees and costs have been satisfied (either by
being paid in full, or a subsequent administrative or judicial decision has
resolved the outstanding debt).
   NOTICE OF EMERGENCY ABATEMENT. A written notice that informs a responsible
person of emergency abatement actions taken by the county and provides and
itemized statement of costs for those actions.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND SUMMONS. A written notice that informs a responsible
person of code violations, orders certain steps to correct the violations,
demands appearance at an administrative hearing and sets forth a date and time
for the hearing.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust,
organization or the manager, lessee, agent, sergeant, officer or employee of
any of them or any other entity that is recognized by law as the subject of
rights or duties. For purposes of this chapter, PERSON also indicates a person
whose interest is adverse to the county at an administrative hearing.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The recorded owner of real property as shown on the records
of the County Recorder or Assessor.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020)
§ 11.005 REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   (A)   Where the right to an administrative appeal has been established by
the county, a person having that right may request an administrative review, if
the request is filed within ten business days from the date of service of one
of the following:
      (1)   Itemized statement of costs, as defined in §
11.004 of this chapter, has been issued in a notice of violation of a code
violation to a responsible person;
      (2)   Administrative citation, as defined in §
11.004 of this chapter, has been issued in a notice of violation of a code
violation to a responsible person;
      (3)   A decision made by a land use appellant, a board or officer of the
county, or an adversely affected party may after approval of a written decision
issued by the county, appeal that decision to the Administrative Law Judge by
alleging that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Planning Commission, Board, County Administrator or
Director of Planning in the administration or interpretation of the land use
ordinance;
      (4)   An administrative process decision, as defined in §
11.004 of this chapter;
      (5)   Notice of emergency abatement, as defined in §
11.004 of this chapter, has been issued in a notice of violation of a code
violation to a responsible person; or
      (6)   Notice of any other county action where the right to an
administrative review is provided under any published county ordinance or
policy.
   (B)   The request for an administrativereview shall be made in writing
addressed to the office of the County Clerk/Auditor or to the Chief
Administrative Officer.
   (C)   The request shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   It shall be in writing;
      (2)   It shall contain a legible, plain statement of the reason or
reasons that the person requesting the review is entitled to relief from the
county action;
      (3)   It shall be accompanied by a copy of the itemized statement of
costs, administrative citation, administrative process decision, notice of
emergency abatement or other notice of county action for which the review is
requested;
      (4)   It shall contain the name of the person requesting the review and
the address to which all notices and orders shall be mailed; and
      (5)   It shall be dated and signed by the person requesting the review.
   (D)   The county may initiate an administrative review by service and filing
of a notice of violation and summons. Service of the notice of violation and
summons shall be served by any of the following methods, unless different
provisions are otherwise specifically stated to apply:
      (1)   Regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the
property owner or other responsible person;
      (2)   Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. If
not inhabited, the notice must also be mailed as in division (D)(1) above;
      (3)   Personal service; or
      (4)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation once a week for a
period of two weeks.
   (E)   Within 20 calendar days after receiving a request for an
administrative review or the service of a notice of violation and summons, the
Administrative Law Judge shall schedule a date, time and place for an
administrative hearing, if required. Failure to hold the hearing within 20 days
of the request shall not be a basis for reversal of the county action. No
adverse action, except an emergency abatement, shall be taken pending the
administrative review.
   (F)   Failure to request an administrative review within ten business days
from the date of service of any of the notices in division (E) above shall
constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative review and the right to
an appeal.
   (G)   At the discretion of the Chief Administrative Officer, an appeal of a
denial by the county, a county department, or county official of a Government
Records Access and Management Act (GRAMA) request may be referred to the
Administrative Law Judge.
   (H)   Any person adversely affected by a final action of the San Juan County
Recorder when applying the statewide standards for county recorders may appeal
the action to the Administrative Law Judge under this chapter. The party
appealing the final action shall set forth any errors (acts or omissions) the
County Recorder made in applying the rules adopted by the County Recorder
Standards Board established under UCA § 63C-29-201. Appeals shall be filed with
the County Clerk within ten business days of the effective date of the County
Recorder’s final action.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 11.006 NOTIFICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (A)   Notice of the date, time and place of the administrative hearing shall
be served upon the person requesting the hearing no later than five county
business days in advance of the hearing. Failure to provide timely notice of
the hearing shall result in the continuation of the hearing. No adverse action
will be taken or imposed by the county, with the exception of emergency
abatement action, pending the hearing.
   (B)   Except in the case of an notice of violation and summons, the notice
shall be served by mailing it to the address designated in the request for
hearing and shall be deemed to have been served on the third business day
following the date of mailing. Service of the notice of violation and summons
shall be served by any of the following methods, unless different provisions
are otherwise specifically stated to apply:
      (1)   Regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the
property owner or other responsible person;
      (2)   Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. If
not inhabited, the notice must also be mailed as in division (B)(1) above;
      (3)   Personal service; or
      (4)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation once a week for a
period of two weeks.
   (C)   Upon service of the notice or notice of violation and summons, the
person receiving the service shall be required to attend the administrative
hearing at the appointed date and time.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020)
§ 11.007 ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE; APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS AND POWERS.
   (A)   (1)   The County Chief Administrative Officer, with the consent of the
County Board, shall appoint an Administrative Law Judge to conduct
administrative reviews under this chapter.
      (2)   The Administrative Law Judge shall serve for a term of three years
and, during that three-year term, shall be subject to removal by the County
Administrator only for cause.
      (3)   Cause for removal may be for any conduct unbecoming a hearing
officer, dereliction of assigned duties or the existence of a systemic bias or
conflict of interest that might affect impartiality of decisions.
      (4)   A person appointed to serve as an Administrative Law Judge shall
either be law trained or have significant experience with the requirements and
operation of administrative hearing processes. The person shall be free from
any systemic bias or conflict of interest that might affect impartiality of
decisions.
      (5)   An Administrative Law Judge, in individual administrative reviews,
is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest or any other
reason for which a judge may be disqualified in a court of law. The
Administrative Law Judge shall not adjudicate/review a matter if he or she is
biased or prejudicated with respect to any issue, person, or party; or has a
personal interest which impairs his or her ability to fairly address the facts
and law in a matter. A motion to disqualify under this rule may be submitted to
the Administrative Law Judge by any party to an administrative appeal. The
Administrative Law Judge shall consider the motion and shall decide whether to
proceed with the adjudication/review or withdraw. The Administrative Law Judge
may ask the parties in the matter on appeal to submit briefs, at the discretion
of the Administrative Law Judge.
         (a)   BIAS means a subjective inclination, bent, or preconceived
opinion based on extrajudicial factors (factors other than the law or evidence
applicable in a matter under consideration), that impairs a judge from
exercising fair and independent judgment regarding an issue, person, or party.
BIAS does not refer to the possession of a general judicial philosophy.
         (b)   PREJUDICE means a fixed mental attitude or position of a judge,
based on extrajudicial factors (factors other than the law or evidence
applicable in a matter under consideration), that impairs the judge from
dealing fairly and impartially with an issue, person, or party. The presence or
absence of PREJUDICE can be determined by the totality of the circumstances.
         (c)   PERSONAL INTEREST includes family, social, political, financial,
or other interests or relationships that influence a judge’s judicial conduct
or judgment.
   (B)   (1)   An Administrative Law Judge shall have authority to conduct an
administrative review for violations of
Ch. 152 of this code of ordinances and such other matters as specifically
designated by published ordinance or policy.
      (2)   An Administrative Law Judge is a quasi-judicial officer, which
includes the authority to investigate and adjudicate the matter on appeal. In
all cases, the review of the matter on appeal shall be de novo. The
Administrative Law Judge may mediate a resolution of the matter among the
parties towards a settlement of the appeal.
      (3)   An Administrative Law Judge may continue a review for good cause
shown by one of the parties or if the Administrative Law Judge independently
determines that due process has not been adequately afforded to a party.
      (4)   At the request of any party to an administrative hearing, an
Administrative Law Judge may sign subpoenas for witnesses, documents and other
evidence where the attendance of the witness or the admission of evidence is
deemed helpful by the Administrative Law Judge to decide issues at the hearing.
All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees, shall be
borne by the party requesting the subpoena.
      (5)   The Administrative Law Judge may modify civil fees or fines upon a
finding of good cause. The Administrative Law Judge may reduce the fines to
what is just and equitable under the circumstances; however, in connection with
an appeal regarding an itemized statement of costs, the Administrative Law
Judge may not order the responsible person to pay less than actual costs
incurred by the county and shall require the responsible person to pay the
administrative costs as established in the consolidated fee schedule.
      (6)   The Administrative Law Judge shall have the authority to affirm or
reverse, in whole or in part; remand; or modify the administrative decision of
a county official.
      (7)   An Administrative Law Judge has continuing jurisdiction over the
subject matter of an administrative review for the purposes of: granting a
continuance; ordering compliance by issuing an administrative order; ensuring
compliance of that order; authorizing the county to enter upon private property
to abate a violation; modifying an administrative order, assessing costs of
abatement, assessing civil fines; or, where extraordinary circumstances exist,
granting a new review.
      (8)   An Administrative Law Judge may require a responsible person to
post a performance bond to ensure compliance with an administrative order, but
only if agreed to by the enforcement official handling the matter for the
county.
      (9)   An Administrative Law Judge shall not make any order that would
require or allow a person to violate state law or county ordinance.
      (10)   An Administrative Law Judge shall not adjudicate or review an
appeal of a legislative decision.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 11.008 PROCESS AND PROCEDURES FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   (A)   Prior to a hearing on the matter on appeal, the Administrative Law
Judge may host pre-hearing conferences for purposes including: addressing
standing or other jurisdictional matter; ensuring that the county action was
administrative and not legislative; ensuring that the action appealed is final;
gathering and reviewing the administrative record upon which the county action
was based; requesting additional records or affidavits from the parties
relevant to matters raised on appeal or by the Administrative Law Judge’s
review of the administrative record; addressing procedural motions of the
parties; developing the legal framework/standards relevant to the matter on
appeal; preparing and publishing a hearing management order; or other
appropriate pre-hearing requirements.
   (B)   For any pre-hearing conference, except for a settlement conference,
the Administrative Law Judge shall publish a memorandum which summarizes the
issues discussed during the pre-hearing conference, and, if appropriate,
publish orders for the parties relating to the matter on appeal. At any time
after an appeal is filed, the Administrative Law Judge may order a party to
produce documents or other evidence under the party’s control if necessary to
decide the matter pending before the Administrative Law Judge. At any time, the
Administrative Law Judge may take judicial notice of public or generally
available facts or information, provided that all parties are informed of the
facts or information which the Administrative Law Judge intends to judicially
notice and each party shall be given a reasonable opportunity to refute the
facts or information which the Administrative Law Judge intends to judicially
notice.
   (C)   Prior to a hearing, the Administrative Law Judge shall include the
parties in the preparation and publication of a hearing management order. That
order may include, as appropriate: submission of documents and production of
witness lists prior to the hearing; the types of evidence to be considered;
swearing of witnesses; under which circumstances, if any, the hearing will be
closed to the public; recording of the hearing; representation of the parties;
sequencing of the presentation of evidence and making arguments; consequences
of a person or party failing to appear at the hearing; issuance of subpoenas,
as appropriate; parties’ opportunity to confront and cross examine witnesses;
the parties’ burdens of proof (including affirmative defenses); exclusion of
privileged, irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence; the role of
the Administrative Law Judge in questioning witnesses; submission of rebuttal
evidence; requests for continuance and how such requests will be handled; and
motions and how motions will be handled.
   (D)   Administrative hearings are intended to be informal in nature. The
state rules of civil procedure and evidence shall be guidelines for the conduct
of the hearing but shall not be binding. Formal rules of evidence and civil
procedure, including discovery shall not apply; however, upon request made in
writing reasonably in advance of a hearing, the county shall provide to a
person requesting a hearing the opportunity to review documents, photographs or
other tangible evidence it intends to present at the hearing and shall provide
a list of the witnesses it intends to call at the hearing. Failure to request
discovery shall not be a basis for a continuance. Complainant information shall
not be disclosed or released unless the complainant is a witness at the
hearing. The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow
duly adopted policies and procedures.
   (E)   The county shall bear the initial burden of proof to establish the
existence of a violation of published county ordinances or policies other than
those in a land use appeal.
   (F)   In a land use appeal, the initial burden of proof shall be borne by
the appellant.
   (G)   After a party’s initial burden of proof has been met, the
Administrative Law Judge shall inform the parties of each party’s burdens of
proof; based on the matter on appeal, relevant state statutes, and relevant
state case law.
   (H)   Unless required otherwise by state statute or state case law, such
burden of proof shall be established by a preponderance of the evidence.
   (I)   Each party shall have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and
present evidence in support of the case. A written declaration signed under
penalty of perjury may be accepted in lieu of a personal appearance. Testimony
may be given by telephone or other electronic means.
   (J)   Administrative hearings shall be held at the county administrative
officesand shall be recorded; however, at the discretion of the Administrative
Law Judge, administrative hearings may be held at the location of a violation
as long as adequate provision is made to preserve a verbatim record of the
hearing.
   (K)   The person shall have the right to be represented by an attorney or
other advocate. If an attorney will be representing a responsible person at a
hearing, notice of the attorney’s name, address and telephone number shall be
given to the County Attorney at least one day prior to the hearing. If such
notice is not given, the hearing may be continued at the county’s request.
   (L)   Administrative hearings may be held on Mondays through Fridays,
excluding county holidays, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 11.009 FAILURE TO ATTEND ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   A person who fails to appear at an administrative hearing shall be deemed to
have waived all rights in connection with the hearing, including the right to
appeal; provided that, proper notice of the hearing has been given as provided
in published county ordinances, policies and procedures, an administrative
order may be entered against a person based upon the failure to appear.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020)
§ 11.010 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   (1)   A person and the county may enter into a stipulated agreement,
which shall be signed by both parties. Such agreement shall be reviewed by the
Administrative Law Judge and entered as an administrative order. Entry of such
agreement shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing
and the right to appeal.
      (2)   Within ten business days after all evidence and testimony are
presented, the Administrative Law Judge shall issue a written administrative
order that affirms or reverses, in whole or in part; remands; or modifies the
notice of violation and summons, itemized statement of costs, administrative
citation, administrative process decision, notice of emergency abatement or
other county action.
      (3)   If affirmed, the administrative order shall specify the evidence
supporting the Administrative Law Judge’s decision and the action required to
satisfy the order.
      (4)   The Administrative Law Judge may assign the party who prevails at
the administrative hearing to prepare findings of fact and conclusions of law.
      (5)   An Administrative Law Judge may issue an administrative order that
requires a person to cease from violating published county ordinance, policy or
procedure, and to take any necessary corrective action.
      (6)   An Administrative Law Judge may order the county to enter the
property and abate all violations, including the removal of animals in
violation of applicable published county requirements. Whenever an order of
abatement is entered, the Administrative Law Judge shall order the responsible
person to pay to the county the actual costs of the abatement and the
administrative costs of the county to perform the abatement.
      (7)   An Administrative Law Judge may revoke a kennel permit, an animal
license, the right to possess animals as provided in published county ordinance
or policy.
      (8)   As part of an administrative order, an Administrative Law Judge may
establish specific deadlines for the payment of fees and costs, and condition
the total or partial assessment of civil fees on the responsible person’s
ability to take necessary corrective actions by specified deadlines. Such fees
shall continue to accrue until the responsible person complies with the
Administrative Law Judge’s decision and corrects the violation.
      (9)   An administrative order imposing civil fines for failure to abate a
violation of the county code by a stated deadline, shall continue to accrue
additional fines until the responsible person complies with the Administrative
Law Judge’s decision and corrects the violation, but shall not exceed $200 for
each day the violation remains uncorrected and not to exceed a total of $3,000
for a violation.
      (10)   An Administrative Law Judge may schedule subsequent review
hearings as may be necessary or as requested by the county to ensure compliance
with an administrative order.
      (11)   An Administrative Law Judge may order a person to post a
performance bond to ensure
compliance with an administrative order, but only if agreed to by the
enforcement official handling the matter for the county.
      (12)   An Administrative Law Judge may revoke or suspend a beer license,
a building permit or permits for any alteration, repair or construction
pertaining to any existing or new structures or signs on the property, or any
permits pertaining to the use and development of real property or a structure
where a violation is located as provided in published county ordinance or
policy.
      (13)   An administrative order shall become final on the date of signing
by an Administrative Law Judge.
      (14)   An administrative order shall be served on all parties.
      (15)   An Administrative Law Judge shall assemble and prepare for
certification an administrative record which supports the decision on appeal.
The administrative record is a compilation and organization of all evidence
presented and relied upon in connection with the final administrative decision.
Once assembled, the Administrative Law Judge shall submit the administrative
record to the County Attorney for certification and filing.
      (16)   An Administrative Law Judge may take any action reasonably
necessary to obtain compliance with the applicable county ordinances.
      (17)   An Administrative Law Judge may assess civil fines and costs of
abatement and administrative costs to a responsible person.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the
terms and deadlines set forth in a final administrative order.
      (2)   A violation of this section shall be a Class B misdemeanor.
      (3)   Upon failure of a person to comply with the terms and deadline set
forth in the administrative order, the county may use all appropriate legal
means to recover the civil penalties and administrative costs to obtain
compliance.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 11.011 COUNTY EMPLOYEE APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Employee appeals. Employee appeals for the county shall consist of the
county’s Administrative Law Judge appointed or designated pursuant to the
procedures set forth in this code.
   (B)   Non-appealable actions.
      (1)   No probationary, temporary/seasonal or part-time employee, or
appointed employee, has the right to appeal any disciplinary action or other
employment action.
      (2)   No employees have appeal rights for verbal warnings, written
reprimands or involuntary reassignment for disciplinary purposes which do not
affect the employee’s rate of pay.
      (3)   Unless specifically provided by this section, no employee has the
right to appeal a termination, transfer or pay reduction which is made for a
non-disciplinary reason, such as a reduction in force, furlough, reorganization
or a broadly applicable reduction in salary which affects multiple employees in
a department or in the county.
      (4)   No employees have appeal rights for suspension from employment
without pay for two days or less.
      (5)   No appeal is allowed from discharge or involuntary reassignment due
to loss of state or federal licensure or certifications which are required for
the employee’s position.
   (C)   Appealable rights for merit employees. Merit employees have the right
to appeal any disciplinary action resulting in:
      (1)   Dismissal, termination or release from employment;
      (2)   Demotion;
      (3)   Suspension from employment without pay for more than two days; or
      (4)   Involuntary transfer for a disciplinary purpose to a position with
less remuneration.
   (D)   Merit employees have the right to appeal a dismissal, termination, or
release from employment, or reassignment to a position with less remuneration,
based on the employee’s fitness for duty.
   (E)   Appealing to the Administrative Law Judge.
      (1)   Employees desiring to file an appeal must submit their written
notice of appeal, describing in detail the grounds for the appeal with any
supporting documentation, to the County Clerk or with the Chief Administrative
Officer within ten business days following the employment action giving rise to
the appeal, or an employee will be deemed to have waived all appeal rights.
      (2)   A copy of the appeal shall also be filed with the employee’s
supervisor and the Human Resource Department. Upon receipt of the employee’s
appeal, a date and time shall be set for the Administrative Law Judge to
convene a hearing to hear the appeal. All appeal documents will then be
forwarded to the Administrative Law Judge.
      (3)   Hearings and decision of the Administrative Law Judge shall be held
and rendered as soon as reasonably practicable, with no unreasonable delay. The
Administrative Law Judge may allow an enlargement of time for hearing
preparations, if good cause is shown.
      (4)   All parties to the appeal shall be entitled to appear at the appeal
hearing in person and to be represented by counsel, to have the hearing open to
the public, to confront witnesses whose testimony is to be considered and to
examine the evidence to be considered by the Administrative Law Judge.
      (5)   The Administrative Law Judge may request the appointment of
independent medical or other technical experts, in the Administrative Law
Judge’s sole discretion, if the Administrative Law Judge believes that the
expert’s opinion is necessary for the resolution of the case.
      (6)   (a)   All documentation to be presented at the appeal hearing shall
be made available by each party upon written request of the party seeking the
documentation at least five business days prior to the scheduled hearing date;
all requests for documents shall be considered to be ongoing up to and through
the time of the hearing.
         (b)   Any party to any appeal may, no later than five business days
prior to the date of the appeal hearing or cutoff date for a decision, submit
to the Administrative Law Judge a written brief, no more than ten pages in
length, with supporting documentation, which articulates that party’s arguments
and position regarding the subject matter of the appeal.
         (c)   Copies of all written briefs shall be concurrently forwarded to
the opposing party, and a reply brief may be submitted in response no later
than two business days prior to the hearing date or cutoff date for a decision.
      (7)   The Utah Rules of Evidence, Utah Rules of Civil Procedure and Utah
Administrative Code do not apply to administrative hearings. Hearings are
conducted to be fundamentally fair to the parties and to provide due process.
The Administrative Law Judge may entertain objections in order to maintain
decorum and to address issues of relevance.
      (8)   In the Administrative Law Judge’s discretion, parties may convene
for a pre-hearing conference with the Administrative Law Judge to discuss
relevant issues, such as anticipated witnesses or the scope of the appeal.
   (F)   Record of the hearing. An audio recording of the hearing shall be kept
and all exhibits received in evidence at the hearing shall be maintained.
   (G)   Appeals from disciplinary actions. The proceedings for appeals from
disciplinary actions are bifurcated.
      (1)   During the first phase of the proceedings, the Administrative Law
Judge considers evidence of the charges upon which the discipline was based.
The county bears the burden of proving the charges by a preponderance of the
evidence.
         (a)   If the Administrative Law Judge sustains all of the charges,
then it shall proceed to the second phase of the hearing, described herein.
         (b)   If the Administrative Law Judge sustains none of the charges,
then the Administrative Law Judge shall overturn the disciplinary action.
         (c)   If the Administrative Law Judge sustains some, but not all, of
the charges, then the Administrative Law Judge shall refer the decision back to
the department director for reconsideration of the disciplinary decision, in
light of the Administrative Law Judge’s findings. A referral back to the
department director is an interlocutory order, and is not subject to appeal.
The department director may decrease the severity of, modify, withdraw or
retain the disciplinary decision previously made. If the department director
fails to respond to the Administrative Law Judge within three business days
from the Administrative Law Judge’s referral, then the Administrative Law Judge
shall proceed as if the department director has not changed the disciplinary
decision.
      (2)   During the second phase of the proceedings, the Administrative Law
Judge considers whether the misconduct warranted the sanction imposed by the
department director. The Administrative Law Judge gives broad deference to the
department director’s choice of punishment, and reviews that decision for an
abuse of discretion. The disciplined employee bears the burden of proving an
abuse of discretion by clear and convincing evidence:
         (a)   A department director abuses his or her discretion if the
sanction is arbitrary, capricious or illegal;
         (b)   When considering whether the sanction is arbitrary, capricious
or illegal, the Administrative Law Judge may consider whether the discipline
imposed is:
            1.   Disproportionate in light of the circumstances; or
            2.   Inconsistent with previous sanctions imposed by the department
upon similarly situated employees pursuant to the department’s or county’s own
policies.
         (c)   If the Administrative Law Judge finds that the disciplined
employee has carried the burden of establishing an abuse of discretion, then
the Administrative Law Judge shall overturn the disciplinary action.
      (3)   The disciplined employee may waive challenge to either phase of the
proceedings at any time. In the absence of a clear, written waiver, the
proceedings will proceed through both phases.
   (H)   Appeals from discharge or reassignment due to fitness for duty
determinations.
      (1)   In cases of discharge or transfer to a position of less
remuneration due to a determination that the individual is unfit to report to
duty due to a medical condition, the employee has the right to appeal that
decision.
      (2)   In cases of fitness for duty appeals, the county bears the burden
of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the circumstances warrant
the action taken.
   (I)   Rendering decision.
      (1)   The Administrative Law Judge shall render a final decision in
writing and may:
         (a)   Sustain the county’s action; or
         (b)   Overturn the county’s action. If the county’s action is
overturned, the Human Resource Department or designee shall remove the record
of the overturned action from the employee’s personnel file and retain it
separately, which record shall be designated as private pursuant to state law.
      (2)   The Administrative Law Judge shall reinstate any loss of pay
associated with an overturned action, but in the case where an employee has
taken employment elsewhere, the amount shall be reduced by any amounts the
employee earned from other employment during this period of time.
      (3)   If a department director reduces the severity of the disciplinary
decision, then the Administrative Law Judge shall reinstate any loss of pay
which would not have been incurred, if the reduced discipline had been
initially imposed.
   (J)   Transmission. The Administrative Law Judge shall transmit a copy of
its decision to the employee, the department director, the Human Resource
Department and the County Recorder for certification. The County Clerk shall
certify the decision by placing the county’s official seal on the document and
the date of certification.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 11.012 LAND USE APPEAL.
   (A)   All appeals of a county land use decision shall be filed and heard by
the Administrative Law Judge appointed, authorized, and governed by this
chapter.
   (B)   Only an applicant of a land use decision or “adversely affected party”
as defined under the County Land Use Development and Management Act (CLUDMA)
may appeal a final land use decision to the Administrative Law Judge.
   (C)   Any appeal of a land use decision must be made within ten business
days of the decision or of constructive notice thereof, whichever is later.
      (1)   An applicant or adversely affected party must appeal by filing a
“notice of appeal” with the County Clerk or Chief Administrative Officer. The
notice of appeal will include the following: a reason or reasons that the
appellant is entitled to relief from the land use decision; a copy of the land
use decision; and the name of the appellant with an address to which all
notices or orders shall be sent.
      (2)   A failure to appeal as required by this chapter may result in
summary dismissal by the Administrative Law Judge.
   (D)   Whenever an appeal is brought by a party other than the applicant or
property owner under this chapter:
      (1)   The applicant and/or property owner of the property in dispute
shall be notified of the appeal within 14 business days after the notice of
appeal is received by the Administrative Law Judge. A copy of the notice of
appeal will be provided with the notification.
      (2)   In addition to the appellant, the applicant or property owner has a
right to be approved by the Administrative Law Judge as an intervening party in
the appeal.
   (E)   The Administrative Law Judge is to review the land use decision. The
county is to provide the documentation relied upon in making its decision, and,
if applicable, an official recording if available. Both the appellant and the
county may supplement with additional information that may not have been
provided by or to the county.
   (F)   The scope of the appeal shall be the land use decision being appealed,
the grounds for relief raised by the appellant, issues the Administrative Law
Judge determines may be raised by a party in court after the final
administrative decision, and any requirements of county ordinances, policies,
and procedure.
   (G)   The review of factual matters by the Administrative Law Judge shall be
de novo. The Administrative Law Judge may request that the parties narrow the
factual matters or issues which are subject to de novo review.
   (H)   The Administrative Law Judge shall: presume that the land use decision
of a land use authority is valid; and uphold the land use decision unless the
land use decision is: (A) arbitrary and capricious; or (B) illegal.
      (1)   For purposes of appeal: A land use decision is arbitrary and
capricious if the land use decision is not supported by substantial evidence in
the record.
      (2)   A land use decision is illegal if the land use decision is:
         (a)   Based on an incorrect interpretation of the land use regulation;
or
         (b)   Contrary to law.
   (I)   If multiple land use decisions were made and timely appealed regarding
the same subject property and are subject to inseparable interests by nature of
the same project, property at issues, or the alleged injury to be caused, those
shall be consolidated into a single appeal before the Administrative Law Judge.
   (J)   The Administrative Law Judge may reverse the land use decision, affirm
the land use decision, affirm in part and/or reverse in part, modify a
condition or requirement, attach conditions or requirements, remand the land
use decision to the land use authority, and make any such order as ought to be
made consistent with its decision.
   (K)   On a question of law pertaining to the interpretation of CLUDMA, the
Administrative Law Judge may request an opinion from the County Attorney’s
Office prior to issuing any final decision on an appeal. The legal opinion will
be provided in writing to all parties and become part of the appeal record. The
legal opinion is not the final decision and is not binding on the
Administrative Law Judge. The Administrative Law Judge must issue a written
final decision.
   (L)   The Administrative Law Judge may grant variances to county land use or
zoning ordinances.
(Ord. 2020-11, passed 9-2-2020; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
CHAPTER 12: LAND USE APPEALS
Section
   
12.001   Purpose
   
12.002   Definitions
   
12.003   Land use appeal authority
   
12.004   Parties
   
12.005   Initiating an appeal
   
12.006   Appeal process
   
12.007   Decision
§ 12.001 PURPOSE.
   This chapter addresses administrative appeals of land use decisions
affecting property within the jurisdiction of San Juan County, Utah. This
chapter repeals, replaces, and supersedes all other and previous ordinances
enacted by the county regarding the administrative appeal of land use
decisions. If there is a discrepancy between a provision of this chapter and
that of another ordinance regarding the administrative appeal of a land use
ordinance, this chapter controls.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 12.002 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions used in the County Land Use, Development, and Management Act
(CLUDMA), UCA §§ 17-27a-101 et seq., are hereby adopted and incorporated into
this chapter addressing land use appeals.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 12.003 LAND USE APPEAL AUTHORITY.
   The Land Use Appeal Authority shall hear and decide appeals of the county’s
land use decisions made by its land use authorities, proceeding according to
the requirements of state law and this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 12.004 PARTIES.
   Only the land use applicant, the county, or an adversely affected party may
appeal a land use decision to the Appeal Authority.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 12.005 INITIATING AN APPEAL.
   (A)   Time. A land use appeal must be filed within ten business days of
receiving actual or constructive notice of the land use decision being
appealed.
   (B)   Form. The land use appeal shall be filed either using the county’s
form or a document clearly and prominently labeled a “notice of appeal.”
   (C)   Content. The notice of appeal shall clearly set forth:
      (1)   The appellant’s identity and contact information (including an
email address);
      (2)   The land use decision being appealed, including the date thereof
and, if applicable, the date the appellant discovered the decision;
      (3)   If available, a copy of the land use decision being appealed;
      (4)   If the land use applicant is not the appellant, the identity and
contact information for the applicant;
      (5)   The basis for the appellant’s standing to bring the appeal; and
      (6)   Every theory of relief the appellant intends to raise on appeal.
The appellant must raise every theory of relief it can raise in district court.
   (D)   Fee. Contemporaneous with the notice of appeal, the appellant shall
tender to the county the relevant fee per the county’s schedule of fees.
   (E)   Filing. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Chief
Administrative Officer. It may be filed by: (1) email (preferred), (2) hand-
delivery; or (3) by first class U.S. Mail. The date of delivery shall be
considered the date of filing using the first two methods, the postmarked date
if using the third method. If delivery is by email, the subject line must
clearly identify the message as a “notice of appeal.”
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 12.006 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Intake. Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the Chief Administrative
Officer shall inspect it for compliance with the foregoing requirements of §
12.005. If the notice of appeal is compliant, it shall be transferred
immediately to the Appeal Authority and the County Attorney’s Office. If the
notice of appeal is not compliant, the Chief Administrative Officer shall
inform the appellant of the deficiencies. If the deficiencies are timely cured,
the notice of appeal shall be considered to have been filed when the initial
notice was filed.
   (B)   Notice to parties. Upon receiving the notice of appeal from the Chief
Administrative Officer, the Appeal Authority shall immediately determine
whether it is brought by the applicant. If not, the Appeal Authority shall
immediately inform the applicant of the appeal, invite the applicant to
participate as a party to the appeal, and the Appeal Authority and all other
parties shall treat the applicant as a party to the appeal.
   (C)   Record. Immediately upon receiving the notice of appeal, the County
Attorney shall assemble and serve on the Appeal Authority and the other parties
the record of the land use decision on appeal. The record shall include
relevant minutes, complete applications at issue, relevant communications with
the applicant, relevant communications with the appellant where applicable, and
any written record of the decision. The county shall Bates-stamp these
documents, which shall become the record on appeal. Absent extraordinary
circumstances, the County Attorney shall serve the record on the parties before
the scheduling conference is held.
   (D)   (1)   Scheduling conference. Upon receiving the notice of appeal, the
Appeal Authority shall in timely fashion hold a scheduling conference to
include:
         (a)   Deciding whether the grounds for the land use decision appear in
the record provided by the County Attorney;
         (b)   Scheduling the hearing;
         (c)   Setting a submission date for briefing; and
         (d)   Confirming the theories of relief to be addressed on appeal.
      (2)   (Excluding jurisdictional issues, theories of relief and issues not
confirmed at the scheduling conference, including regarding the completeness
and adequacy of the record, will not be considered by the Appeal Authority. The
appellant must raise every theory of relief it can raise in district court.)
      (3)   Unless extraordinary circumstances prohibit it, the scheduling
conference shall be held within 14 days after the Appeal Authority receives the
notice of appeal. The scheduling conference need not be held in person but
shall include all parties.
   (E)   Briefing.
      (1)   Prior to the hearing, the parties (the appellant, the county, and,
if applicable, the applicant) shall file simultaneous briefs on the theories of
relief and issues confirmed at the scheduling conference. The briefs shall not
exceed 15 double-spaced pages, excluding the caption, signature block,
certificate of service, and exhibits. The briefs shall follow the formatting
required by Utah Rule of Civil Procedure 10(d) and be filed and served on the
Appeal Authority and all parties via email. Except as provided in division (H)
below, no affidavits or declarations or other evidentiary documents beyond
those contained in the record may be attached to the briefing.
      (2)   All theories of relief and issues, including jurisdiction, the
completeness of the record, or a party’s standing, shall be reserved for the
briefing and hearing, not presented through separate filings.
      (3)   No other briefing shall be filed or considered unless the Appeal
Authority orders supplemental briefing as described below. The date set for the
filing and service of briefs shall not be less than seven days before scheduled
hearing.
   (F)   Hearing.
      (1)   At the hearing, the parties shall present argument to the Appeal
Authority.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (H) below, the hearing need not be
held in person.
   (G)   Supplemental briefing. If at the end of the hearing the Appeal
Authority determines that supplemental briefing is necessary in order to render
an informed decision, the Appeal Authority may order supplemental briefing to
be filed on a specifically identified and narrow question. The Appeal Authority
shall set a date for the supplemental briefing to be filed, the briefing
length, and whatever else it deems appropriate. Unless extraordinary
circumstances require otherwise, the supplemental briefing shall be filed
within 14 days of the hearing. Supplemental briefing should be rare and
permitted only in extraordinary circumstances.
   (H)   Inadequate record. If at the scheduling conference the Appeal
Authority determines that the grounds for the land use decision do not appear
in the record provided by the County Attorney, then the foregoing process is
altered in the following ways:
      (1)   Each party may attach to its brief affidavits or declarations and
all documentary evidence related to the land use decision beyond the record
provided by the County Attorney that the party wishes the Appeal Authority to
consider. Absent good cause, documents not attached to a party’s brief will not
be considered. The Appeal Authority generally will follow the Utah Rules of
Evidence when considering the submitted affidavits or declarations and
documentary evidence.
      (2)   The parties may examine and cross-examine witnesses during the
hearing. Such testimony shall be guided generally by the Utah Rules of
Evidence.
      (3)   The hearing shall be held in person at the county’s administrative
offices.
      (4)   If at the end of the hearing the Appeal Authority determines that
supplemental evidence is necessary in order to render an informed decision, the
Appeal Authority may order specific supplemental evidence to be filed following
the procedure and direction of division (G).
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 12.007 DECISION.
   (A)   Issuance. Absent extraordinary circumstances, the Appeal Authority
shall serve on all parties a concise written decision within 28 days of the
hearing or of any ordered supplemental submissions, whichever is later. If the
Appeal Authority can do so, it is encouraged to issue its decision sooner.
   (B)   Standard of review. Except as provided in division (C), the Appeal
Authority shall review the land use decision and determine only whether it is
supported by substantial evidence or illegal. A land use decision is illegal if
it is based on an incorrect interpretation of a land use regulation, conflicts
with the authority granted by CLUDMA, or is contrary to law.
   (C)   Inadequate record. If at the scheduling conference the Appeal
Authority determines that the grounds for the land use decision do not appear
in the record provided by the County Attorney, then the Appeal Authority shall
determine whether the land use decision was correct.
   (D)   Content. The Appeal Authority’s written decision shall set forth
factual findings and legal conclusions sufficient for review. The Appeal
Authority may only affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, the land use
decision. If reversed entirely or in any part, the Appeal Authority shall
provide the county instructions to issue a land use decision consistent with
the Appeal Authority’s decision.
   (E)   Notification. The Appeal Authority’s decision shall set forth in bold
typeface the parties’ rights to petition for judicial review, citing the
appropriate statute and providing a non-binding calculation of the filing
deadline.
(Ord. 2024-02, passed 1-16-2024)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GOVERNING BODY
      
31.   OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
      
33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
      
34.   PURCHASING POLICY
      
35.   CONSTITUTIONAL TAKINGS
CHAPTER 30: GOVERNING BODY
Section
   
30.001   Board meetings
§ 30.001 BOARD MEETINGS.
   (A)   The annual Commission meeting schedule is as follows, unless otherwise
publically notified.
      (1)   First Tuesday.
         (a)   Commission work session: 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
         (b)   Commission meeting: 11:00 a.m.
      (2)   Third Tuesday.
         (a)   Commission work session: 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
         (b)   Commission meeting: 11:00 a.m.
      (3)   Fifth Tuesday: no regular scheduled meetings.
   (B)   All meetings will be held in the Commission Chambers at the San Juan
County Administration Building located at 117 South Main Street, Monticello,
Utah.
   (C)   Periodically, there may be additional special joint meetings that take
place different governmental entities and/or special service districts
throughout the county and to include neighboring counties.
   (D)   Commission work sessions will be held as needed and will be
appropriately noticed. Commission meetings will start at 11:00 a.m. and
continue until the business of the day has concluded. All general business of
the county shall be the subject thereof. Exceptions to this schedule will be
special meetings held outside the county seat during the time normally given to
Commission meetings but will be properly public noticed prior to the meeting in
keeping with Utah Code.
(Ord. 2020-12, passed 12-15-2020; Ord. 2021-14, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. 2023-
05, passed 12-19-2023; Ord. 2024-06, passed 12-17-2024)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Officials
   
31.001   County Surveyor; fees
   
31.002   County Treasurer
Electronic Meetings
   
31.015   Purpose
   
31.016   Definitions
   
31.017   Member requests
   
31.018   Notice
   
31.019   Quorum verification
   
31.020   Public attendance
   
31.021   Conduct of meeting
   
31.022   Compliance with law
Economic Development Board
   
31.035   Title
   
31.036   Purpose
   
31.037   Membership
   
31.038   Meetings
   
31.039   Member responsibilities and terms
   
31.040   Officers
   
31.041   Conflict of interest
   
31.042   Adoption of bylaws
Homeless Coordinating Committee
   
31.055   Title
   
31.056   Mission
   
31.057   Membership
   
31.058   Leadership and decision-making
   
31.059   Annual decision-making process
   
31.060   Committees
   
31.061   Adoption and amendment of bylaws
Health Department; Board of Health
   
31.075   Establishment and organization
   
31.076   Authority
   
31.077   Membership
   
31.078   Powers and duties
   
31.079   Public health rules and regulations
   
31.080   Director of Health; appointment; powers and duties
   
31.081   Review and appeals of Health Department administrative decisions
Library Board of Directors
   
31.095   Establishment; terms; vacancies
   
31.096   Bylaws and officers
   
31.097   Meetings
   
31.098   Committees
   
31.099   Duties and responsibilities
   
31.100   Librarian; duties and responsibilities
Community Reinvestment Agency
   
31.115   Creation
   
31.116   Commission designated
   
31.117   Authority
   
31.118   Executive director
Criminal Justice Coordinating Council
   
31.130   Purpose
   
31.131   Establishment
   
31.132   Membership
   
31.133   Procedure
   
31.134   Duties
   
31.135   Support staff
OFFICIALS
§ 31.001 COUNTY SURVEYOR; FEES.
   (A)   The office of County Surveyor is hereby consolidated into the office
of County Commissioner (the Chairperson), so that henceforth the person who is
Chairperson of the County Board of Commissioners shall also be the County
Surveyor.
   (B)   The County Surveyor’s office shall charge $20 for each page of a
record of survey.
(Ord. 1978-2, passed 1-3-1978; Ord. 2011-01, passed 4-11-2011)
§ 31.002 COUNTY TREASURER.
   (A)   Division of responsibilities. The various departments and offices of
the county have different roles in taxing and accounting processes so that
there is a system of checks and balances. The primary functions of the County
Treasurer are as follows.
      (1)   Property taxes. The County Treasurer is responsible for the
collection, distribution, and reconciliation of property taxes levied by all
the taxing entities in the county.
      (2)   County finance.
         (a)   The County Treasurer is responsible for the banking,
reconciliation, management and investment of all county funds.
         (b)   Cash management duties are performed in accordance with the
State Money Management Act, UCA § 51-7.
         (c)   Most funds held by the County Treasurer are invested in the
state’s Public Treasurers Investment Fund, which is administered by the State
Treasurer’s office. Funds are also invested with Zions Wealth Administration.
   (B)   Internal controls.
      (1)   Cash receiving.
         (a)   Cash receipts are entered into the accounting system by the
department which received them or by the Clerk/Auditor’s office.
         (b)   Individual entries are assigned a number sequence within the
system in order to differentiate each receipt.
         (c)   The County Treasurer’s office verifies the receipt and deposits
it to the bank, balancing the cash receipt tickets with the cash received.
         (d)   The originating department needs to bring two signed copies of
each cash ticket, one for the Treasurer and one originating department.
         (e)   Cash receipts are signed by the originator, then verified,
signed and deposited each day by the Deputy Treasurer and reviewed by the
County Treasurer.
         (f)   Cash receipts are balanced each day with system totals and bank
balances.
      (2)   Cash receiving; real property taxes. Real property taxes shall be/
have:
         (a)   Processed in the County Treasurer’s office;
         (b)   Daily balanced entries with cash (totals for given day);
         (c)   Daily balanced tax system totals with tax balance spreadsheet
totals and cash in tax accounts (year-to-date totals); and
         (d)   Daily balance with bank.
      (3)   Payments from tax checking account. Payments from tax checking
account shall be:
         (a)   Processed in the County Treasurer’s office; and
         (b)   Checks shall require two signatures.
      (4)   Accounts payable. Accounts payable should be/have:
         (a)   Processed in the Clerk/Auditor’s office;
         (b)   Funds transferred by the County Treasurer;
         (c)   Approved by the Board of Commissioners; and
         (d)   Checks shall require two signatures.
      (5)   Payroll. Payroll shall be/have:
         (a)   Processed in the Clerk/Auditor’s office;
         (b)   Funds transferred by the County Treasurer;
         (c)   Payroll batches are approved by the County Treasurer; and
         (d)   Payments are direct deposits.
      (6)   Bank reconciliations. Bank reconciliations are done by the opposite
department (the department not processing the checks or deposits) and within 30
days after the end of each month.
         (a)   General Fund checking. Processed by the Deputy Clerk, reconciled
by the Deputy Treasurer, reviewed by the County Treasurer and the Clerk/Auditor
         (b)   Payroll checking. Processed by the Deputy Clerk, reconciled by
the Deputy Treasurer, reviewed by the County Treasurer and the Clerk/Auditor.
         (c)   Tax checking. Processed by the County Treasurer’s Office,
reconciled by the Clerk/Auditor, reviewed by the Deputy Treasurer and the
County Treasurer.
         (d)   Tax savings. Processed by the County Treasurer’s Office,
reconciled by the Clerk/Auditor, reviewed by the Deputy Treasurer and the
County Treasurer.
(Ord. 2021-05, passed 1-19-2021)
Cross reference:
   Finance and revenue; taxation, see
Chapter 33
ELECTRONIC MEETINGS
§ 31.015 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to authorize and govern the use of
electronic meetings by county councils, boards, commissions or other public
bodies which are required to hold public meetings in compliance with the
state’s open and public meetings laws found in UCA § 52-4-207.
   (B)   Unless stated otherwise, all other policies, regulations and laws
pertaining to notice, meetings being open to the public and other matters will
apply to county meetings held through electronic means and the participation of
members in non-electronic meetings through electronic means.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 4-7-2020)
§ 31.016 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANCHOR LOCATION.
      (1)   The physical location from which the electronic meeting originates
or from which the participants are connected.
      (2)   PRIMARY ANCHOR LOCATION is established at the Commission Chambers
located at 117 South Main Street, in Monticello, Utah, unless that location is
inoperable due to an emergency or following the county’s Continuity of
Operations Plan requiring other secondary locations to be established due to a
significant event.
   ELECTRONIC MEETING. A public meeting of the County Board of Commissioners or
other county public board, commission or body convened and conducted by means
of a telephonic conference device or other electronic means, allowing each
member of the public body to call into to the anchor location and participate
concurrently with all other members of the public body in the conduct of the
meeting and which former allows members of the public to hear the meeting and
when appropriate give public participation or public comments.
   MEETING ADMINISTRATOR. The chair of the public body or other member
specifically assigned and designated to ensure proper operation of the
electronic conference equipment at the anchor location to assure that all
members of the public body and, when necessary the public, are able to
participate in the electronic meeting.
   MEMBER. A member of an elected or appointed public body.
   PUBLIC BODY. Any commission, board, special service district, subdivision of
or other entity required by state code to comply with the state’s Open and
Public Meetings Act, being UCA Title 52, Ch. 4.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 4-7-2020)
§ 31.017 MEMBER REQUESTS.
   (A)   Calling an electronic meeting.
      (1)   Members of a public body may request that a meeting be held
electronically.
      (2)   Such request must be made to the public body chair at least three
days prior to the time that the public meeting is scheduled, so that the
necessary arrangements can be made for the electronic meeting.
      (3)   A majority of the members of the public body must agree to hold the
meeting electronically.
   (B)   Electronic member participation. Members may elect, in their
discretion, to participate electronically in any meeting; provided that, they
give reasonable notice to the Chair of their intent to participate
electronically and, in the opinion of the Chair, the necessary arrangements
needed to facilitate their electronic participation are reasonably available.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 4-7-2020)
§ 31.018 NOTICE.
   The public body will call an electronic meeting by giving notice of the
meeting, including notice of the agenda, date, time and anchor location of the
electronic meeting, at least 24 hours before the meeting, by:
   (A)   Posting written notice of the electronic meeting at the anchor
location in conformance with all applicable public notice requirements for
public meetings;
   (B)   Posting notice on the state’s public notice website, at least 24 hours
before the meeting unless the meeting is an emergency meeting;
   (C)   Providing notice of the electronic meeting to each member, at least 24
hours before the meeting, so that each member may participate in and be counted
as present for all purposes, including the determination that a quorum will be
present; and
   (D)   Providing to each member a description of how he, she or they will be
connected to the electronic meeting, including the telephone number, or
computer access link required for participation and any access codes necessary
to make an electronic meeting conference available to the members.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 4-7-2020)
§ 31.019 QUORUM VERIFICATION.
   (A)   Before an electronic meeting may be called to order, all members of
the public body shall be given an opportunity to participate in the meeting and
no electronic meeting shall be convened unless the quorum is physically present
at the anchor location. However, if a proclamation of local, state or national
emergency is in effect, a majority of a quorum need not be physically present
at the physical location from which the electronic meeting originates or from
which the public body members are connected to the electronic meeting in order
for an electronic meeting to be held.
   (B)   Those attending the meeting electronically should connect at least ten
minutes prior to the beginning of the meeting to allow for any technical issues
to be resolved.
   (C)   If a participant cannot connect before the meeting, a brief recess may
be called to allow for the electronic connection of a participant.
   (D)   Before an electronic meeting may be called to order, all members of
the public body must be given an opportunity to participate in the meeting and
no electronic meeting will be convened unless a quorum of the public body is
able to participate either in person or electronically in the meeting.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 4-7-2020)
§ 31.020 PUBLIC ATTENDANCE.
   Each electronic meeting shall be convened by the meeting administrator by
announcing the parties present at the meeting and by making available to
members of the public at the anchor location or through electronic means, such
as an amplified speaker, enabling members of the public to hear the comments of
members and the conduct of the meeting and, when appropriate, make public
comment.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 4-7-2020)
§ 31.021 CONDUCT OF MEETING.
   (A)   Upon determining that a sufficient number of the members are present
for the electronic meeting to be convened and members of the public can
adequately hear the comments of all members of the public body, the Chair or
other member conducting the meeting must formally convene the meeting and take
a roll call of those participating.
   (B)   The Chair or other member conducting the meeting must provide
opportunity for each matter on the agenda to be presented and must allow each
member an opportunity to comment, question or otherwise participate in the
meeting.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 4-7-2020)
§ 31.022 COMPLIANCE WITH LAW.
   In all other respects, electronic or telephonic meetings must be conducted,
recorded and minutes must be kept as required by law for all other open and
public meetings.
(Ord. 2020-06, passed 4-7-2020)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BOARD
§ 31.035 TITLE.
   The San Juan County Economic Development Board (the “CED Board”).
(Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 31.036 PURPOSE.
   (A)   CED Purpose.
      (1)   This CED Board is organized exclusively to further economic
development, workforce opportunities, business expansion and retention, and new
business opportunities/services across the county.
      (2)   The CED Board will liaise with the newly formed Rural County Grant
Program (“RCGP”), created by Utah Session Laws of the 2020 Legislative Session,
Senate Bill 0095 (“SB 0095”) (Economic Development Amendments), which mandates
that for each rural county to apply they must have an active CED Board in
place.
   (B)   Specific purpose. The RGCP shall be overseen by the Rural Partnership
Board and administered by the Office of Rural Development. The CED Board shall
assist and advise the county’s Board of Commissioners on:
      (1)   Applying for grants under the RCGP;
      (2)   What projects should be funded by grant money provided to a rural
county under RCGP; and
      (3)   Preparing reporting requirements for grant money received by a
rural county under RCGP.
   (C)   Additional purpose. The Board shall also be used in offering guidance
and direction relating to economic development, workforce opportunities and all
other business coordination efforts throughout the entire county with projects
and the establishment of economic development goals to be presented to the
county’s Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 31.037 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Eligibility for membership.
      (1)   The county’s Board of Commissioners shall appoint members of the
CED Board in accordance with UCA § 17-54-104 of Utah SB 0095, in addition to
the following that each CED Board shall be composed of at least the following
members:
         (a)   A representative of the county;
         (b)   A representative from each municipality in the county;
         (c)   A workforce development representative;
         (d)   A private sector representative; and
         (e)   A member of the public who lives in the county.
      (2)   Four additional members at large can be added at the county’s
Economic Development Director’s recommendation, with advice and consent of the
Commission, but are not mandatory as described in Utah SB0095. Members are
appointed at the behest of the county’s Board of Commissioners; applications
shall be open to any current resident who is a registered voter, and is a
property owner, or a business owner or who is an employee of the county. In
appointing members of the CED Board, the county encourages and supports equal
opportunities for all boards and committees and encourages women, minorities
and the disabled to apply.
   (B)   Candidate qualifications. CED Board candidates shall be a resident and
registered voter of the county with experience or knowledge in economic
development or tourism, knowledge of county and local issues, a good listener,
ability to communicate and be analytical.
   (C)   Rights of members. Each member shall be eligible to appoint one voting
representative to cast the member’s vote in association elections.
   (D)   Resignation and termination. Any member may resign by filing a written
resignation with the Board. A member can have his, her or their membership
terminated by the county’s Board of Commissioners if it is determined by
preponderance of the evidence that the Board member has not complied with the
requirements of §
31.039 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 31.038 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. 
      (1)   The CED Board meets quarterly on the second Monday of the first
month of that quarter. Additional meetings may be added, if necessary, to
provide input and direction to County Economic Development and Visitor Services
staff.
      (2)   Meetings will be held in Monticello at 117 South Main Street in the
Board of Commissioners Chambers.
      (3)   Unless otherwise advertised, regular meetings of the members shall
be held monthly, at a time and place designated by the Board Chair.
   (B)   Annual meetings. An annual meeting of the members shall take place in
the month of September, the specific date, time and location of which will be
designated by the Chair. At the annual meeting, the members shall elect
officers, receive reports on the activities of the association and determine
economic priorities for consideration in the coming year.
   (C)   Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Chair or a
simple majority of the Board of Directors.
   (D)   Notice of meetings. Electronic notice of each meeting shall be given
to each voting member not less than two days prior to the meeting. The Board
will also follow the Open and Public Meetings Act (UCA Title 52, Ch. 4), with
the exception of certain matters that may be discussed in “closed meetings”.
Closed meetings should be limited to discussion as defined in state code. In
accordance with the Open and Public Meetings Act notice and the agendas of
public meetings be available to the public.
   (E)   Quorum. A quorum for a meeting of the members shall consist of at
least 60% of the active membership. The presence, in person or via phone, of a
majority of current members of the Board of Directors shall be necessary at any
meeting to constitute a quorum to transact business, but a lesser number shall
have power to adjourn to a specified later date without notice.
   (F)   Voting. All issues to be voted on shall be decided by a simple
majority of those present at the meeting in which the vote takes place.
(Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 31.039 MEMBER RESPONSIBILITIES AND TERMS.
   (A)   Member responsibilities.
      (1)   All applications for the RCGP shall be received, reviewed, and
voted on by the members of the CED Board. Applications that are approved will
be submitted to the Office of Rural Development in collaboration with the Rural
Partnership Board in accordance with SB 0095 and UCA Title 63G, Ch. 3,
Administrative Rulemaking Act.
      (2)   The Board will ensure that approved grants meet eligibility and
reporting criteria for a rural county to receive grant money under SB 0095(4)
(b), including relevant submission forms, reporting requirements and deadlines.
      (3)   The Board will not recommend more than $800,000 of aggregate grant
awards annually and will work with county leaders to prioritize applicants
that:
         (a)   Align with the existing priorities and goals as defined in the
county’s existing Economic Development Plan;
         (b)   Are consistent with local economic development priorities as
defined in the county’s General Plan and Strategic Economic Development Plan;
         (c)   Demonstrate clear economic need;
         (d)   Utilize local or in-kind resources in combination with the
grant;
         (e)   Have evidence that jobs will be created; and
         (f)   Have evidence that there will be a positive return on
investment.
   (B)   Reporting responsibilities.
      (1)   On or before September 1 of each year, if the county has received a
grant under the RCGP in the previous 12 months, the Board shall provide a
written report to the Rural Partnership Board that describes:
         (a)   The amount of grant money the county has received;
         (b)   How grant money has been distributed by the county, including
what companies or entities have utilized grant money, how much grant money each
company or entity has received and how each company or entity has used the
money;
         (c)   An evaluation of the effectiveness of awarded grants in
improving economic development in the county, including the number of jobs
created, infrastructure that has been created and capital improvements in the
county;
         (d)   How much matching money has been utilized by the county and what
entities have provided the matching money; and
         (e)   Any other reporting, auditing or post-performance requirements
established by the Office of Rural Development in collaboration with the Rural
Partnership Board under subsection (6) in SB 0095.
      (2)   Note: county staff may be appointed to assist with the creation of
reporting documents.
   (C)   Tenure, requirements and qualifications.
      (1)   Appointed members of the CED Board shall serve an initial two-year
term. At the conclusion of the initial term, the county’s Board of
Commissioners may decide to retain the members for additional terms or appoint
new members. Terms will be staggered to always maintain experience and tenured
Board members.
      (2)   (a)   In order to create a staggering of the Board members, the
initial term for the following members shall be three years:
            1.   The representatives from each municipality;
            2.   A workforce development representative; and
            3.   A private sector representative.
         (b)   Once their initial term expires, they will return to two-year
terms.
      (3)   Each member of the Board of Directors shall attend at least 75% of
the meetings of the Board per year. Failure to attend a minimum of 75% of the
meetings may result in removal from the Board.
      (4)   To remain in good standing, CED Board members must attend regularly
scheduled meetings in compliance with the following guidelines.
         (a)   A CED member that is absent for more than three of the regular
scheduled meetings in a year, without being excused for official county or
excusable business, will be automatically dismissed from the county’s CED
Board. Meetings that are changed or rescheduled after the official dates have
been posted for the year do not apply towards attendance requirements.
         (b)   If a CED member has attended two committee meetings, as a
committee member, this would excuse one absence from the regularly scheduled
meetings, which is a privilege that could be taken advantage of only one time
per year, per member.
         (c)   A CED member may attend a regularly scheduled meeting via
electronic means and by notifying the Board Chair at least 12 hours prior to
the meeting in question, which would also allow the member the ability to
garner the necessary information for the CED member to use to call in. This
will be effective only if there is a quorum present at the anchor location.
         (d)   A CED member must be present at each meeting through at least
three-quarters of the scheduled agenda to constitute a presence.
         (e)   Appointments for Monticello City, Blanding City and the Town of
Bluff can send approved city/town representation in their place. Approved city/
town representation include: city manager; city/town council; city/town
employee; or the respective mayor.
         (f)   A dismissed CED member remains eligible to apply for a CED
vacancy.
      (5)   Members of the CED Board shall not, as individuals, direct the
appointment to or removal from the county’s Economic Development and Visitor
Services Office of any employee, nor interfere with the duties or performance
of any county employee including the Director.
      (6)   Except when acting on EDVS business in a regular CED meeting or as
a member of an authorized committee, CED members have no privileges beyond
those of other citizens to records, materials or produced items that belong to
the county’s Economic Development and Visitor Services.
   (D)   Forfeiture. Any member of the CED Board who fails to fulfill any of
his or her requirements as set forth in this section shall automatically
forfeit his or her seat on the Board.
   (E)   Vacancies. Whenever any vacancy occurs in the CED Board, it shall be
filled without undue delay by the county’s Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 31.040 OFFICERS.
   The officers of the Board shall be the Chair and Vice-Chair. All officers
must have the status of active members of the Board.
   (A)   Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the membership. The
Chair shall have the following duties.
      (1)   He or she shall preside at all meetings of the Board.
      (2)   He or she shall ensure any ongoing reporting requirements are met
with the Office of Rural Development and Rural Partnership Board in
collaboration with county officials.
   (B)   Vice-Chair. The Vice-Chair shall be vested with all the powers and
shall perform all the duties of the Chair during the absence of the latter.
   (C)   Election of officers. Officers will be sought on a volunteer basis.
Recommendations will be provided to the county’s Board of Commissioners and may
be appointed by majority vote of the county’s Board of Commissioners.
   (D)   Removal of officer. The CED Board with the concurrence of three-
fourths of the members voting at the meeting may remove any officer of the
Board of Directors and recommend a successor for the unexpired term. No officer
of the Board of Directors shall be expelled without an opportunity to be heard
and notice of such motion of expulsion shall be given to the member in writing
20 days prior to the meeting at which motion shall be presented, setting forth
the reasons of the Board for such expulsion.
   (E)   Vacancies. The Board shall also be responsible for nominating persons
to fill vacancies which occur between annual meetings, including those of
officers. The persons appointed shall hold membership or office for the
unexpired term in respect of which such vacancy occurred.
(Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 31.041 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   Purpose. 
      (1)   The purpose of the conflict of interest policy is to protect the
CED Board and its members from approving grants that might benefit the private
interest of a Board member.
      (2)   This policy is intended to supplement, but not replace, any
applicable state and federal laws governing conflict of interest applicable to
governmental organizations.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      FINANCIAL INTEREST.
         (a)   A person has a financial interest if the person has, directly or
indirectly, through business, investment or family:
            1.   An ownership or investment interest in any entity with which
the CED Board is considering an application, transaction or arrangement;
            2.   A compensation arrangement with the CED Board or with any
entity or individual with which the CED Board has a transaction or arrangement;
or
            3.   A potential ownership or investment interest in, or
compensation arrangement with, any entity or individual with which the CED
Board is negotiating a transaction or arrangement.
         (b)   Compensation includes direct and indirect remuneration as well
as gifts or favors that are not insubstantial.
         (c)   A FINANCIAL INTEREST is not necessarily a conflict of interest.
Under §
31.037(B) of this chapter, a person who has a financial interest may have a
conflict of interest only if the appropriate governing board or committee
decides that a conflict of interest exists.
      INTERESTED PERSON. Any Board member who has a direct or indirect
financial interest, as defined in division (C) below, is an INTERESTED PERSON.
   (C)   Procedures.
      (1)   Duty to disclose. In connection with any actual or possible
conflict of interest, an interested person must disclose the existence of the
financial interest and be given the opportunity to disclose all material facts
to the Board considering the proposed transaction or arrangement.
      (2)   Determining whether a conflict of interest exists. After disclosure
of the financial interest and all material facts, and after any discussion with
the interested person, he or she shall leave the governing board or committee
meeting while the determination of a conflict of interest is discussed and
voted upon. The remaining Board members shall decide if a conflict of interest
exists.
      (3)   Procedures for addressing the conflict of interest.
         (a)   An interested person may make a presentation at the governing
Board meeting, but after the presentation, he or she shall leave the meeting
during the discussion of, and the vote on, the transaction or arrangement
involving the possible conflict of interest.
         (b)   After exercising due diligence, the governing Board shall
determine whether the organization can obtain with reasonable efforts a more
advantageous transaction or arrangement from a person or entity that would not
give rise to a conflict of interest.
         (c)   If a more advantageous transaction or arrangement is not
reasonably possible under circumstances not producing a conflict of interest,
the governing board or committee shall determine by a majority vote of the
disinterested directors whether the transaction or arrangement is in the CED
Board’s best interest, for its own benefit, and whether it is fair and
reasonable. In conformity with the above determination, it shall make its
decision as to whether to enter into the transaction or arrangement.
      (4)   Violations of the conflicts of interest policy.
         (a)   If the governing Board has reasonable cause to believe a member
has failed to disclose actual or possible conflicts of interest, it shall
inform the member of the basis for such belief and afford the member an
opportunity to explain the alleged failure to disclose.
         (b)   If, after hearing the member’s response and after making further
investigation as warranted by the circumstances, the governing board or
committee determines the member has failed to disclose an actual or possible
conflict of interest, it shall take appropriate disciplinary and corrective
action.
(Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 31.042 ADOPTION OF BYLAWS.
   (A)   Annual review and amendment.
      (1)   The bylaws will be reviewed by the Commission at the beginning of
each calendar year.
      (2)   Amendments will be recommended to the Board of Commissioners for
approval.
   (B)   Waiving or suspending rules. A rule of procedure may be suspended or
waived at any meeting by unanimous vote of the Commission members present
unless such a rule is set by state law or county ordinance.
(Ord. 2020-08, passed 4-21-2020)
HOMELESS COORDINATING COMMITTEE
§ 31.055 TITLE.
   (A)   Name. The name of this affiliation shall be the “San Juan County Local
Homeless Coordinating Committee (SJCLHCC)”.
   (B)   Service area. The SJCLHCC will enable homeless provider agencies to
serve the homeless and those at imminent risk of homelessness in the geographic
boundaries of the county, excluding the Navajo Nation. The Navajo Nation has
its own program and funding from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
(Ord. 2020-09, passed 5-5-2020)
§ 31.056 MISSION.
   The SJCLHCC works to ensure that people who experience homelessness or are
at imminent risk of homelessness will have access to community and system
resources to resolve their immediate housing crisis and facilitate their
transition from homelessness to stability in permanent housing as rapidly as
possible. Homelessness in the county area will be rare, brief and non-
reoccurring.
(Ord. 2020-09, passed 5-5-2020)
§ 31.057 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   General. Membership on the SJCLHCC shall consist of executive-level
members (or their designees who have been granted decision-making powers). Each
agency within the LHCC will have no more than one voting member. The SJCLHCC
shall be governed and appointed by the Board of County Commissioners. This
Committee includes a Chair, Co-Chair, PIT (Point In Time) Count Lead,
Coordinated Entry Lead and a Secretary.
   (B)   Voting members.
      (1)   There shall be one voting member from each entity named below:
         (a)   South Eastern Association of Local Governments;
         (b)   San Juan Counseling;
         (c)   DWS;
         (d)   San Juan County Housing Authority;
         (e)   San Juan Health;
         (f)   San Juan Public Health;
         (g)   Utah Navajo Health;
         (h)   San Juan County School District;
         (I)   San Juan County Sheriff’s Department;
         (j)   Faith-based organizations;
         (k)   City of Blanding;
         (l)   City of Monticello;
         (m)   Town of Bluff;
         (n)   San Juan County Commissioner; and
         (o)   San Juan County Administration.
      (2)   Agencies wishing to be considered for voting membership on the
SJCLHCC should submit an application to the executive committee.
   (C)   Meetings.
      (1)   The full SJCLHCC shall meet quarterly on the first Tuesday of the
first month each month except July and December at 3:00 p.m. Meetings will be
held at the Commission Chambers located at 117 South Main Street, Monticello,
Utah.
      (2)   There shall be at least one-week notice that will contain a
tentative agenda and minutes from the last meeting. A notice of 48 hours will
be provided for emergency meetings. The first meeting of the calendar year
shall be designated as the annual planning meeting, at which time elections are
to occur. The last meeting of the calendar year will schedule meetings for the
upcoming year.
   (D)   Attendance. All members are expected to regularly attend SJCLHCC
meetings. The executive committee reserves the right to remove any member for
consistent failure to attend.
   (E)   Quorum and voting.
      (1)   For funding decisions, a quorum consists of 15 voting members; all
other decisions require eight voting members present.
      (2)   All votes will be taken by roll call or ballot of all official
representatives. SJCLHCC members must attend 75% of the meetings during the
preceding 12 months in order to be eligible to vote.
   (F)   Minutes of meetings. Recorded minutes shall be kept of every meeting
and shall include, at a minimum, the date, time and place of the meeting, the
number of the attending organization members, the topics discussed, the
decisions reached and actions taken, the list of roll call votes on all
motions, any reports made and other information as may be deemed necessary by
the Chairperson. Minutes, agendas and meeting invites will be the
responsibility of the Secretary.
(Ord. 2020-09, passed 5-5-2020)
§ 31.058 LEADERSHIP AND DECISION-MAKING.
   (A)   Name; purpose. The leadership group of the SJCLHCC shall be known as
the Executive Committee. The purpose of the Executive Committee is annually:
      (1)   To set priorities for homelessness services and housing based on
analysis of community data and need, in accordance with HUD and the state;
      (2)   To make funding recommendations to the collaborative applicant for
the annual allocation from the U.S. Department of HUD;
      (3)   To assure that programs receiving HUD funding are appropriately
monitored and meet program performance standards;
      (4)   To identify additional funding sources that contribute to the
community’s ability to respond to homeless populations; and
      (5)   To monitor the effective functioning of the LHCC, including review
of attendance.
   (B)   Membership. The member membership of the Executive Committee shall
consist of Chair, Co-Chair, PIT Count Lead, Coordinated Entry Lead and
Secretary.
   (C)   Terms of service. Executive members shall be elected for two years and
may stand for reelection upon the completion of their terms.
   (D)   Chairmanship. The chairmanship of the Executive Committee shall be a
locally elected official and terms of service shall be for two years.
   (E)   Meetings. The Chair will call meetings as deemed necessary.
   (F)   Conflicts of interest. It is the policy of the SJCLHCC that a
conflict, or the appearance of a conflict between the SJCLHCC-decision making
entity and the organizations receiving awards of grants shall in all cases be
avoided. All members of the SJCLHCC decision-making entity shall absent
themselves from discussing and voting on projects in which they or their agency
have a financial or potential financial interest.
(Ord. 2020-09, passed 5-5-2020)
§ 31.059 ANNUAL DECISION-MAKING PROCESS.
   (A)   The Executive Committee shall set community priorities in keeping with
the overall mission of the balance of state continuum of care.
   (B)   The Executive Committee shall set performance standards to be reviewed
and reported on by funded agencies.
   (C)   The Executive Committee shall review all applications for new or
renewal projects and make recommendations to the BOS COC for approval.
(Ord. 2020-09, passed 5-5-2020)
§ 31.060 COMMITTEES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The Executive Committee Chairperson shall appoint individuals to
chair the various standing committees and other committees on an as-needed
basis.
      (2)   The appointee may be an executive-level member of the SJCLHCC or
other staff member or community volunteer.
   (B)   Responsibilities of committees.
      (1)   Responsibilities of the Committee Chairpersons are to:
         (a)   Hold regularly scheduled meetings;
         (b)   Send out meeting notices;
         (c)   Facilitate committee meetings;
         (d)   Carry out goals and objectives of committee with committee
members;
         (e)   Keep accurate attendance records; and
         (f)   Report to the full SJCLHCC on a quarterly basis.
      (2)   SJCLHCC member agencies are expected to actively participate on
pertinent committees. Committee members’ responsibilities are to:
         (a)   Regularly attend committee meetings called by the Committee
Chair;
         (b)   Participate in discussions;
         (c)   Assist in the development and implementation of Committee
activities such as policy development, surveys and the like; and
         (d)   Participate in committee activities related to preparation of
relevant sections of HUD applications.
      (3)   The following shall be possible standing committees of the County
LHCC dictated upon need:
         (a)   Outreach/Prevention Subcommittee. The purpose is to develop
policies and systems to help clients to secure mainstream benefits for which
they are eligible (e.g., GA, TANF, SSI, SNAP);
         (b)   Coordinated Entry Subcommittee;
         (c)   Emergency Shelter Subcommittee;
         (d)   Affordable Housing Subcommittee. The purpose is to provide a
forum for agencies to discuss trends and issues among those seeking permanent
housing and to utilize data to inform committee recommendations;
         (e)   Point in Time Count Subcommittee. The purpose is to develop
methodology and tools to conduct point-in-time surveys to identify the homeless
or those who are at imminent risk of homelessness and to implement such surveys
on at least an annual basis;
         (f)   Discharge Subcommittee. The purpose is to develop and implement
policies and protocols for the discharge of persons from publicly funded
institutions or systems of care (such as health care facilities, foster care or
other youth facilities or correction programs and institutions) in order to
prevent such discharge from immediately resulting in homelessness for such
persons; and
         (g)   Housing Management Information System (HMIS) and Data Forum
Subcommittee. The purpose is to engage all funded providers in meeting
expectations for maintaining accurate and up-to-date program-level data and to
provide a forum to discuss HMIS issues or problems.
      (4)   Other committees and subcommittees may be established to respond to
community needs and/or emerging funding sources (e.g., frequent users of
emergency services, veterans).
(Ord. 2020-09, passed 5-5-2020)
§ 31.061 ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF BYLAWS.
   Bylaws may be amended at regular or special meeting of the county’s Board of
Commissioners by a majority two-thirds’ vote of the members present and voting.
Amendments must be in written form and distributed to members at least two
weeks prior to presentation and vote.
(Ord. 2020-09, passed 5-5-2020)
HEALTH DEPARTMENT; BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 31.075 ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established a County Health Department,
pursuant to UCA §§ 26A-1-101 through 26-1-124.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The County Health Department shall have jurisdiction
through the unincorporated and incorporated areas of the county and shall
enforce local health ordinances, state health laws, rules, regulations and
standards.
   (C)   Appointment of personnel.
      (1)   All Health Department personnel shall be hired by the local health
officer or his or her designee in accordance with the personnel policies of the
local Health Department.
      (2)   A personnel compensation plan shall be approved by the county’s
Board of Health.
      (3)   (a)   The county’s Health Department shall develop personnel
policies based on a merit system and shall submit the policies to the Board for
approval.
         (b)   If the Board does not approve the policies, the Board may adopt
the personnel policies of the county.
      (4)   (a)   Subject to the local merit system, employees of the Health
Department may be removed by the local Health Officer for cause.
         (b)   A hearing by the Board shall be granted if requested by the
employee or shall be handled pursuant to the county personnel policies if the
county policies have been adopted by the Board.
   (D)   Organization.
      (1)   The county’s Health Department shall consist of a Board of Health,
a local Health Officer and Department personnel.
      (2)   The Health Officer shall be the Director and CEO of the Department.
      (3)   The local Board of Health shall be known as the “San Juan County
Board of Health”, pursuant to UCA Title 26A.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed - -2018)
§ 31.076 AUTHORITY.
   The county’s Health Department operates as a local health department under
UCA Title 26A, Ch. 1, as amended, and as organized under UCA § 26A-1-103 as a
county health department.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed - -2018)
§ 31.077 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The county’s Board of Health shall consist of seven members residing
in the county, including: a member of the County Board of Commissioners and six
other members, appointed by the county’s Board of Commissioners with advice and
consent of the Health Officer pursuant to UCA § 26A-1-109.
   (B)   Board members shall be nonpartisan and include geographical
representation from both the incorporated and unincorporated areas of the
county. Members should have knowledge or an interest in public health and
environmental matters.
   (C)   Any potential conflict of interest of any member shall be disclosed in
accordance with applicable statutes and countywide policies and procedures.
   (D)   The Board shall adopt bylaws governing the election of officers,
committees, task forces and other advisory bodies to the Board. The Board
members’ terms of service shall be governed by state law.
   (E)   A majority of the members may not:
      (1)   Be primarily engaged in providing health care to individuals or in
the administration of facilities or institutions in which health care is
provided;
      (2)   Hold a fiduciary position or have a fiduciary interest in any
entity involved in the provision of health care;
      (3)   Receive either directly or through a spouse more than one-tenth of
the member’s gross income from any entity or activity relating to health care;
or
      (4)   Be members of one type of business or profession.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed - -2018)
§ 31.078 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The county’s Health Department has jurisdiction under UCA § 26A-1-108,
as amended, in all unincorporated and incorporated areas of the county.
   (B)   The county’s Board of Health is hereby empowered to enforce all
ordinances of the county and all applicable ordinances of the municipalities,
and the laws, rules and regulations and standards of the state, now in force or
that may hereafter be enacted, which relate to the health, sanitation and
environment of the county.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed - -2018)
§ 31.079 PUBLIC HEALTH RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Health shall make such rules and regulations, pursuant to
UCA § 26A-1-121 of the Local Health Department Act and UCA Title 19, the
Environmental Quality Code. Such rules and regulations shall have the force and
effect of law if they are finally adopted by the Board of Health, after proper
public notice and an opportunity for hearing is given.
   (B)   The county’s Board of Health may make standards and regulations:
      (1)   Not in conflict with rules of the Departments of Health and
Environmental Quality; and
      (2)   Necessary for the promotion of public health, environmental health
quality, injury control and the prevention of outbreaks and spread of
communicable and infectious diseases.
   (C)   The standards and regulations enacted by the county’s Board of Health:
      (1)   Supersede existing local standards, regulations and ordinances
pertaining to similar subject matter; and
      (2)   Except as provided under division (D) below and except where
specifically allowed by federal law or state statute, may not be more stringent
than those established by federal law, state statute or administrative rules
adopted by the state’s Department of Health in accordance with UCA Title 63G,
Ch. 3, the state’s Administrative Rulemaking Act.
   (D)   (1)   The county’s Board of Health may make standards and regulations
more stringent than corresponding federal law, state statute or state
administrative rules for the purposes described in division (B) above, only if
the Board makes a written finding after public comment and hearing and based on
evidence in the record, that corresponding federal laws, state statutes or
state administrative rules are not adequate to protect public health and the
environment.
      (2)   The findings shall address the public health information and
studies contained in the record, which form the basis for the Board’s
conclusion.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed - -2018)
§ 31.080 DIRECTOR OF HEALTH; APPOINTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Director of the county’s Health Department shall be appointed by
the county’s Board of Health.
      (1)   (a)   If the Director of Health is a physician, he, she or they
shall be a full-time physician who is a graduate of a legally chartered and
legally constituted medical school, licensed to practice medicine in the state.
         (b)   A license may be secured within six months from the date of
appointment, and his, her or their employment will be subject to such other
requirements as are set out by the state and the county merit system.
      (2)   If the Director of Health is not a physician, they shall have
successfully completed a master’s degree in public health, nursing or other
health discipline related to public health, or public administration, or
business administration from an accredited school and have at least five years
of professional public health experience, of which at least three years were in
a senior level administrative capacity; or have successfully completed a
bachelor’s degree in a field closely related to public health work from an
accredited school and have at least 12 years of professional full-time public
health experience, of which at least ten years have been in a senior level
administrative capacity.
      (3)   If the Director of Health is not a physician, the county’s Health
Department shall contract with or employ a physician that is: residing in Utah
and licensed to practice medicine in Utah; competent and experienced in a
primary medical care field, such as family practice, pediatrics, or internal
medicine; board certified in preventive medicine or in a primary medical care
field, such as family practice, pediatrics or internal medicine; able to
supervise and oversee clinical services delivered within the county’s Health
Department, including the approval of all protocols and standing orders; able
to play a substantial role in reviewing policies and procedures addressing
human disease outbreaks of public health importance; and able to participate in
the State Department of Health’s local health department physician network.
   (B)   The Director of Health shall have and exercise the following powers
and duties, in addition to all other powers and duties required of him or her
by state law, federal law and local ordinance:
      (1)   Be the chief executive and administrative officer of the county’s
Health Department, and the secretary and executive officer of the Board of
Health;
      (2)   Succeed to all powers and discharge all duties and perform all
functions that by existing law are conferred upon or required to be discharged
or performed by the county’s Health Director or the Board of Health;
      (3)   With the approval of the Board of Health, to designate a member of
the staff of the Department of Health as acting Director of Health, to act for
and perform all the duties and functions of the Director of Health during any
absence or disability;
      (4)   To prescribe standard operating procedures consistent with the law
and countywide policies for the direction of the Department, the conduct of its
employees, the distribution and performance of its business, and the custody,
use and preservation of the records, papers, books, documents and property
pertaining to the Department of Health;
      (5)   To approve travel and subsistence expenses necessary for employees
of the Department, as actually and necessarily incurred in the performance of
their official duties when absent from their places of residence;
      (6)   Wherever the Director of Health is responsible for the performance
of any act, an appropriate employee of the Department may be authorized to act
for the Director;
      (7)   Serve, without additional compensation or payment of fees provided
by law, as local registrar of vital statistics for the area over which the
Department has jurisdiction with respect to enforcement of state health laws;
      (8)   Serve as official health consultant to and official health
spokesperson for elected officials in the county, cities and towns in which the
Department has jurisdiction; and
      (9)   To promote and enforce all federal, state and local public health
laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations in the Department’s areas of
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed - -2018)
§ 31.081 REVIEW AND APPEALS OF HEALTH DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
   Administrative actions or decisions of the Board of Health, the Health
Officer, or Health Department shall be appealed to the Administrative Law Judge
under
Chapter 11 of this code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
LIBRARY BOARD OF DIRECTORS
§ 31.095 ESTABLISHMENT; TERMS; VACANCIES.
   (A)   There is hereby established the County Library Board of Directors,
which shall consist of not less than five and not more than nine Directors
chosen from the residents of the county.
   (B)   Only one Director of the Board may be a member of the Board of County
Commissioners at any one time.
   (C)   All Directors shall be appointed by the county executive with the
advice and consent of the Board of County Commissioners. Appointments of the
Board shall be made before July 1 of each year in which the appointment is
necessary.
   (D)   Directors shall be appointed to serve for four-year terms, or until
their successors are appointed, and shall not serve more than two consecutive
full terms.
   (E)   Terms of Directors shall be staggered so that approximately one-
quarter of the Board is appointed each year.
   (F)   Vacancies created by resignation, death, removal or otherwise shall be
filled for the duration of the unexpired term in the same manner as the
original appointment.
   (G)   The county executive may remove any Director for misconduct or neglect
of duty.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 8-11-2003)
§ 31.096 BYLAWS AND OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Board shall adopt bylaws for managing the business and affairs of
the Board.
   (B)   (1)   The County Treasurer shall have legal custody of all library
fees/fines and other funds collected or received by the library and taxes and
fees collected by the county and shall act as the Treasurer of such funds.
      (2)   The County Treasurer shall not be a member of the Board.
   (C)   (1)   The Board shall elect a Chair and such other officers as
specified by state law and or the Board’s bylaws.
      (2)   The Chair shall arrange staff to take minutes and maintain official
records of Board actions.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 8-11-2003)
§ 31.097 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Board shall schedule regular meetings as it deems necessary and
appropriate to conduct its business shall have no fewer than four regular
meetings during a calendar year.
   (B)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the Board of Directors.
   (C)   Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chair; provided,
notice thereof is given to the public and all Directors at least 24 hours in
advance.
   (D)   Meetings shall comply with all the requirements of state law
including, but not limited to, the state’s Open and Public Meetings Act, being
UCA Title 52, Ch.4.
   (E)   If the Board Director who is a member of the Board of County
Commissioners is unable to attend any Board meeting, then that Director may
designate an alternate to act in that Director’s place, and the alternate’s
presence shall count as a Board Director for purposes of meeting a quorum and
voting.
   (F)   Records of all Board meetings shall be kept, managed, classified and
disclosed as required by county ordinance and state law, including, but not
limited to, the Government Records Access and Management Act, being UCA Title
63G, Ch. 2.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 8-11-2003)
§ 31.098 COMMITTEES.
   Ad hoc committees for the study and/or investigation of library issues or
other library matters may be appointed by the Board Chair to serve until the
completion of the work for which they were established.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 8-11-2003)
§ 31.099 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Subject to compliance with federal laws, state laws and county
ordinances and policies, the Board is hereby granted responsibility for:
      (1)   The expenditure of library funds;
      (2)   Establishing and revising policies in cooperation with the Library
Director for the use operation, maintenance and care of the library, library
facilities, equipment, staff and other such resources;
      (3)   The purchase, lease, exchange or sale of land; the purchase, lease,
exchange, sale or construction of buildings for the benefit of the library; and
the purchase, lease, exchange or sale or personal property for the benefit of
the library; and
      (4)   Establishing policies for the enforcement of library rules and
applicable laws and ordinances.
   (B)   Subject to compliance with federal and state laws regarding
collections and information resources, the Board shall:
      (1)   Establish policies for the selection, acquisition, cataloging,
maintenance and use of the library collections and information resources; and
      (2)   Submit those policies to the County Attorney for review for
compliance with state and federal law.
   (C)   Subject to compliance with federal laws, state laws and county
ordinances and policies, the Board shall:
      (1)   Recommend to the County Executive a competent person for
appointment with those duties specified in a job description approved by the
Board and the County Executive;
      (2)   Make an annual report to the county executive and the Board of
County Commissioners on the condition and operation of the library, including a
financial statement;
      (3)   Submit an annual report to the state’s Library Board;
      (4)   Furnish to the county executive, in writing, and prior to the time
required by law to levy county taxes, an estimate of the amount of moneys
necessary to establish, equip and maintain the library, and to provide library
services during the next ensuing fiscal year and to certify the amount; and
      (5)   Perform such other duties related to the library as established in
the official job description or as may be assigned by the county executive.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 8-11-2003)
§ 31.100 LIBRARIAN; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Librarian, as the County Library Director, shall be assigned the
following duties and responsibilities:
   (A)   Serve as the executive officer for the Board;
   (B)   Serve as the administrative officer and department head of the county
library system as a department of the county in accordance with and subject to
the requirements of county ordinances, policies and procedures; and
   (C)   Perform such other duties related to the library as established in the
official job description or as may be assigned by the county executive; be an
employee of the county subject to the personnel policies, procedures, merit
system and compensation plans approved by the county executive and Board of
County Commissioners.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 8-11-2003)
COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AGENCY
§ 31.115 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a community reinvestment agency, to be known as the
“Community Reinvestment Agency of San Juan County” (“Agency”).
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 31.116 COMMISSION DESIGNATED.
   The Board of Commissioners is hereby designated as the governing body of the
Agency.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 31.117 AUTHORITY.
   The Agency is hereby authorized to enter into agreements and transact
business and to exercise al powers, rights, duties and privileges as set forth
in the Limited Purpose Local Government Entities - Community Reinvestment
Agency (UCA §§ 17C-1-101 et seq.) (“Act”), as may be amended from time to time.
All of the provisions of the Act, as the same may be amended from time to time,
are hereby adopted as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 12-19-2017)
§ 31.118 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
   The Commission Chair or the Commission Chair’s designee will serve as the
executive director of the Agency and exercise the Agency’s executive powers. In
carrying out the executive powers of the Agency, the Commission Chair or his or
her designee may exercise all rights and powers not expressly required by the
Act to be performed by the governing body of the Agency.
(Ord. 2017-01, passed 12-19-2017)
CRIMINAL JUSTICE COORDINATING COUNCIL
§ 31.130 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the San Juan County Criminal Justice Coordinating Council
(“CJCC”) is to foster communication and collaboration among agencies involved
in the criminal justice system; to formalize the mechanisms for making
improvements to the criminal justice system; and to comply with the requirement
of UCA § 17-55-201(4) to develop and implement a strategic plan for the
county’s criminal justice system.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 31.131 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The CJCC is established to carry out the purposes described in this chapter.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 31.132 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The membership of the CJCC is guided by UCA § 17-55-201 (as amended).
The specific membership of the CJCC shall be as follows:
      (1)   One County Commissioner as designated;
      (2)   County Sheriff or his or her designee;
      (3)   One Chief of Police of a municipality within the county or his or
her designee;
      (4)   The County Attorney or the Attorney’s designee;
      (5)   A district court judge for the county;
      (6)   A justice court judge for the county;
      (7)   One public defender or attorney who provides public defense for the
county;
      (8)   A representative of the Division of Adult Probation and Parole
within the Utah Department of Corrections as assigned by the Division of Adult
Probation and Parole with a preference for an agent that has active cases
within the county;
      (9)   A representative of San Juan Counseling as designated by the
Executive Director;
      (10)   A county victim advocate;
      (11)   An individual with lived experience in the criminal justice
system;
      (12)   An individual representing the San Juan School District;
      (13)   A member of the Children’s Justice Center;
      (14)   The San Juan County Administrator.
   (B)   The San Juan County Commissioner assigned to the CJCC, who acts as
Chair of the Council, may appoint to the CJCC additional individuals as ex
officio non-voting members of the CJCC to represent the sectors listed in UCA §
17-55-201(2)(b). The Chair may appoint as many ex-officio members as deemed
appropriate. Appointment to the CJCC under this section is subject to
confirmation by the full Board of San Juan County Commissioners.
   (C)   Each member shall have one vote on all matters of which the CJCC takes
action.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 31.133 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Commissioner assigned to the CJCC shall serve as Chair of the
CJCC.
   (B)   A majority members of the CJCC shall constitution a quorum and a
majority vote of members present at a meeting shall constitute a binding action
of the CJCC.
   (C)   The CJCC shall comply with the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 31.134 DUTIES.
   The CJCC shall:
   (A)   Review, in a cooperative and comprehensive manner, the criminal
justice system in the county, the implementation of state and federally
required reforms, and look proactively at other ways the criminal justice
system can be improved;
   (B)   Develop and implement a strategic plan for the county’s criminal
justice system as set forth in UCA § 17-55-201(4)(a), as amended, which plan
shall include:
      (1)   Mapping of all systems, resources, assets, and services within the
county’s criminal justice system;
      (2)   A plan for data sharing across the county’s criminal justice
system;
      (3)   Recidivism reduction objectives; and
      (4)   Community reintegration goals.
   (C)   Create bylaws and appoint officers as the CJCC deems appropriate that
are not inconsistent with this chapter;
   (D)   Meet at least biannually; and
   (E)   Beginning in the year 2023, before November 30 of each year, provide a
written report to the Utah Commission on Criminal and Juvenile Justice
regarding the implementation of the strategic plan and any data on the impact
of the CJCC on the criminal justice system in the county.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-22-2022)
§ 31.135 SUPPORT STAFF.
   Administrative support for the CJCC shall be provided by the San Juan County
Attorney’s Office and County Administrator.
(Ord. 2022-05, passed 11-22-2022)
CHAPTER 32: PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Purpose
   
32.002   Applicability
   
32.003   System standards
   
32.004   Authority for policies
   
32.005   Savings clause
   
32.006   Disclaimer
   
32.007   Policy distribution
   
32.008   Definitions
Equal Employment Opportunity
   
32.020   Legal compliance
   
32.021   Anti-discrimination
   
32.022   Nepotism
Administration
   
32.035   Administration of policies
   
32.036   Office personnel records
   
32.037   Information requests
   
32.038   Records retention
   
32.039   Employment application information
Position Management
   
32.050   Position allocation
   
32.051   Job descriptions
   
32.052   Classification
   
32.053   Reclassification
   
32.054   Reorganization
   
32.055   Position review
   
32.056   Layoff; reduction-in-force (RIF)
   
32.057   Abolishment of position
   
32.058   Resignation
Recruiting and Hiring for New and Vacant Positions
   
32.070   Recruiting
   
32.071   Hiring procedures
   
32.072   Final appointment
   
32.073   Orientation period
   
32.074   Re-employment of retirees
   
32.075   Other employment actions
   
32.076   Appointed positions
Employment Status
   
32.090   Regular full-time employees
   
32.091   Regular part-time employees
   
32.092   Special appointments
   
32.093   Independent contractors
   
32.094   Grant positions
Employee Conduct, Discipline and Employment Actions
   
32.105   Employee discipline
   
32.106   Progressive discipline; employment actions
   
32.107   Employee good-faith reporting
Dispute Resolution, Appeal and Grievance Procedure
   
32.120   Basis for grievance and appeal procedures
   
32.121   Suspension and transfer appeal procedure
   
32.122   Demotion and involuntary termination appeal procedure
   
32.123   Grievance procedures
   
32.124   Employee complaint procedure for issues not grievable or covered
Compensation
   
32.135   Equitable pay
   
32.136   General wage/salary adjustment
   
32.137   Initial appointment and promotions
   
32.138   Overtime
   
32.139   Termination pay
   
32.140   Pay advancement
   
32.141   Severance pay
   
32.142   Payroll deductions/withholding
   
32.143   Payday
Benefits
   
32.155   Group health insurance
   
32.156   Vacation
   
32.157   Sick leave
   
32.158   Donation of accrued leave
   
32.159   Bereavement leave
   
32.160   Holiday leave
   
32.161   Court leave or jury duty
   
32.162   Maternity leave
   
32.163   Military leave
   
32.164   Administrative leave
   
32.165   Family and medical leave
   
32.166   Retirement
   
32.167   Employment insurance
   
32.168   Educational assistance
Reimbursement for Expense
   
32.180   Travel
   
32.181   Travel expenses
   
32.182   Use of personal vehicles
   
32.183   Use of county vehicles
   
32.184   Lodging
   
32.185   Per diem
   
32.186   Advance payments
Attendance, Work Hours and Timekeeping
   
32.200   Attendance
   
32.201   Timekeeping
   
32.202   Unforeseen work interruptions
   
32.203   Job abandonment
   
32.204   Overtime/after hours
Work Policies
   
32.215   General conduct
   
32.216   Performance documentation
   
32.217   Outside employment
   
32.218   Political activity
   
32.219   Garnishments
   
32.220   Drug-free workplace
   
32.221   Non-smoking policy
   
32.222   Racial and sexual harassment
   
32.223   Discrimination/harassment based on other protected categories
   
32.224   Religious liberty protections
   
32.225   Acceptable use of county information technology resources policy
   
32.226   Social media policy
   
32.227   Return to work policy
   
32.228   Conflict of interest policy
Occupational Laws
   
32.240   Occupational health and safety
   
32.241   Worker’s compensation
Emergencies and Accidents
   
32.255   Accidents
   
32.256   Vehicle safety and operator guidelines
   
32.257   Providing assistance to stranded motorists
   
32.258   Emergency call out
   
32.259   Personal safety
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
32.270   Supplies, tools and equipment
   
32.271   County vehicles
   
32.272   County volunteers
   
32.273   Telephone use (personal)
   
32.274   Use of county property or facilities
   
32.275   Uniform and equipment allowance
   
32.276   Receiving gifts, gratuities or other remuneration
   
32.277   Providing of gifts and awards
   
32.278   Employee parking
   
32.279   Use of county property
   
32.280   Personal use of public property policy
   
32.281   Credit card use policy
   
32.282   County owned cell phone and stipend policy
   
Appendix A:Family and Medical Leave Act Guidelines
   
Appendix B:Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The county is a political subdivision operating under the laws of the
state and administers public funds.
   (B)   The policies and procedures relative to the personnel working for the
county are set forth for a dual purpose:
      (1)   To give employees clear, concise information as to their rights,
privileges, obligations and responsibilities; and
      (2)   To provide elected officials, department heads and supervisors
direction in dealing consistently and fairly with all employees.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.002 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   These policies and procedures apply to all departments and employees
of the county.
   (B)   Except as otherwise specifically noted, these policies and procedures
apply to all county departments and, as such, all elected officials and
department heads are required to comply with them.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.003 SYSTEM STANDARDS.
   The system standards subscribed to by the county shall conform to the
following:
   (A)   Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their
relative ability, knowledge and skill levels;
   (B)   Providing adequate and equitable compensation;
   (C)   Training employees as needed, to assure high quality performance and
justify reasonable performance standards;
   (D)   Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance,
correcting inadequate performance and dismissing employees whose inadequate
performance cannot be corrected;
   (E)   Assuring a non-discriminatory setting for applicants and employees in
all aspects of personnel administration;
   (F)   Providing information to employees regarding their political rights
and prohibited practices under the Hatch Act or related legal guidelines; and
   (G)   Providing career employees with a formal procedure for the filing and
airing of grievances and appeals without fear of retaliation, discrimination,
coercion, restraint or reprisal.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.004 AUTHORITY FOR POLICIES.
   (A)   The policies and procedures of the county are established by the Board
of County Commissioners.
   (B)   The county may alter, amend or supplement these policies at any time.
Any amendments or changes thereto must be approved by the Board of County
Commissioners.
   (C)   Only the Board of County Commissioners can enter into contracts,
agreements or promises of any kind relative to employment with the county.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.005 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   If any provision of these policies and procedures, or the application
thereof, is found to be in conflict with any state or federal law, the
conflicting provision is hereby declared inoperative to the extent of the
conflict, but such conflict will not affect the operation of the remainder of
these policies and procedures, or any of its application.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.006 DISCLAIMER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to create a contract or
agreement between the county and any employee. Nor are any other obligations or
liabilities created by this chapter for the county.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.007 POLICY DISTRIBUTION.
   (A)   (1)   The Human Resource Department, upon adoption, shall distribute
this policy to every county department for dissemination to its employees.
      (2)   Providing access to the policy electronically satisfies the
distribution requirement.
      (3)   Each employee is expected to read and understand the policy and
after review will be required to sign a memorandum stating that they have been
given a policy, reviewed the policy and have had an opportunity to seek
clarification for those issues and policies not understood.
   (B)   The county reserves the right to change all benefits, separation
plans, programs, policies, practices and rules at any time and without prior
notice to employees.
   (C)   Employees may direct any questions regarding this policy to the County
Human Resource Department, San Juan County Courthouse, 117 South Main,
Monticello, 587-3225.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.008 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLOCATION (OF POSITION). The official establishment of a position by an
office/department, upon approval of the Board of County Commissioners, to hire
an individual to perform a specified job as defined by a job description and
assigned to an established pay range.
   APPEAL. A formal request to a higher level of review for consideration of an
unacceptable grievance decision.
   BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. Unless otherwise specifically defined, means
the elected governing body of the county.
   CLASS or CLASSIFICATION. A group of positions sufficiently similar in
respect to duties performed, degree of supervision exercised or required,
minimum requirements of training, experience or skill and other such inherent
characteristics that the same title and the same tests of fitness may be
applied to each position in the group.
   CLASS SPECIFICATION (ALSO JOB DESCRIPTION). A description of the duties and
responsibilities of each class of position within the county, and minimum
qualifications required for the class of position including training and
experience and other qualifications.
   CLASSIFICATION PLAN. A plan for the internal valuation of all positions in
the county with an appropriate title, pay grade and pay range.
   COMPENSATION PLAN. An approved salary scale for the county, including
initial, intervening and maximum rates of pay for each class of position.
   COMPENSATORY TIME. Time off of work awarded in lieu of cash for hours worked
in excess of the 40 hours work week. See overtime provisions in §
32.138.
   DEMOTION. A reduction in grade of an employee, for cause such as
inefficiency, or for disciplinary reasons, from one position to another, either
within the same class or to a different class having a lower entrance salary
with a corresponding lowering of the employee’s salary.
   DEPARTMENT. A service area or function of the county established by statute
or ordinance which come under the direct authority and supervision of the Board
of County Commissioners.
   DEPARTMENT HEAD. An appointed position of the county to plan, organize,
direct and manage a service or function established by statute or ordinance
which comes under the direct authority and supervision of the Board of County
Commissioners.
   DISCRIMINATION. Alleged violation of any applicable state or federal law
governing employment discrimination.
   ELECTED OFFICIAL. An individual elected by the public to plan, organize,
direct and manage a statutorily established political function of the county
(e.g., a County Commissioner, County Sheriff, County Clerk/Auditor, County
Treasurer, County Recorder, County Attorney, Justice Court Judge, County
Assessor and County Surveyor).
   ELIGIBLE APPLICANT. An individual who is qualified for a position, benefits
or privileges in the county under the provision of these policies and
procedures.
   EMPLOYEE, EMERGENCY. One who is hired for a specific function and is
generally only hired for a specific amount of days, generally not to exceed 30
days.
   EMPLOYEE, EXEMPT. An employee who, because of his or her positional duties
and responsibilities and level of decision making authority is exempt from the
overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). EXEMPT EMPLOYEES
are expected to work whatever hours are necessary to accomplish the goals and
deliverables of the position. Thus, EXEMPT EMPLOYEES have more flexibility in
their schedules to come and go as necessary to accomplish work than non-exempt
or hourly employees.
   EMPLOYEE, NON-EXEMPT. An employee who, because of the type of duties
performed, the usual level of decision making authority and the method of
compensation, is subject to all FLSA provisions. NON-EXEMPT EMPLOYEES are
normally required to account for hours and fractional hours worked. NON-EXEMPT
EMPLOYEES must be compensated for all hours worked including overtime hours at
the premium (time-and-one-half) rate of pay.
   EMPLOYEE, PART TIME. One who works less than 40 hours per week.
   EMPLOYEE, SEASONAL. One who is hired for a seasonal period to perform a
specific function and is generally hired for a period of 90 to 180 days.
   EMPLOYEE, TEMPORARY STATUS. One who is hired for a specific period of time,
generally less than 90 days.
   GOVERNING BODY. The Board of County Commissioners.
   GRIEVANCE. A complaint or resentment, as against an unjust or unfair act.
   IMMEDIATE SUPERVISOR. That employee or officer on the next direct line of
authority above an aggrieved employee.
   JOB DESCRIPTION. A written statement describing the duties of a particular
position within an office/department and the minimum requirements needed to
perform them.
   MALFEASANCE. Misconduct or wrong doing; doing what one should not do at all.
   MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS. The requirements for training and experience, and
other qualifications, to be measured by written and/or oral examinations, or by
performance tests and prescribed for a given class in the job specifications.
Applicants with fewer than stated MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS are deemed ineligible
or unqualified.
   MISFEASANCE. Doing incorrectly what should be done; wrong doing.
   NONFEASANCE. Failing to perform a duty or responsibility
   OFFICE. A work or service function governed and managed by an elected
official other than the Board of County Commissioners.
   ORIENTATION PERIOD. An “at will” employment period of at least six months of
regular employment or equivalent beginning with the date of appointment. The
ORIENTATION PERIOD is considered the final step in the selection process prior
to achieving regular employment status.
   POSITION. An office or employment in the county (whether part-time or full-
time, temporary or regular, occupied or vacant) composed of specific duties.
   PROMOTION. A change in status of an employee from a position in one class to
a position in another class having a higher entrance salary or pay grade.
   REASSIGNMENT. A change in classification of an employee, for administrative
or other reasons not included in the definition of “Demotion”, from a position
in one class to a position in another class normally having a lower entrance
salary which could result in a reduction in salary.
   RECLASSIFICATION. A change from one classification to another classification
(either higher or lower) having a different job specification without a
reduction in salary.
   REDUCTION-IN-FORCE. Any separation of an employee because of inadequate
funds, change of workload or lack of work, in which the county discontinues the
use of the identifiable position occupied by such employee either by
discontinuing the performance of the duties of such position or by distributing
such duties among other existing positions.
   REHIRE. The return to employment of a former employee who has resigned while
in good standing, or who has been separated from the county without prejudice
or cause.
   REINSTATEMENT. The resumption of employment of an employee who has been on
leave of absence with or without pay.
   RESIGNATION. The termination of employment at the request of the employee.
   SALARY ADJUSTMENT. A change in the rate of pay for an employee to conform
with the approved classification or compensation plan.
   SALARY INCREASE. An increase in salary of one or more steps within a grade
of the compensation plan.
   SEPARATION. See the definition of “dismissal”.
   SERIES. A group of positions similarly classified as to title and duties,
but with graduations in minimum qualifications and salary rates consistent with
the degree of responsibilities.
   SUSPENSION. A forced leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed
60 calendar days in any one year.
   TEMPORARY APPOINTMENT. An appointment or rehire for a period not to exceed
nine months.
   TERMINATION. The conclusion of an employee’s working relationship with the
county.
   TRANSFER (INTERDEPARTMENTAL). A move from one county office/department to
another. This should not be confused with managerial functions of moving
personnel from one section to another within the same office/department by
promotion, demotion or reassignment.
   VERBAL REPRIMAND. Instruction by a supervisor, department head or elected
official describing a change in behavior expected from an employee.
   VETERAN. A person who served in the active military (Army, Navy, Air Force
or Coast Guard) and who was discharged or released therefrom with other than a
dishonorable discharge.
   VOLUNTEER. A person who donates service without pay or other compensation
except expenses actually and reasonably incurred as approved by the supervising
agency.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
§ 32.020 LEGAL COMPLIANCE.
   It is the policy of the county to comply with the guidance set forth in
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Pub. Law No. 88-352); the Civil
Rights of 1991 (Pub. Law No. 102-166); § 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973
(Pub. Law No. 93-112); the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; and any
other state or federal statute, law or regulation that is related to fair
employment practices.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.021 ANTI-DISCRIMINATION.
   In accordance with federal law and the state’s Antidiscrimination Act, UCA §
34A-5-101, et seq. (1953, as amended), it is the policy of the county to
provide equal opportunity by ensuring that all personnel actions, including
hire, tenure or term, and condition or privilege of employment be based on the
ability to perform the duties and responsibilities assigned to a particular
position without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age,
sexual orientation or gender identity as that term is defined by UCA § 34-A-5-
102(o) (or as subsequently amended), pregnancy, child-birth, pregnancy-related
conditions or disability and with proper regard for their privacy as citizens
and constitutional rights.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.022 NEPOTISM.
   It is the policy of the county to comply with UCA §§ 52-3-1 to 52-3-4 (1953,
as amended), regarding the employment of relatives. The county strives to avoid
favoritism or patronage to relatives or close friends in matters related to job
recruitment, selection, job advancement or issuing contract for services. The
county discourages supervisors or department heads from hiring members of the
same family to work in the same department or under the same supervisor.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 32.035 ADMINISTRATION OF POLICIES.
   (A)   The day-to-day management of personnel activities and operations
within the county is the responsibility of the county Human Resource Director.
Elected officials and appointed department heads are also responsible for
assuring the effective administration of all policies and procedures within
their departments and offices.
   (B)   Under the direction of the Board of County Commissioners, the Human
Resource Director shall coordinate and manage all aspects of the personnel
management system and enforce all policies and procedures, which shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   The development and administration of the job classification and
compensation plans;
      (2)   The administration of a system of employee performance management;
      (3)   Recruitment, including the advertisement of vacancies and oversight
of selection processes;
      (4)   Procedures involving the training and disciplining of employees;
      (5)   Maintenance of all personnel records and actions;
      (6)   Promotions, demotions, suspensions and separations;
      (7)   Reassignments and reclassifications;
      (8)   Make reasonable and practical interpretations in the absence of
precedent regarding the meaning and intent of policies, procedures and the
like; and/or
      (9)   Other actions as prescribed by county rules, regulations, policies
and procedures.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.036 OFFICE PERSONNEL RECORDS.
   (A)   It is the policy of the county to maintain personnel records for
applicants, employees and past employees in order to document employment-
related decisions, evaluate and assess policies and comply with governmental
record keeping and reporting requirements.
   (B)   The county strives to balance its need to obtain, use and retain
employment information with each employee’s right to privacy. To this end, the
county attempts to restrict the personnel information maintained to that which
is necessary to conducting county business or which is required by state or
federal law or county ordinance.
   (C)   The Human Resource Director is responsible for overseeing the record
keeping for all personnel information and will specify what information should
be collected and it should be stored and secured.
   (D)   The Human Resource Department shall maintain the official personnel
records.
   (E)   According to law, all medical files and employment eligibility
certifications (I-9) shall be maintained separate from other personnel records.
   (F)   Employees have a responsibility to make sure their personnel records
are up to date and should notify the department head/elected official or the
Human Resource Department of any changes in at least the following:
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Address;
      (3)   Telephone number;
      (4)   Number of dependents;
      (5)   Address and telephone of dependents and spouse or former spouse
(for insurance purposes only);
      (6)   Beneficiary designations for any of the county’s insurance,
disability or retirement plans; and
      (7)   Persons to be notified in case of emergency.
   (G)   Personnel records shall contain, as appropriate:
      (1)   Record of application for employment;
      (2)   Reference to transcripts of academic preparation;
      (3)   Performance evaluation ratings;
      (4)   Any formal reprimand, corrective actions or commendation;
      (5)   Records of actions affecting employee salary, status or standing;
      (6)   Leave records;
      (7)   Any other information felt to be pertinent by the department head/
elected official, Human Resource Director or employee; and
      (8)   Records of employee past employment will not be kept in personnel
files.
   (H)   An employee has the right to review the contents of his or her
personnel record as governed by law under the supervision of the Human Resource
Director. The county will, upon written request, supply the employee with a
copy of any document it places in the employee’s file.
   (I)   If a disciplinary action is rescinded or overturned upon an appeal,
all forms, documents and records pertaining to the case shall be removed from
the employee’s personnel record and destroyed.
   (J)   Personnel records are private data and available for review only to
the employee and users authorized by law or as determined by the Human Resource
Director to have a legitimate need to know in accordance with Government
Records Access and Management Act (“GRAMA”). A log or record of those reviewing
personnel records and information shall be maintained together with the reason
for access to the records. All reviews of personnel records shall be done in
the presence of the Human Resource Director or designee. The responsibility for
the management of GRAMA requests has been assigned to the office of the County
Clerk/Auditor. The responsibility for what information will be released, who
can review the information and under what circumstances it can be reviewed is
contained in a county ordinance.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.037 INFORMATION REQUESTS.
   Information and records management shall be conducted in a manner consistent
with state law, Government Records Access and Management Act (GRAMA) and the
county’s record management policy. Requests for verification of employment;
names, gender, gross compensation, job titles, job descriptions, business
addresses, business telephone numbers, number of hours worked per pay period,
date of employment, relevant, previous employment and similar job
qualifications of present employees shall be treated as public information.
Such requests or inquiries should be directed to the Human Resource Director or
designee. The actual net salary of the employee is confidential information.
When providing information on previous employees for a reference check, the
county’s response shall be limited to the same information as provided for an
employment verification. Under no circumstance shall character judgments or
assessments be issued.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.038 RECORDS RETENTION.
   Employee records shall be retained in accordance with the schedules
established by the state’s Division of Archives and Record Services.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.039 EMPLOYMENT APPLICATION INFORMATION.
   (A)   General policy.
      (1)   It is the county’s policy to comply with the state’s Employment
Selection Procedures Act (“UESPA”) with regard to obtaining, using and
maintaining personal information of applicants for employment with the county.
Additionally, UESPA requires that the county maintain and make available this
policy to all such applicants.
      (2)   The county shall comply with all federal, state and local laws
concerning the selection and hiring of persons for employment.
   (B)   Definitions. In implementing this policy, the county will be guided by
the current definitions found in state statutes and regulations, or in case law
construing the statutes and regulations, and applicable federal law. In the
event of any conflict between the definitions in the UESPA and the definitions
in this policy, the legal definitions found in the UESPA will control. The
following definitions are provided for general guidance of employees and
applicants in understanding the policy.
      APPLICANT. A person who has applied for employment with the county.
      PERSONAL INFORMATION. All information about an applicant obtained by the
county in a written, electronic, audio or visual record, whether generated by
the applicant or by the county, for the purposes of considering applicant for
employment or further review. Examples of PERSONAL INFORMATION include, but are
not limited to, name, physical address, mailing address, phone number, e-mail
address, employment history, residence history, references, personal contacts,
physical characteristics, resume, restricted personal information and any other
data and information obtained about applicant.
      PROHIBITED USE. Providing or disclosing an applicant’s personal
information to a person other than a county employee, agent, officer or
official, or providing or disclosing an applicant’s personal information for
the purposes of marketing, profiling, reselling or other similar use.
      RESTRICTED PERSONAL INFORMATION. An applicant’s Social Security number,
date of birth and/or driver’s license number.
   (C)   Guidelines.
      (1)   The county will not request an applicant’s restricted personal
information unless:
         (a)   The county has offered the applicant a job; or
         (b)   The county needs applicant’s restricted personal information to
obtain, and the applicant consents to the county obtaining, a criminal
background check, credit history and/or driving record of applicant, in
accordance with all applicable state and federal laws.
      (2)   The county will not use an applicant’s personal information other
than to determine whether or not the county will consider the applicant for
further review or will hire the applicant as an employee. However, the county
may:
         (a)   Provide an applicant’s personal information upon request to a
government official if required to be disclosed by order of a governmental
agency, legislative body or a court of competent jurisdiction, or to a
representative of the state’s Labor Commission’s Division of Antidiscrimination
and Labor in a formal investigation of the county’s compliance with UESPA; or
         (b)   If the applicant is hired as an employee, use the applicant’s
personal information for a performance review or promotion application review
that is similarly conducted and applied to other employees in a similar
position.
      (3)   The county will maintain this employment application information
policy and will make it available for review to an applicant immediately upon
request by such applicant, including before the county obtains or applicant
provides applicant’s personal information.
      (4)   If the county does not employ the applicant, it will not retain
applicant’s personal information for more than two years after the date on
which applicant provides the information to the county as part of the
application process.
      (5)   The Human Resource Director is responsible for implementing this
policy, including determining when to request restricted personal information,
when and how to use and disclose an applicant’s personal information, and when
to destroy or dispose of it.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
POSITION MANAGEMENT
§ 32.050 POSITION ALLOCATION.
   (A)   The official establishment of a position by a department head/elected
official cannot take place without the approval of the Board of County
Commissioners.
   (B)   No person shall be hired or appointed, and no employee promoted to any
position (exceptions may occur for the occasional seasonal, emergency/
temporary, contractual or part-time professional work needs), until the
following has occurred:
      (1)   A presentation of justification as to the need for the position or
for the promotion and advancement of an employee;
      (2)   A verification that funds are available to support the position;
      (3)   The development or revision of a current job description; and
      (4)   The proper classification of the position and assignment to an
established pay grade and range is approved by the Human Resource Director.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.051 JOB DESCRIPTIONS.
   (A)   The initial content of all job descriptions shall be provided by
subject matter experts, such as department heads/elected officials, supervisors
and incumbent workers, through the use of questionnaires, written documents and
related materials. If needed, verification shall be obtained through on-site
job audits conducted or coordinated by the Human Resource Director. Based upon
information, the Human Resource Director shall prepare the description in
approved format for final draft.
   (B)   All employees will be assigned to employment as provided in an
established job description and must be able to meet the requirements for
performing the essential functions of the position to which assigned.
   (C)   Standard formats shall be established by the Human Resource Director
to include essential and marginal duties and responsibilities and minimum
qualifications (training, education and experience), and the Americans with
Disabilities Act (“ADA”) compliance. The description shall be used by the
county as the basis for:
      (1)   The classification of the position and determination of its rate of
pay;
      (2)   Preparation of examinations and for determination as to whether an
applicant or employee meets the minimum requirements for a particular class of
positions;
      (3)   The preparation of a position announcement soliciting applications
from interested individuals for position vacancies;
      (4)   The orienting of a new employee to the duties and responsibilities
of a position to which hired or promoted by an administrative officer,
supervisor or department head/elected official, in consultation with the Human
Resource Director; and/or
      (5)   The basis for the development of performance management objectives
and evaluations.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.052 CLASSIFICATION.
   All positions shall be comparatively evaluated against a set of common
factors and assigned a class title encompassing a specific salary range on the
compensation plan. All employees hired will receive compensation according to
the classification of the position for which they are hired. No salary shall be
approved for any individual unless it conforms to the approved classification
and compensation plan. Most employees will be hired at the entry level and will
progress through the salary range based on job knowledge and performance
warranting such advancement. ENTRY LEVEL is defined as the lowest grade within
the range of classification of the job description. Refer to §§
32.120 through
32.124 for further details regarding advancement through the salary range.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.053 RECLASSIFICATION.
   An employee’s position may be reclassified based upon an analysis conducted
by the Human Resource Director. When it appears that a job may be eligible to
be reclassified, the Human Resource Director, under the direction of the
department head/elected official, shall perform or cause analysis to be
performed of the job to determine whether a job shall be reclassified. The
reclassification of a position may or may not affect an employee’s salary. The
Human Resource Director shall inform and receive approval from the Board of
County Commissioners for any such reclassification actions.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.054 REORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Reclassification may be required from time to time as a result of
reorganization. Should circumstances arise from a reorganization or
reclassification process that requires the abolition of a position, this shall
be treated as a reduction-in-force (see §
32.056). Reorganization shall be sufficient cause for reclassification by way
of reassignment.
   (B)   In an effort to minimize the effects of a reduction-in-force brought
about by reassignment, reclassification or reorganization, the following
options shall be considered, depending upon qualifications and available
position vacancy:
      (1)   The employee may be returned to a lower grade position; or
      (2)   The employee may be transferred to another position.
   (C)   (1)   If the employee’s pay is greater than the maximum for the
position to which assigned or transferred the employee shall be placed on a
salary freeze for a period not to exceed two years.
      (2)   If during the two-year period, the employee’s rate of pay falls
back within the assigned pay range, the freeze shall be lifted.
      (3)   If at the end of two years, the employee’s rate of pay still falls
above the maximum of the pay range, that employee’s pay rate shall be reduced
to the maximum of the assigned position.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.055 POSITION REVIEW.
   At least annually, each county department or office is responsible to review
all job descriptions utilized within the department and report to the Human
Resources Department significant differences between the work actually assigned
and the job description.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.056 LAYOFF; REDUCTION-IN-FORCE (RIF).
   (A)   Should it become necessary to undergo a reduction of the work force,
brought about by a curtailment of operating revenues, technological innovation,
the discontinuance or reduction of services or other grounds consistent with
economic and efficient administration of the county; the Board of County
Commissioners, in cooperation with elected officials/department heads and the
Human Resource Director, shall attempt to utilize the following sequence as far
as practicable to achieve the required reduction:
      (1)   Temporary/seasonal employees (may be separated or reduced in work
hours);
      (2)   Tenured part-time employees (may be separated or reduced in work
hours); and
      (3)   Tenured full-time employees (may be separated or reduced in work
hours).
   (B)   (1)   In determining which employee(s) shall be separated, the Human
Resource Director, in conjunction with department head/elected official(s),
shall recommend which job classes are affected and may utilize such factors as,
but not limited to, longevity, performance and organizational needs.
      (2)   The Board of County Commissioners or affected elected official
shall have the final say when layoffs affect regular full-time employees.
   (C)   Employees will be notified, in writing, that they have been laid off
by reason of a reduction in force, the reasons for the reduction in force, the
circumstances by which their position was eliminated, and what benefits they
are entitled to, and that they are entitled to grieve the action to the Board
of County Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.057 ABOLISHMENT OF POSITION.
   If a circumstance should arise requiring the abolition of a certain
position:
   (A)   The employee may be offered a position at a salary for a position
which may entail a reduction in pay;
   (B)   The employee may be promoted based upon performance, qualifications
and position availability;
   (C)   The affected employee(s) may be transferred to another office/
department to fill an open position commanding equal or lesser compensation;
   (D)   If none of the alternatives are available, the employee shall be
separated from county employment; and/or
   (E)   The Board of County Commission shall make the final decision in such a
circumstance, including whether to offer the employee any alternative to
separation.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.058 RESIGNATION.
   (A)   Good standing. Any employee who resigns and desires to leave the
county in good standing should give a minimum of a two-week notice if they are
to be considered for re-employment at a future date. Resignations must be in
writing and be submitted to the department head/elected official.
   (B)   De-facto resignation. An employee who is absent from work for three
consecutive work days and is capable of giving proper notice to his or her
supervisor, but fails to do so, shall be deemed to have resigned and shall be
informed of the same in writing by the department head/elected official.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
RECRUITING AND HIRING FOR NEW AND VACANT POSITIONS
§ 32.070 RECRUITING.
   Selecting and advancing employees in the county system shall be on the basis
of their ability, knowledge and skill levels relevant to the vacant position.
   (A)   Internal department recruitment.
      (1)   When a new or existing position becomes vacant, the employees in
the department where the vacancy occurs shall be notified. If more than one
employee expresses interest in the position, the applicable supervisor will
conduct interviews. If the applicable supervisor determines that there is an
interested, suitable candidate from within the department, the position may be
filled internally upon review and approval from the Human Resource Director and
the Board of County Commissioners.
      (2)   In some instances where a temporary employee is functioning in a
similar position as that being recruited for, the department head/elected
official will have the option of filling the vacancy without formal recruitment
or competition so long as the temporary employee qualifies for the position.
This qualification procedure will be met when:
         (a)   The employee has been in a temporary position for a period of at
least three months; and
         (b)   The employee has satisfactorily performed the duties for which
he or she has been assigned.
      (3)   Additionally, when the need has been determined and a request has
been approved by the Board of Commissioners, the department head may promote an
employee into a newly vacated position.
   (B)   County-wide recruitment. If internal department recruiting produces no
suitable candidates, recruitment may continue by posting the vacancy within all
the county departments. Any county employee may apply for a position by
contacting the Human Resource Department. After the position closes, the
applicable supervisor may interview qualified applicants. If the elected
official, department head or supervisor determines there is a suitable
candidate, the position may be filled upon review and approval from the Human
Resource Director and the Board of County Commissioners. The supervisor may
also elect to refer the position to open recruitment. In such a case, qualified
county applicants will be considered with all other open recruitment
applicants.
   (C)   Open recruitment. If a position remains vacant after considering
departmental and county-wide recruitment, the county will publicly advertise or
post the vacancy as deemed necessary by the Human Resource Director. Outside
applications will be accepted for a minimum of seven calendar days after or
concurrent with departmental and county-wide recruitment. At the option of the
department head/elected official, workforce services or another recruiting
entity may be designated to assist in the application gathering and review
process. All interested applicants must file their applications with the Human
Resource Department. After the recruitment period closes, the Human Resource
Department will forward the qualified applications to the applicable supervisor
to decide which applicants to interview.
   (D)   Concurrent recruitment. At the discretion of a department head/elected
official and where it can be demonstrated that it is in the best interest of
the department/office, recruitment for an open position may run concurrently
(e.g., internal, county and open recruitment may run concurrently).
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.071 HIRING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   When a position becomes vacant or the need arises to create a
new position, the elected official or department head shall notify the Human
Resource Department of recruitment needs.
      (2)   Notification shall be accompanied by the position title and a
description of the duties, responsibilities and required knowledge and skills.
Minimum qualifications for education and experience shall be outlined for all
recruited positions.
      (3)   All employees and appointments must be hired into position that
have existing job classifications (except seasonal, temporary, contractual,
noncareer and part-time professional positions).
      (4)   Authorization to hire individuals into non-allocated positions must
be approved in advance by the Board of County Commissioners.
   (B)   Upon being given approval to recruit, the Human Resource Department
shall follow the county recruiting policy and procedure.
   (C)   (1)   Upon closing the recruitment, the supervisor and/or department
head/elected official over the position being recruited shall review all
applications and select a suitable number of interview candidates that meet the
minimum job qualifications. The interview process shall be coordinated by the
department head/elected official in connection with the Human Resource
Department.
      (2)   Upon completing the interviews and any related selection test(s),
the supervisor and/or department head/elected official shall submit the
recommendation for hire to the Human Resource Director. The Human Resource
Director shall submit the final recommendation for hire to the Board of County
Commissioners for final approval.
   (D)   The county reserves the right to reject any application which
indicates on its face that the applicant does not possess the minimum
qualifications required for the position. Applicants and subsequently hired
applicants who make false statements or who are found to be engaged in any type
of deception or fraud in the application or testing process shall be rejected
or immediately terminated.
   (E)   (1)   Applicants may be subjected to competitive testing which may
include, but not be limited to: determination of whether an employee is
bondable, rating of education and experience, written, oral or physical agility
tests, essential function demonstrations and/or background investigations,
proof of academic attainment and the like.
      (2)   Applicants for positions which require the employee to operate
county vehicles or equipment on public roadways must provide a copy of a Motor
Vehicle Record (“MVR”). MVR’s will be used to assist in the ranking of
applicants who meet the minimum requirements.
   (F)   Public health and safety demands that employees be physically able to
perform the duties of the job classification to which hired. The physical
requirements of the job constitute bona fide occupational qualifications. When
hiring a new employee, job offers are considered conditional if it is
determined that the candidate is required to pass a physical examination by a
qualified medical examiner before commencing work. The results of the exam will
be presented to the department head/elected official, in writing, and will be
treated as a confidential medical record. The county will also accommodate
employees and applicants in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) and provide “reasonable accommodation”.
      (1)   The county will pay the cost of any required medical examination.
      (2)   A final candidate for any position may be required to undergo drug
and alcohol testing. (See §
32.220)
   (G)   In conformance with the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986
(Pub. Law No. 99-603), the Human Resource Department shall establish an
employment verification system, and shall verify that all applicants for vacant
positions or persons hired to fill vacant positions are authorized to work
within the boundaries of the United States.
      (1)   The Human Resource Department shall complete or have completed
Immigration and Naturalization Service Form 1-9 prior to the hired employee’s
first day of work and verify work eligibility through examining such documents
as a United States passport, birth certificate, Social Security card, driver’s
license or an alien identification document.
      (2)   Employees must also attest in writing that they are authorized to
work in the United States.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.072 FINAL APPOINTMENT.
   The department head/elected official shall make recommendations for final
appointments for new hires to the Human Resource Director. The Human Resource
Director shall then submit the recommendation for hire to the Board of County
Commissioners for final approval.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.073 ORIENTATION PERIOD.
   (A)   (1)   All appointments to positions within the county, whether new
hires, rehire, reinstatements (affected by reduction-in-force or leave without
pay) or promotion, require an orientation period during which both the county
and the employee can determine compatibility and competence. This period is
regarded as a testing period designed to acquaint the new employee with the
position and allow the employee, supervisor and department head/elected
official to measure fairly the employee’s suitability for the job.
      (2)   The orientation period shall be six months in duration with an
option by elected officials/department heads to extend the period an additional
six months.
      (3)   The orientation period for Sheriff’s office employees shall be 18
months in duration with an option to extend the period an additional six
months. The employment relationship may be terminated at any time during the
new hire orientation period, with or without notice, and with or without cause,
by either the employee or the county.
   (B)   (1)   Promoted employees and all new employees who fail to demonstrate
competence and/or compatibility with the new assignment within the six-month
period or the 18-month period for Sheriff’s office personnel shall be
terminated, unless the department head/elected official decides to extend the
employee’s orientation period.
      (2)   Sheriff’s office personnel that are required to have Peace
Operations Special Training (“POST”) certification (road deputies and
correctional officers) shall have an orientation period that extends through
the POST certification program(s) required for their jobs. In other words, the
orientation period does not end until eighteen months after the POST
certification program is completed.
   (C)   Upon completion of the orientation period, the supervisor shall
conduct a performance review to apprize the employee of their suitability for
the position and determine the employment actions to be recommended to the
Board of County Commissioners.
   (D)   After the employee has completed the designated orientation period the
employee is deemed to be a regular county employee.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.074 RE-EMPLOYMENT OF RETIREES.
   It is the policy of the county to comply with UCA § 49-11-505 (1953, as
amended), regarding the re-employment of retirees. Furthermore, Internal
Revenue Service (“IRS”) regulations require that there be a bona fide
separation period before a retiree returns to work. Additionally, it is a
violation of IRS regulations to have a “deal” of re-employment arranged prior
to retirement. Therefore, an exemplary employee who is otherwise qualified to
retire under the state’s retirement system (URS) may retire and, at the sole
discretion of the county, become re-employed in a full- or part-time capacity
for any open position which he or she may be qualified for after six months
have passed from the retirement date without post-retirement restrictions under
the above statutory section.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.075 OTHER EMPLOYMENT ACTIONS.
   (A)   Promotion. A promotion is defined as a change in job title and/or
grade recognizing a substantial change in the employee’s duties (see §
32.053). Employees promoted into a higher pay grade will receive an increase
which is to go into effect the pay period following the promotion date.
   (B)   Reinstatement/rehire. 
      (1)   Former employees who left voluntarily, and in good standing may be
reinstated to a vacant position only when their qualifications and ability
indicate a potential for performance which would clearly exceed expected
performance of interested qualified current employees. Previous experience may
be given credit in determining placement of employee on salary schedule and
accrual of benefits if the rehire or reinstatement occurs within one year from
the date of termination.
      (2)   Former employees that were terminated or left county employment
voluntarily without giving proper notice are not deemed to have left the county
in “good standing” and may be denied an opportunity to apply or interview for
an open position.
   (C)   Transfer. When a position becomes vacant in any office/department
within the county, employees are free to make application for the position
without hindrance from other department head/elected officials. However,
employees are encouraged to visit with his or her department head/elected
official before making such application. The employee must be considered on an
equal basis with all other applicants. The office/department accepting the
transferring employee shall accept all accrued leave time as their budgetary
obligation.
   (D)   Reassignment. The effective operation of an office/department requires
periodic changes in work assignments to match functional needs with
capabilities from one position to a similar position in the same classification
and grade within the office/department. Also, employees may request
reassignments, but must do so in writing through established chains of
authority.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.076 APPOINTED POSITIONS.
   (A)   A Chief Deputy and Undersheriff are authorized appointed positions
within the Sheriff’s Office and the elected official may make appointments to
fill or vacate said positions with coordination and confirmation of the Chief
Administrative Officer that the appointment of the individual is qualified in
accordance with the position’s job description, that the individual meets
employment eligibility verifications, and of which position has been approved
by the Board of County Commissioners as part of the adopted fiscal budget.
   (B)   A Chief Deputy is an authorized appointed position within the
Surveyor’s Office and the elected official may make appointment to fill or
vacate said position with coordination and confirmation of the Chief
Administrative Officer that the appointment of the individual is qualified in
accordance with the position’s job description, that the individual meets
employment eligibility verifications, and if the position has been approved by
the Board of County Commissioners as part of the adopted fiscal budget.
   (C)   A Chief Deputy is an authorized appointed position within the
Recorder’s Office and the elected official may make appointment to fill or
vacate said position with coordination and confirmation of the Chief
Administrative Officer that the appointment of the individual is qualified in
accordance with the position’s job description, that the individual meets
employment eligibility verifications, and if the position has been approved by
the Board of County Commissioners as part of the adopted fiscal budget.
   (D)   A Chief Deputy is an authorized appointed position within the
Attorney’s Office and the elected official may make appointment to fill or
vacate said position with coordination and confirmation of the Chief
Administrative Officer that the appointment of the individual is qualified in
accordance with the position’s job description, that the individual meets
employment eligibility verifications, and if the position has been approved by
the Board of County Commissioners as part of the adopted fiscal budget.
   (E)   A Chief Deputy is an authorized appointed position within the
Treasurer’s Office and the elected official may make appointment to fill or
vacate said position with coordination and confirmation of the Chief
Administrative Officer that the appointment of the individual is qualified in
accordance with the position’s job description, that the individual meets
employment eligibility verifications, and if the position has been approved by
the Board of County Commissioners as part of the adopted fiscal budget.
   (F)   A Chief Deputy Clerk and a Chief Deputy Auditor are authorized
appointed position within the Clerk/Auditor’s Office and the elected official
may make appointment to fill or vacate said position with coordination and
confirmation of the Chief Administrative Officer that the appointment of the
individual is qualified in accordance with the position’s job description, that
the individual meets employment eligibility verifications, of which the Chief
Deputy Auditor position has been approved by the Board of County Commissioners
as part of the adopted fiscal budget.
   (G)   A Chief Deputy is an authorized appointed position within the
Assessor’s Office and the elected official may make appointment to fill or
vacate said position with coordination and confirmation of the Chief
Administrative Officer that the appointment of the individual is qualified in
accordance with the position’s job description, that the individual meets
employment eligibility verifications, and if the position has been approved by
the Board of County Commissioners as part of the adopted fiscal budget.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-21-2023)
EMPLOYMENT STATUS
§ 32.090 REGULAR FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   Employees that successfully complete the orientation period and work 40
hours per week are considered regular full-time employees and are eligible for
all the benefits, rights and privileges described in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.091 REGULAR PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Employees that successfully complete the orientation period and who
generally work less than 40 hours per week, but generally more than 20 hours
per week on a continuous or recurring basis are considered regular part-time
employees.
   (B)   The number of hours worked may be increased or decreased at the
discretion of the department head/elected official within the limits authorized
by the appointment of the position by the Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.092 SPECIAL APPOINTMENTS.
   Temporary, seasonal and emergency appointments are defined as being limited
to a definite period of time generally for not more than six consecutive
months. Appointments, such as summer help, may be made by the elected officials
and department heads and coordinated through the Human Resource Department to
carry out necessary seasonal work. Temporary employees, whether full-time or
part-time, shall not qualify for regular employee benefits (except that
mandatory benefits shall be provided as prescribed by law, e.g., Social
Security, workers compensation). Temporary employment does not count as credit
toward the completion of an orientation period if hired into a permanent
position.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.093 INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS.
   Independent contractors hired to perform professional or other specialized
services for the county are not employees of the county and do not qualify for
employee status, however, participation in any benefit program may be
negotiated as part of the contract or service agreement. The duration of the
contracts shall be established by statute or shall be determined on a project-
by-project or service-by-service basis by the Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.094 GRANT POSITIONS.
   (A)   A grant employee occupies a position which is more than 50% funded by
grant monies or another alternate funding source when it is anticipated that
the grant or alternate funding source will continue for more than two years.
Grant employees, may, upon consent of the Board of County Commissioners, accrue
benefits in the same manner as other employees, but the term of a grant
employee is subject to the availability of funds from the grant or other
alternate funding source. Such grant employees will not be retained when grant
funding is no longer available. Employees accepting grant positions shall be
required to sign a letter acknowledging the conditions of their employment and
the funding source to which the position is tied.
   (B)   Grant monies are funds received from sources other than the county’s
General Fund, enterprise funds and specialized taxes which are anticipated to
be available for more than two years and may require regular justification
reports to maintain and receive funding. Temporary fund contributions mandated
by law or to support programs mandated by law or inter local agreement, which
are anticipated to be available more than two years, may also be considered
grant monies.
   (C)   The Human Resource Director, consulting with the Clerk/Auditor’s
office, will determine which positions are to be funded by grant monies,
including alternate funding sources.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
EMPLOYEE CONDUCT, DISCIPLINE AND EMPLOYMENT ACTIONS
§ 32.105 EMPLOYEE DISCIPLINE.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of all employees to observe policies
necessary for the proper operation of county functions. Employees still within
their orientation period may be terminated at any time for any reason and are
not entitled to any form of progressive discipline nor are they entitled to
appeal any disciplinary measure. However, all employees that violate county
policy are subject to discipline. Depending upon the circumstances, the county
may reprimand, transfer, suspend, demote, reduce pay or terminate employees who
violate county policy.
   (B)   Grounds for discipline may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Inefficiency;
      (2)   Incompetence;
      (3)   Failure to maintain skills;
      (4)   Inadequate performance levels;
      (5)   Neglect of duty;
      (6)   Misconduct;
      (7)   Disloyalty;
      (8)   Inability to work in harmony with co-workers;
      (9)   Rudeness to the public;
      (10)   Disobedience of a reasonable order of a supervisor;
      (11)   Dishonesty;
      (12)   Insubordination;
      (13)   Misappropriation or damage to public funds or property;
      (14)   Misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office;
      (15)   Misuse of public funds or property;
      (16)   Tardiness;
      (17)   Unapproved absences; and/or
      (18)   Any act adverse to public service.
   (C)   The grounds for discipline list in division (B) above is not
exhaustive and is merely set forth as a guideline. This list should not be
construed as preventing or limiting the county from taking disciplinary action,
including termination, in circumstances where the county deems such action to
be appropriate regardless of whether the county has specifically identified a
written rule or policy. Similarly, employees may be disciplined for violations
of county policy found in other sections of this manual, violations of state or
federal law, or violations of relevant policies, rules or laws promulgated
elsewhere.
   (D)   (1)   Before implementing disciplinary action that may lead to
termination, the employee’s supervisor or department head/elected official
should review the circumstances with the Human Resource Director.
      (2)   Employees may appeal some, but not all, disciplinary actions
through the county’s dispute resolution process as outlined in §§
32.120 through
32.124.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.106 PROGRESSIVE DISCIPLINE; EMPLOYMENT ACTIONS.
   (A)   Verbal reprimand.
      (1)   A verbal reprimand is a formal conversation between a supervisor
and an employee about a specific aspect of the employee’s performance and/or
conduct. This step is taken when an employee has committed a relatively minor
violation of county policy.
      (2)   When giving the verbal reprimand, the disciplining authority should
identify the specific action(s) that warrant the verbal reprimand, the specific
policies violated, and the correction the employee is expected to make.
      (3)   After the verbal reprimand has been given, the supervisor must
summarize the meeting in writing, including the above cited elements in the
summary, in the event the formal documentation is required at a later date.
This verbal reprimand summary should be delivered to the Human Resource
Director to be placed in the employee’s official personnel file. Verbal
reprimands cannot be appealed or grieved under the county’s dispute resolution
process.
   (B)   Written reprimand.
      (1)   A written reprimand is a formal written notice to the employee
regarding repeated offenses for which a verbal reprimand has already been
given, significant misconduct and/or specific inadequate performance.
      (2)   The written notice should identify the specific action(s) that
warrant the written reprimand, the specific policies violated, and the
correction the employee is expected to make. The employee is asked to
acknowledge receipt of the reprimand by signing and dating the document. If the
employee refuses to acknowledge receipt, a witness can sign and date the
document stating the employee received a copy of this document. The original of
the reprimand, with the employee’s or witness’ signature, shall be sent to the
Human Resources Office for placement in the employee’s official personnel file.
      (3)   Written reprimands cannot be grieved under the county’s dispute
resolution process.
   (C)   Suspension.
      (1)   Suspension without pay is a severe disciplinary action administered
by the supervisor, department head or elected official. A suspension is usually
implemented after an oral reprimand and/or written reprimand have been given
and expectations of the supervisor/department head/elected official are not
being met by the employee, or when an employee commits a serious violation of
county policy. The length of the suspension will typically range from one to
five work days, but may be longer involving more serious matters. Prior to
deciding to suspend an employee without pay, a supervisor must provide that
employee an opportunity to give his or her side in response to the charges.
      (2)   The suspension without pay written notice shall include:
         (a)   The effective date of the suspension, including the time and
date the employee is to report back to work;
         (b)   Details of the incident(s) or action(s) warranting the
disciplinary action including the policies, rules and/or standards violated as
well as the dates and nature of previous direction such as verbal and written
reprimands (if applicable);
         (c)   A statement indicating the specific improvements expected; and
         (d)   Notice that this action may be grieved under this chapter and
the procedure and time limits contained therein.
      (3)   (a)   The employee is asked to acknowledge receipt of the
suspension by signing and dating the document.
         (b)   If the employee refuses to acknowledge receipt, a witness can
sign and date the document stating the employee refused to acknowledge receipt,
but received a copy of this document.
         (c)   The original of the suspension, with the employee’s or witness’
signature, shall be sent to the Human Resources Office for placement in the
employee’s official personnel file.
   (D)   Demotion/termination/dismissal.
      (1)   (a)   Demotion or termination is a severe disciplinary action
administered by the supervisor, department head or elected official. Such an
action usually occurs, but is not required to occur, when previous disciplinary
steps have been taken and there has been inadequate change in the performance
and/or behavior by the employee, or when an employee has committed a serious
violation not appropriately addressed by lesser forms of discipline.
         (b)   Prior to deciding to recommend demotion or termination, a
supervisor must provide that employee an opportunity to give his or her side of
the story in response to the charges.
      (2)   An employee that has fulfilled his or her orientation period that
is recommended for demotion or termination from county employment shall be
given a written statement setting forth the charges upon which the proposed
demotion or termination is based. The statement shall include:
         (a)   The effective date of the notice of proposed demotion or
suspension without pay pending termination;
         (b)   A statement detailing the incident(s) or action(s) warranting
the discipline, including the policies, rules and/or standards violated as well
as the dates and nature of previous supervisor direction such as verbal and
written reprimands, and suspensions (if applicable);
         (c)   An explanation of the employee’s right to a hearing as provided
by this chapter and the procedure and time limits contained therein; and
         (d)   A statement that the decision to demote or terminate will be
based on the findings of the hearing.
      (3)   The employee is asked to acknowledge receipt of the demotion/
termination notice by signing and dating the document. If the employee refuses
to acknowledge receipt, a witness can sign and date the document stating the
employee refused to acknowledge receipt, but received a copy of this document.
      (4)   (a)   The original of the demotion/termination notice, with the
employee’s, or witness’ signature, shall be sent to the Human Resource Office
for processing and placement in the employee’s official personnel file.
         (b)   No decision to recommend demotion or termination of an employee
will be made without prior consultation with the Human Resources Director.
   (E)   Other forms of discipline.
      (1)   If a disciplining authority determines to issue an alternative form
of discipline to those described above, the employee is entitled to the
procedure that is most closely aligned to the discipline that is issued.
      (2)   The Human Resource Director will ultimately determine which
procedure is most appropriate after giving due deference to the disciplining
authority’s opinion as to the appropriate procedure.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.107 EMPLOYEE GOOD-FAITH REPORTING.
   (A)   General policy. No employee may be subject to any adverse action as
that term is defined in the state’s Protection of Public Employee’s Act
(“UPPEA”), currently codified at UCA § 67-21-1 et seq., because the employee
communicates in good faith the waste or misuse of public funds, property or
manpower, a violation of a federal, state or local law, rule or regulation.
Moreover, no employee may be subject to adverse action because he or she has
objected to or refused to carry out a directive that the employee reasonably
believes violates a federal, state or local law, rule or regulation adopted by
the federal, state or local government.
   (B)   Reporting. An employee may report such conduct by giving written
notice or otherwise formally communicating the alleged conduct to:
      (1)   A person having authority over the alleged perpetrator;
      (2)   The State Attorney General’s office;
      (3)   Law enforcement (if the conduct is criminal in nature); or
      (4)   A member of the Board of County Commissioners or the County Clerk/
Auditor.
   (C)   Copy of statute. As required by UPPEA, a copy of the statute is
attached as Appendix B.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
DISPUTE RESOLUTION, APPEAL AND GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
§ 32.120 BASIS FOR GRIEVANCE AND APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   It is the intent of this section to provide for the reasonable
settlement of certain disputes between an employee and the county. All
employees and supervisory personnel should, however, make every possible effort
to settle differences without utilizing of the procedures contained in this
section.
   (B)   Any county employee that has completed an orientation period may file
a grievance as defined and deemed permissible in this chapter.
   (C)   No prejudicial, discriminatory or retaliatory action may be taken, at
any time, by the county against any person for his or her participation in or
statements made in the investigation or settlement of a grievance. This is in
no way meant to limit the right of the county to take appropriate disciplinary
measures for an employee who has provided false statements or accusations.
   (D)   A grievance shall be deemed abandoned if not filed and processed
within the time limitations contained in §§
32.121 through
32.123 below.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.121 SUSPENSION AND TRANSFER APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Step 1: suspension hearing.
      (1)   (a)   The employee who has been recommended for suspension shall
within five working days, not including the day of receipt of notice
recommending suspension, request in writing a hearing before his or her
department head/elected with a copy sent to the Human Resources Director.
         (b)   If an employee does not request a hearing, the department head/
elected official shall issue a written notice to the employee and Human
Resource Director imposing or not imposing the suspension without a hearing.
      (2)   (a)   If an employee does request a hearing, and if he or she so
desires, he or she may designate a representative to attend, but not
participate in the pre-hearing, and the employee shall provide to the Human
Resources Director the name of the employee’s representative at least one
working day prior to the pre-hearing.
         (b)   After the employee has had the opportunity to meet with his or
her department head/elected official and explain his or her side of the matter,
the department head/elected official shall promptly render a decision in
writing and forward a copy of the decision to the Human Resources Director. The
decision shall include a statement as to the reasons the suspension or transfer
was or was not imposed.
   (B)   Step 2: appeal.
      (1)   An employee, who after a hearing and written decision of his or her
department head/elected official has been deemed suspended and does not agree
with this written decision shall within ten working days of receipt of the
department head/elected official’s written decision file a written request with
the Human Resource Director for an appeal before the Administrative Law Judge.
The Human Resource Director will forward the request to the Administrative Law
Judge.
      (2)   The review and hearing of the appeal shall be conducted pursuant to
the procedures adopted in
Chapter 11 of this code.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 32.122 DEMOTION AND INVOLUNTARY TERMINATION APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Step 1: demotion/termination hearing.
      (1)   The employee who has been recommended for demotion or termination
shall within five working days, not including the day of receipt of notice
recommending demotion or termination, request in writing a hearing before his
or her department head/elected official with a copy of the request sent to the
Human Resources Director. Failure on the part of the employee to request a
hearing in writing before his or her department head/elected official or to
appear at a scheduled pre-hearing will serve as a waiver of the employee’s
grievance. If an employee has waived a hearing, the department head/elected
official shall issue a written notice to the employee and Human Resource
Director imposing or not imposing the demotion or termination.
      (2)   If an employee requests a hearing, the employee will be given at
least three working-days’ notice of the hearing date, time and location. The
hearing shall be the conducted by department head/elected official or his or
her respective designee. If desired by the employee, he or she may designate a
representative to attend but not participate in the hearing, and the employee
shall provide to the Human Resources Director the name of the employee’s
representative at least one working day prior to the hearing. Attendees of the
hearing shall include the employee and his or her representative, the
department head/elected official or his or her respective designee, a
management representative and a representative of the Human Resources Office.
The hearing will not follow the formal rules of evidence and will be conducted
in an informal manner. The management representative shall summarize the
disciplinary notice. The employee may then respond to all specific charges.
      (3)   The department head/elected official will promptly render a
decision in writing and forward to the employee and the Human Resources
Director a copy of the decision. The decision shall include a statement as to
the reasons the demotion or termination was or was not imposed.
   (B)   Step 2: appeal.
      (1)   An employee, who, after a hearing and written decision of his or
her department head/elected official, has been deemed demoted or terminated and
does not agree with this written decision shall within ten working days of
receipt of the department head/elected official’s written decision file a
written request with the Human Resource Director for an appeal before the
Administrative Law Judge. The Human Resource Director will forward the request
to the the Administrative Law Judge.
      (2)   The review and hearing of the appeal shall be conducted pursuant to
the procedures adopted in
Chapter 11 of this code.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 32.123 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES.
   The grievance procedure for the application of express terms of this chapter
which deprive an employee of accrued and/or existing pay and/or benefits or
that is related to any adverse action taken against him or her for reporting
governmental waste or legal violations is as follows.
   (A)   Step 1. An employee that has completed his or her orientation period
who believes that he or she has a grievance relating to the application of the
express terms of these policies and procedures which deprive him or her of
accrued and/or existing pay and/or benefits or that is related to any adverse
action taken against him or her for reporting governmental waste or legal
violations in violation of §
32.107 shall reduce the grievance to writing and submit it to the employee’s
department head, with a copy sent to the Human Resource Director, within ten
working days of the alleged violation. The grievance shall state the violation
and cite the policies and procedures section. Upon receipt of the grievance,
the department head/elected official will provide the employee an opportunity
to meet him or her and will then promptly respond to the grievance in writing.
If desired by the employee, he or she may designate a representative to attend
but not participate in the hearing, and the employee shall provide to the Human
Resources Director the name of the employee’s representative at least one
working day prior to the hearing. The department head/elected official’s
grievance response must be consistent with county human resource systems,
programs, procedures and practices as established by this chapter and/or by the
Human Resource Department.
   (B)   Step 2.If the grievance is not settled after following the procedure
described in division (A) above, the employee may file within ten working days
of receipt of the department head/elected official decision a written request
to the Human Resource Director for review by the Chief Administrative Officer.
The Human Resource Director will forward the request to the Chief
Administrative Officer. At the discretion of the Chief Administrative Officer,
an employee grievance may be referred to the Administrative Law Judge for
review.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 32.124 EMPLOYEE COMPLAINT PROCEDURE FOR ISSUES NOT GRIEVABLE OR COVERED.
   The employee complaint procedure for issues not grievable, not appropriately
under the jurisdiction of an outside entity, and not covered by a different
appeal procedure in this chapter is as follows.
   (A)   (1)   For matters not grievable under this chapter, or for which no
other appeal procedure is provided for in this chapter, or for matters not
under the exclusive jurisdiction of an outside agency, an employee that has
completed his or her orientation period may submit a written complaint to his
or her supervisor for consideration.
      (2)   The supervisor shall promptly respond to the employee’s complaint
in writing. If the issue is not settled at this level, or if the employee’s
complaint is about his or her supervisor, the employee may submit the written
complaint to the next level of supervision in the department for consideration.
The procedure may continue in this manner until the issue is settled and/or the
employee submits the written complaint to his or her department head/elected
official for consideration. The department head/elected official shall promptly
respond to the employee’s complaint in writing and forward a copy of this
response to the Human Resource Director.
      (3)   The decision of the department head/elected officials or his or her
designee will be final and not reviewable by an independent hearing officer.
   (B)   All complaint responses must be consistent with county policy,
procedures and practices. Additionally, if the complaint is related to human
resource matters, all complaint responses must be consistent with county human
resource systems, programs, procedures and practices as established by this
chapter and/or by the Human Resource Department.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
COMPENSATION
§ 32.135 EQUITABLE PAY.
   (A)   Compensation for county employees shall be competitive and as
equitable as possible within the marketplace.
   (B)   The assignment of employees to positions and pay rates shall be
consistent with the formal classification plan.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.136 GENERAL WAGE/SALARY ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of the county to consider prevailing practices
related to cost-of-living and market trends to establish wages and salaries.
However, every proposed salary change must be weighed against the anticipated
affect(s) upon the county budget. Final determination and any changes to the
salary scale will be made by the Board of County Commissioners.
   (B)   Where general, across-the-board raises are awarded, the raise will be
effective on a date determined and approved by the Board of County
Commissioners.
      (1)   Cost-of-living vs. market. Adjustments to the salary schedule may
be determined periodically through analysis of market trends in comparison to
cost-of-living. This may be done once per year and the county may utilize
either market survey results or cost-of-living index data or a combination of
both. All employees, regardless of employment status, shall receive the
benefits of such general adjustment to the pay plan.
      (2)   Benefits. In determining the total compensation value of the
position, benefits must be considered. Base salary plus cost of benefit equals
total compensation. In comparing benefit packages provided in the labor market,
the county may evaluate both level and cost of benefits or other factors as
deemed appropriate.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.137 INITIAL APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTIONS.
   (A)   All initial appointments, including promotions, shall normally be
assigned to the starting rate of the pay grade to which the position is
classified.
   (B)   Exceptions may be allowed if:
      (1)   An employee cannot be recruited for the position at the beginning
rate; or
      (2)   The qualifications of the individual selected for the position
exceed the minimum requirements and the individual can be expected to perform
at a level equal to that of other individuals being paid at the same or higher
step.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.138 OVERTIME.
   (A)   Overtime shall be avoided if at all possible. For some county
departments and offices overtime is unavoidable. Every effort should be made to
keep the accumulation of overtime hours to a minimum. Any time worked over 40
hours in any defined work week or work period (fire: 212 hours in a 28-day
period; law enforcement: 171 hours in a 28-day period) by a Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA) covered employee, shall qualify as overtime.
   (B)   The following rules apply to the accumulation and compensation for
overtime worked.
      (1)   For the purpose of calculating overtime under the Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA), the work week shall begin at 12:00 a.m. on Monday and end
at 12:00 a.m. (midnight) on Sunday.
      (2)   All overtime needs to be pre-approved by a supervisor or department
director.
      (3)   Employees with excessive overtime may be subject to a desk audit.
   (C)   (1)   Some county employees are not covered by the FLSA’s minimum wage
and overtime requirements. These employees/officials include elected officials,
policy-making appointees and legal advisors. Other exempt employees include
executive, administrative and professional employees.
      (2)   The county determines, after review and approval from Human
Resources and the Board of County Commissioners, which positions to
characterize as exempt from the FLSA. FLSA exempt positions are generally
compensated on a salary basis and do not accrue compensatory time for overtime
hours worked.
   (D)   (1)   For all regular full-time, temporary and seasonal employees,
overtime shall be paid at the rate of time-and-one-half the regular rate of pay
for all hours worked in excess of the 40-hour work week or pay period for law
enforcement personnel, as described in division (A) above.
      (2)   All authorized monetary payments for overtime shall be issued on
the regularly scheduled pay day for the pay period in which it was earned.
   (E)   (1)   The Federal Government has allowed local and state governments
to pay compensatory time (“comp-time”) instead of overtime monetary pay. This
is provided that employees agree to accept comp-time in writing and the rates
at which it is paid are the same at which monetary compensation would have been
paid. For instance, a worker who works more than 40 hours per week will receive
one and one-half hours of comp-time for each hour of work over 40.
      (2)   No employee not eligible for overtime pay shall be eligible for
comp-time pay.
   (F)   Comp-time may only be used when an employee has agreed in a signed
writing to receive overtime through comp-time.
      (1)   All accrued compensatory time shall be used before the use of
accrued vacation or other forms of leave.
      (2)   In no event shall any employee be able to accumulate hours in
excess of the limits established below.
         (a)   Employees engaged in public safety activities, emergency
response activities, or seasonal activities who are not exempt from the Fair
Labor Standards Act overtime rules may accumulate no more than 480 hours.
         (b)   Employees engaged in any other activity not listed above and who
are not exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act overtime rules may accumulate
no more than 240 hours. Additionally, once such employees have worked 160 hours
of overtime, they may accumulate no more comp-time.
      (3)   No employee may be forced or coerced to accept comp-time in lieu of
payment.
      (4)   Employees must be allowed to use the comp-time within a reasonable
period after the employee makes a request for its use if that will not unduly
disrupt the operations of the department.
   (G)   Records of overtime hours worked shall be maintained by the department
head/elected official and reported monthly to the Clerk/Auditor.
   (H)   When call-out occurs, as in the case of emergencies, snow removal and
the like, the county shall pay a minimum of one-half hour of overtime when the
employee is called out to work other than their regular work schedule.
   (I)   All time spent in training, in conferences, at workshops, meetings and
the like or traveling to such events, when such attendance is required by the
county, shall constitute hours worked and shall be used to calculate overtime
eligibility under the FLSA.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.139 TERMINATION PAY.
   (A)   An employee’s final paycheck will be issued within 24 hours of
termination. Compensation for all unused vacation and accrued time will be
calculated according to county rules and policies governing these programs.
   (B)   The Human Resource Director, under the direction of the department
head/elected official or and in coordination with the office of the Clerk/
Auditor, shall determine the amount of termination pay to which the employee is
entitled. In the event of death of an employee, final payment shall be made to
the employee’s beneficiary.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.140 PAY ADVANCEMENT.
   The county will not make pay advances.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.141 SEVERANCE PAY.
   When it becomes necessary to terminate an employee from county employment
and it is in the best interest of both the employee and the county to expedite
such action; the employee shall be issued severance pay not to exceed two weeks
pay, in lieu of two weeks notice. Employees terminated for cause shall not be
eligible for severance pay.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.142 PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS/WITHHOLDING.
   Payroll deductions other than FICA, state and federal income tax
withholdings and garnishments (defined in §§ 32.255 through 32.259), can only
be made with the signed consent of the employee.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.143 PAYDAY.
   County employees will be paid every other Friday. If pay day falls on a
holiday, all county employees will be paid on the preceding workday.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-12, passed 12-21-2021)
BENEFITS
§ 32.155 GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE.
   (A)   All regular full-time employees who work 30 or more hours per pay week
are eligible to participate in the county’s group health insurance program. To
enroll, employees must join the plan within 30 days of their hire date, or
within 30 days of becoming eligible to enroll. If, in any given period, an
employee does not work 30 or more hours in a pay week, due to no fault of his
or her own (either because of illness or hours not being available), the
insurance will stay in effect as long as the employee averages 30 hours per
week during the year.
   (B)   Costs are subject to change at any time due to increased cost of the
program. Employees may opt out of insurance coverage with proof of valid
insurance coverage from another source. Employees opting out will be paid $250
a month for the entire year of coverage. Employees must have the County
Administrator authorize the waiver of health insurance coverage form.
   (C)   New employees who fail to enroll within 30 days of his or her hire
date shall not be covered by county insurance until January 1 of the following
year or other annual open enrollment date established by the county. All other
changes to the employee’s plan (i.e., birth/adoption of a child) must be made
within 30 days of the date of the event.
   (D)   Insurance coverage begins on the first day of employment if properly
enrolled as discussed directly above.
   (E)   Insurance coverage for an employee ends on the last day of the month
during which the employee worked unless the employee elects COBRA coverage as
discussed below.
   (F)   Employees wishing coverage for minor children (other than their own)
living with them full-time must submit a copy of legal guardianship/power of
attorney and a completed health questionnaire to the Human Resources for review
before coverage shall be granted.
   (G)   The county’s group health insurance covers children on their parent’s
plan, even if they are not classified as a dependent, until they are 26 years
old.
   (H)   COBRA coverage. Under the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act, 1985 (COBRA), a person who has been covered under an employer’s group
medial and hospitalization insurance plan as a plan participant or dependent
may be eligible to continue coverage for a limited period of time after such
coverage would otherwise terminate. More specifically, a county employee that
has been employee for six consecutive months prior to their voluntary or
involuntary termination (other than for gross misconduct) from county
employment will be allowed to continue medical and hospitalization insurance
coverage for themselves, their spouse and dependents for up to 18 months from
the date of termination. However, the terminated employee is required to pay
the entire cost of the coverage and coverage may cease if the premium payments
are not made. The county may assess up to 2% of the premium as an
administrative fee.
   (I)   Coverage and similar requirements are governed by the statute and
insurance policies at issue. Life insurance is also provided. Questions
regarding issues should be directed to Human Resources.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. 2022-06, passed -
-)
§ 32.156 VACATION.
   (A)   The county believes that a reasonable period of time away from the job
is conducive to the good health and well-being of its employees and that
healthy, happy employees are a tremendous asset to the county.
   (B)   All employees designated by the Board of County Commissioners are
eligible for vacation as accrued. Employees who work more than 32 hours per
week are eligible for vacation on a pro-rated basis. Temporary or seasonal
employees will not be entitled or eligible for vacation time.
   (C)   Accumulation of vacation shall be based upon the following schedule:
 
County Service   Monthly/Yearly Vacation Accrual
0 to 9 years     Up to 80 hours per year
10 to 14 years   Up to 120 hours per year
15 or more years Up to 160 hours per year
 
   (D)   Vacation leave may not be accrued during a period of time when leave
of absence without pay is being granted. This preclusion includes periods of
leave of unpaid leave allowed for by the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA).
   (E)   Employees shall be entitled to utilize vacation only at the
convenience of the department in which they are employed. However, each
department head/elected official shall make every effort to encourage employees
to utilize their vacation and try to arrange work schedules to permit employees
to take vacation at times convenient to them and the county. Vacation cannot be
used in conjunction with workers’ compensation leave in offsetting holiday pay,
and the like.
   (F)   There is no limit to the amount of accrued vacation time that may be
used at once as long as the needs of the department are met. Conversely, there
is no minimum amount of vacation that must be used at once.
   (G)   An authorized holiday which falls within the time period of employee’s
scheduled vacation shall not be charged as vacation used.
   (H)   Unused current and accrued vacation may be carried forward to
succeeding years. However, no more than two years will be carried. Once an
employee has reached two years of accrued vacation leave they will stop
accruing vacation leave time until their accrued balance drops below the two
years maximum.
   (I)   Former employees that are re-hired with reinstatement rights following
military service or recall from active layoff status shall be entitled to
assume the same eligibility for vacation as enjoyed prior to leave or layoff.
   (J)   The county will not advance vacation days. No elected official or
department head shall authorize the use of non-accrued vacation time.
   (K)   Accumulated earned vacation time shall be paid for by the employing
department when a designated employee separates from the county.
   (L)   The use or non-use of an employee’s vacation leave time is to be
reflected monthly on that employee’s time sheet and monitored by that
employee’s department head or elected official. The official record of accrued
vacation leave is to be kept by the Clerk/Auditor.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.157 SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   (1)   Compensated sick leave is a county-owned benefit afforded to
employees, designated by the Board of County Commissioners, who work 32 hours
per week or more and become ill or injured and cannot perform their normal
duties.
      (2)   Part-time employees averaging less than 32 hours per week or
temporary or seasonal employees are not entitled to sick leave.
   (B)   Sick leave is a privilege and employees shall use it responsibly.
   (C)   While employees have the discretion of managing their sick leave, it
is not intended to be used for vacation purposes. The divisions below are
intended to provide general guidance on how sick leave is to be used. Abuse or
violation of this section may subject the employee to disciplinary action.
      (1)   (a)   Sick leave. Eligible employees shall accumulate sick leave at
the rate of 3.69 hours per pay period. Anytime an employee uses sick leave,
that employee must notify his or her supervisor/department head/elected
official as soon as possible and receive approval to take the leave. Sick leave
can be used for a variety of reasons such as personal or family need, leave
from the first day of missed work due to illness, issues related to the
employee’s own health or that of certain family members, and for family related
absences as covered by the Family & Medical Leave Act (FMLA).
         (b)   Unused sick leave in excess of 520 will be paid out at 100%
annually.
      (2)   Sick leave may not be accrued during an unpaid leave of absence
from the county. This preclusion includes periods of unpaid leave allowed for
by the Family & Medical Leave Act (FMLA).
      (3)   Employees absent from work due to their own illness or injury will
be carried on payroll in a leave without pay status for time equal to
compensated illness accrued or 12 weeks, whichever is greater.
      (4)   Non-scheduled working days and legal holidays occurring while an
employee is ill are not deducted from compensated illness leave credit.
      (5)   Termination. Accumulated earned traditional sick leave time shall
be paid for by the employing department when a designated employee separates
from the county on good terms after five years of continuous service. If an
employee is terminated for cause, accumulated sick leave will not be paid out.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. 2022-06, passed -
-)
§ 32.158 DONATION OF ACCRUED LEAVE.
   Employees desiring to donate his or her accrued leave time to another county
employee will be allowed to do so with the following conditions:
   (A)   Employees shall not be allowed to receive donated or shared leave
prior to exhausting all of his or her accrued leave.
   (B)   A form will be provided for the transfer of accrued time and must be
filled out by donating employee.
   (C)   Accrued time will be donated on an hour-to-hour basis. Donations will
be made on a bi-weekly basis at the time that payroll is submitted and
receiving employee will only be permitted accept enough hours from donating
employees to cover his or her needs for that pay period.
   (D)   Employees are not allowed to bank donated leave time beyond what is
needed to cover his or her needs.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. 2022-06, passed -
-)
§ 32.159 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.
   When a death occurs within the “immediate family”, to a relative or close
friend, the maximum three of days per occurrence are to be allowed off with pay
and will be determined by the supervisor according to the following policy:
   (A)   For members of the “immediate family” (for the purposes of this
section is a spouse, child, stepchild, parent, stepparent, brother, sister,
grandparent, spouse’s grandparent, grandchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, daughter-in-law and son-in-law), employees shall
be granted leave with pay, not to exceed three days, unless approved by the
department head/elected official. Employees desiring extended funeral leave may
be required to use compensatory time, vacation or leave without pay if extended
leave is granted. Deaths that occur during the use of vacation shall be treated
as described in this division and are not charged to vacation.
   (B)   Bereavement leave may not be charged against accrued sick or vacation
leave.
   (C)   For other family relations and friends, compensatory vacation or leave
time without pay may be taken when agreed upon by the department head/elected
official.
   (D)   The County Administrator and department heads are charged with the
responsibility to approve or disapprove leave requests and may require the
employee to provide evidence of the death and/or family relationship.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. 2022-06, passed -
-)
§ 32.160 HOLIDAY LEAVE.
   (A)   The following days have been designated by the county as paid holidays
for regular full-time employees. Employees working flexible schedules, such as
four ten-hour days per week, may use a maximum of 110 hours of holiday leave in
each calendar year.
Date Holiday Observed
Date                                   Holiday Observed
January 1                              New Year’s Day
Third Monday in January                Human Rights Day
Third Monday in February               President’s Day
Last Monday in May                     Memorial Day
June 19                                Juneteenth
July 4                                 Independence Day
July 24                                Pioneer Day
First Monday in September              Labor Day
Second Monday in October               Indigenous Peoples Day
November 11                            Veteran’s Day
Fourth Thursday and Friday in November Thanksgiving holiday
December 25                            Christmas Day
 
   (B)   (1)   When any of the holidays listed in division (A) above fall on a
Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed as the holiday.
      (2)   When any of the above holidays fall on a Saturday, the preceding
Friday shall be observed as the holiday. However, those offices required by law
shall remain open for business.
   (C)   Should a holiday occur while an employee is on vacation, the employee
will not be charged with vacation the day of the holiday.
   (D)   Employees on unpaid Family Medical Leave (FMLA) are not entitled to
holiday pay for holidays that occur while the employee is on unpaid FMLA leave.
   (E)   Eight hours shall be designated as “personal preference” hours. These
hours may be taken in no less than half-hour increments. These personal
preference hours will not be granted to an employee until he or she has worked
for the county a minimum of one calendar year in a permanent position.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. 2022-06, passed -
-)
§ 32.161 COURT LEAVE OR JURY DUTY.
   (A)   Witnesses. An employee who, in obedience to a subpoena or direction by
proper authority, appears as a witness for the federal government, the state or
a political subdivision thereof, shall be entitled to leave with pay. However,
the regular court compensation fees received by the employee shall be signed
over to the county. Time absent by reason of a subpoena to be a witness in
private litigation or by some party other than those identified above, to
testify not in an official capacity shall be taken as annual leave without pay.
   (B)   Juror. An employee who, in obedience to a subpoena or direction by
proper authority, to appear as juror shall be entitled to leave with pay.
However, the regular court compensation fees received by the employee shall be
signed over to the county.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.162 MATERNITY LEAVE.
   (A)   Maternity leave shall be treated as any other illness. Leave granted
for maternity purposes shall be allowed on the same basis for which sick leave
or Family and Medical Leave (FMLA) without pay is granted. Paid sick leave or
FMLA leave without pay is available to cover the time for the pregnant
employee’s physical examinations and periods of incapacitation.
   (B)   (1)   Employees who have exhausted all accumulated sick leave shall be
granted Family and Medical Leave (FMLA) without pay for maternity purposes.
      (2)   Employees desiring extended leave due to pregnancy disability shall
receive it on the same basis as any other disability, as defined in §
32.200(C)(4).
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.163 MILITARY LEAVE.
   Leave shall be given as required by federal and state law to all qualified
members of the armed services.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.164 ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE.
   In cases of training, special educational pursuits, hardships, or other case
not provided for in these policies (i.e., one-half day off paid for Christmas
Eve) the County Administrator may grant short-term leave and full, partial or
no pay. The approval or denial of such requests is at the discretion of the
County Administrator and are not subject to appeal. Administrative leave
requests must be approved in writing in advance of the scheduled leave with
acknowledgment to Clerk/Auditor’s office for payroll purposes.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. 2022-06, passed -
-)
§ 32.165 FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE.
   (A)   Policy. The county will comply with all applicable requirements of the
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA). The Human Resources shall prepare,
and update as appropriate, written guidelines to implement this policy and
shall provide a copy of those guidelines to each employee. The type and length
of leave, and compensation to be received, if any, during the leave will also
be set forth in those guidelines. The most recent guidelines are detailed in
Appendix A.
   (B)   Notice and verification. Employees applying for FMLA leave ordinarily
must provide the county with at least 30 days notice of the need for leave, if
the need for leave is foreseeable. If the need is not foreseeable, the employee
should give as much notice as is practical. Employees who will be absent from
work for three or more days, due to his or her serious health condition or that
of a parent, spouse or child, or another “qualifying exigency” shall apply for
FMLA leave. The employee notice shall contain the reason for the leave, the
anticipated timing of the leave and the expected duration of the leave. In
addition, employees who need leave for their own or a family member’s serious
health condition, must provide medical certification of the serious health
condition within 15 days after the request or as soon thereafter as is
reasonably possible. The county may also require a second or third opinion (at
the county’s expense), periodic re-certification of the serious health
condition (as frequently as every 30 days), and when the leave is a result of
the employee’s own serious health condition, a fitness for duty report to
return to work. The county may deny leave to employees who do not provide
proper general or advanced leave notice or medical certification within
established time frame.
   (C)   Measurement. The county has designated the 12-month period to be
measured forward from the day an employee’s FMLA leave commences, until
changed.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.166 RETIREMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The county is a participant in the public safety and public
employee retirement programs of the Utah State Retirement Systems (URS). The
county endorses the concept that performance and not age should be the standard
for retaining qualified employees.
      (2)   There is no set retirement age from county employment. Under
provisions of the State Retirement Act, some employees may qualify to retire as
early as age 60 or upon completion of 35 years of accredited service.
   (B)   Employees, at their discretion, may choose to retire anytime after
they are eligible under provisions of the Retirement Act.
   (C)   Employees over retirement age can be retained or hired as long as they
are physically and mentally able to satisfactorily discharge the duties of the
position.
   (D)   For those employees who are under State Retirement Systems rules and
regulations are eligible to choose not to participate in the State Retirement
System, the county will contribute, in an amount equal to that being paid on
behalf of employees enrolled under the “employee” group, into an alternate
retirement program through a payroll deduction option presently established.
   (E)   Full-time elected officials:
      (1)   Elected officials, serving in a full-time capacity, taking office
after June 30, 2011, are restricted to participation in the URS Tier 2 defined
contribution plan.
      (2)   Elected officials, with URS service prior to July 1, 2011, may
participate in the defined benefit plan or exempt from retirement coverage,
once they meet the salary requirements outlined in the URS employer’s guide.
   (F)   Part-time elected officials: Elected officials, serving in a part-time
capacity, are ineligible under Tier 2.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.167 EMPLOYMENT INSURANCE.
   (A)   The county participates in the State Unemployment Insurance Program
and each person that is terminated will be eligible for unemployment benefits
in accordance with the rules and provisions as provided by the state.
   (B)   Employees terminated for cause shall not be eligible for unemployment
benefits from the county.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021)
§ 32.168 EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE.
   The county will assist employees in their education goals by either granting
administrative leave (time off with pay) to attend classes or subsidizing the
educational expenses of employees but subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   All requests for educational assistance must be approved by the
department head/elected official and the Board of County Commissioners using an
approved form. Some educational assistance shall require a certain time
commitment to the county based on the educational assistance needed for the
position.
   (B)   No educational program/classes will be reimbursed unless prior
approval is obtained.
   (C)   The educational program will provide a direct benefit to the county
through the employee’s current employment position.
   (D)   The employee shall successfully complete the required course work with
a passing grade.
   (E)   The employee shall agree to repay any such assistance (including
granted leave time) which was received for educational work completed in the
three years immediately preceding any type of termination. This includes POST
and Correctional Certification Training. The employee receiving educational
assistance will sign an agreement to the conditions of this policy.
   (F)   The department for which the employee works, will pay all cost of the
educational assistance and/or administrative leave.
   (G)   Educational assistance shall not exceed $600 in any one calendar year
for any employee. POST, Correctional Certification and CLE is not applicable to
this item. If the cost of the assistance is greater than $600, it will be
reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
   (H)   Educational assistance is only available to those employees working
more than 32 hours per week and that currently have a satisfactory performance
evaluation. Educational assistance is approved, provided that their plan of
study does not interfere with their work schedule.
   (I)   If the employee is entitled to veteran’s educational benefits such
benefits must be used in lieu of county reimbursement. The county reimbursement
will be reduced by the amount of reimbursement the employee is eligible for
from the Veteran’s Administration.
   (J)   Education assistance used to qualify for a higher position in the
county does not guarantee that the employee will be promoted or advanced to a
higher position If there is a vacancy in that position. Advancement is subject
to administrative approval and availability of funding.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-13, passed 12-21-2021; Ord. 2022-06, passed -
-)
REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSE
§ 32.180 TRAVEL.
   (A)   (1)   Travel expenses associated with authorized trips on county
business, for attendance at conventions, conferences, field trips, educational
courses or meetings and the like, will be paid by the county. The employee will
prepare and provide a travel expense report to the county upon completion of
the trip, but not later than one month after return to normal duties.
      (2)   An employee may be accompanied by a spouse on approved county
business trips with the understanding that the county will not pay any of the
costs incurred by the spouse or be responsible for any liability associated
therewith.
      (3)   All absences from work to attend various meetings, training,
seminars, conventions and the like must be approved by the department head/
elected official prior to attendance.
   (B)   All out-of-state travel must be pre-approved by the Board of County
Commissioners. A “Request for Out-of-State Travel” Form should be completed and
signed by the department head and brought to the Board of County Commissioners
for pre-approval. In the event of emergency travel that was not pre-approved,
the Board of County Commissioners should approve the travel immediately upon
return. The approved request should be attached to the expense report for
reimbursement. Routine travel into adjoining states as part of one’s daily job
does not require pre-approval and will not trigger the out-of-state per diem
policy stated below.
      (1)   First class accommodations will be utilized only when a lesser rate
is not available. If a trip requires a choice of air, ground or other type of
travel, reimbursement shall be computed at the lowest rate. An employee may
select another option for his or her convenience, but reimbursement will be
based on the lowest approved rate, unless otherwise approved by the Board of
County Commissioners.
      (2)   Per diem rates for meals (minus incidentals), for out-of-state
travel tied to an out-of-state travel request and approval, shall be reimbursed
to the employee at the M&IE rate set by the United States General Services
Administration (GSA).
   (C)   When an employee is traveling on business that is paid by another
entity, he or she is not entitled to claim reimbursement from the county. If
such travel involves use of a county car, mileage reimbursement received from
another entity shall be paid to the county. Claiming travel expense for the
same trip from two or more entities constitutes a felony punishable by fines
and jail time.
   (D)   The employee is responsible for all personal charges made on direct
billing accounts. This would include, but is not limited to, personal telephone
calls, meals, in-room movies, laundry and dry cleaning and the like.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2020-05, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 32.181 TRAVEL EXPENSES.
   Travel expenses must be included in an annual budget for each department
anticipating travel as a part of the budget process. Any travel expenses in
excess of the amount budgeted must have the approval of the Board of County
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2020-05, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 32.182 USE OF PERSONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Personal cars may be used for county business, if adjudged
advantageous to the county. The reimbursement rate is indicated on the travel
expense report. Employees should understand that the county provides no
insurance for private vehicles. Employees are required to maintain proper
vehicle insurance on vehicles used on county business.
   (B)   Reimbursement rate for a personal vehicle used for approved travel
shall be at a rate established by the Board of County Commissioners and allowed
by the IRS, which may be adjusted from year to year. Employees anticipating
travel may obtain the current reimbursement rate from the County Clerk/Auditor.
Travel distances will be computed from a standard mileage chart when available.
Vehicle odometer readings will be reimbursed for distances not charted, with
approval of the department head/elected official. When necessary, reimbursement
for public transportation (air, bus, train) will equal actual cost of fares.
   (C)   Mileage around Salt Lake City, Utah, in performance of county business
will be reimbursed at the regular rate, but not to exceed 50 miles.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2020-05, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2023-01, passed - -
)
§ 32.183 USE OF COUNTY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Each employee must possess a valid state driver’s license before
operating a county vehicle. If needed and available, county cars may be
scheduled through the County Road Office. Employees will be reimbursed for
verifiable (via receipt) expenses such oil, gas, emergency auto service and
parking fees. An employee using a county car is responsible for assuring that
the car interior is cleaned prior to returning the car.
   (B)   Employees required to commute in a county vehicle for valid non-
compensatory business reasons may not use a county vehicle for personal use
other than commuting.
   (C)   If space is available, an employee’s spouse and children, but not
friends, can accompany them on a trip in a county car if it does not conflict
with employees completing their assigned duties or put the spouse and children
in harm’s way.
      (1)   When an employee is considering out-of-town travel with their
spouse and children, they should evaluate the nature of the trip and what might
they may be doing after hours. If the employee will be socializing or
conducting private business, it may be better that the employee take a personal
vehicle. Also, the employee needs to evaluate the need to take a specialty
vehicle.
      (2)   If it is anticipated that the spouse will need to drive the
vehicle, the spouse must sign a volunteer agreement with Human Resources and
submit their driver’s license to the County Risk Manager for review and
clearance by the Department of Motor Vehicle prior to the trip being taken. If
this procedure is not followed and an accident occurs, the employee and spouse
will be responsible for damages incurred. Furthermore, it should be understood
that by allowing a spouse and children to accompany an employee is not an
invitation to unlimited use of county vehicles for personal convenience. It is
expected that prudence and good judgment will be exercised when determining
when and how the vehicle will be used.
   (D)   It is the policy of the county that if a spouse and children
accompanies an employee, it will not be in carrying out normal day-to-day
duties within the county, but rather on those special occasions when out-of-
town trips are required.
   (E)   On-call status employees, such as road deputies, snow removal crews or
other similar job-related duties, will not be allowed to transport spouses or
other family members to social events, church or other non-work related
activities. However, if a specialty vehicle is going out of town for repair
work, training, or for other non-essential work related activities, then the
same rules apply as for motor pool vehicles.
   (F)   County employees are prohibited from smoking, picking up hitch hikers,
talking on cell phones or giving rides to friends while operating county
vehicles. Furthermore, Good Samaritan acts are to be limited to those outlined
in §
32.257.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2020-05, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2023-01, passed - -
)
§ 32.184 LODGING.
   Employees are encouraged to stay at motels and hotels in which the county
has established direct billing arrangements.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2020-05, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2023-01, passed - -
)
§ 32.185 PER DIEM.
   (A)   Employees shall be reimbursed for meals at the M&IE rate set by the
U.S. General Services Administration as approved by the Board of County
Commissioners. Receipts are not required to be attached to the travel expense
report. When a meal is included in the cost of tuition, fee and the like for
meetings, conferences, workshops, or other approved programs, the employee may
not submit that meal for reimbursement.
   (B)   An employee will not be reimbursed for in-county meals, unless the
employee is required to live away from home within the county. While in the
field, the employee is entitled to reimbursement at the G.S.A. rate for meals.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2020-05, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2023-01, passed - -
)
§ 32.186 ADVANCE PAYMENTS.
   (A)   Advancements, special rates for unique circumstances and all other
expenses related to travel in behalf of the county, training or related
circumstances will be considered for reimbursement or advance payment on a
case-by-case basis by the department head/elected official.
   (B)   The Board of County Commissioners reserves the right to give final
approval for all out-of-state travel reimbursements or advancements.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2020-05, passed 2-18-2020)
ATTENDANCE, WORK HOURS AND TIMEKEEPING
§ 32.200 ATTENDANCE.
   (A)   Attendance, generally. 
      (1)   Punctual and regular attendance is an essential responsibility of
each employee of the county.
      (2)   Employees are expected to report to work as scheduled, on time and
prepared to start working. Employees also are expected to remain at work for
their entire work schedule.
      (3)   Late arrival, early departure or other absences from scheduled
hours are disruptive and must be avoided.
   (B)   Normal work periods. Most full-time employees are expected to work
eight hours a day, 40 hours per week. Each work-week begins at 12:00 a.m. on
Monday and ends at 11:59 p.m. on Sunday. Due to Road Department and Sheriff’s
office shift schedules, variations in the hours worked per week may occur which
shall be managed according to the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA).
      (1)   Hours of operation in the County Courthouse and Public Safety
Building (not including Sheriff’s Office operations) are Monday through Friday,
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. All offices are expected to maintain these core hours to
maximize services to the public. Extended hours of operation during certain
periods of time are the responsibility of the department head/elected
officials.
      (2)   Hours of operation for the County Road Department are Monday
through Thursday 7:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Extended hours of operation may be
necessary and are the responsibility of the department head.
      (3)   Hours of operation for the County Landfill are Monday through
Friday 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 pm.
      (4)   (a)   Department heads and elected officials do not have the
authority to authorize changes to department hours even on a temporary basis.
         (b)   All changes to open hours of any department must be pre-approved
through the Board of County Commissioners and be in accordance with UCA § 17-
16-9.
   (C)   Absence. ABSENCE is defined as the failure of an employee to report
for work when he or she is scheduled to work. The two types of absences are
defined below. Due to full-time hour requirements for benefit eligibility,
employees must take earned leave time for every absence.
      (1)   Excused absence occurs when all the following conditions are met.
         (a)   The employee provides to his or her supervisor sufficient notice
at least 48 hours in advance of the absence.
         (b)   The absence request is approved in advance by the employee’s
supervisor.
         (c)   The employee has sufficient accrued leave time to cover the
absence.
         (d)   Employees are allowed three excused absences, without notice in
a year, provided they have sufficient accrued leave time to cover the absence.
Employees must state it is one of their three excused absences.
      (2)   Unexcused absence occurs when any of the above conditions are not
met.
         (a)   If it is necessary for an employee to be absent from work
because of an illness or an emergency, the employee must notify his or her
supervisor no later than the employee’s scheduled starting time on that same
day. If the employee is unable to call, he or she must have someone make the
call.
         (b)   Any response to this notification does not excuse the absence
only serves as acknowledgment of the notification
      (3)   Employees with three or more consecutive days of absences because
of illness or injury may be required provide the county with proof of
physician’s care.
      (4)   (a)   Leave without pay will only be authorized for reasons
required by law, medical reasons or extenuating circumstances when acceptance
of donated leave is not an option.
         (b)   All leave without pay must be pre-approved by the County
Administrator.
         (c)   Any full-time regular employee who falls below full-time hours
will no longer be eligible for benefits.
   (D)   Employees are expected to report to work and return from scheduled
breaks on time.
      (1)   If employees cannot report to work as scheduled, they must notify
their supervisor no later than their regular starting time.
      (2)   This notification does not excuse the tardiness but simply notifies
the supervisor that a schedule change may be necessary.
      (3)   Any response to this notification does not excuse the tardiness
only serves as acknowledgment of the notification
   (E)   Excessive absenteeism. Three or more unexcused absences or tardies in
a one-year period may result in disciplinary action.
   (F)   Authorized break periods.
      (1)   Non-paid lunch breaks are to be provided no longer than five hours
after the beginning of the work day and are not to be less than 30 minutes or
longer than one hour in length.
         (a)   For those offices working from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., a one-
hour lunch break is authorized. It is intended that full-time employees in
these offices will work an eight-hour day.
         (b)   For county employees working from 7:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., a 30-
minute lunch break is authorized. It is intended that those employees will work
a ten-hour work day.
      (2)   (a)   Two daily, compensable 15 minute rest periods are granted by
the county.
         (b)   One rest period may be used in the middle of the half of the
work day and one may be used in the middle of the second half of the work day.
         (c)   Unused rest periods may not be used to lengthen a lunch hour or
shorten the work day.
      (3)   (a)   The county will comply with the requirements of the Patient
Protection and Affordability Care Act (“PPACA”) and the Fair Labor Standards
Act (“FLSA”) by providing break times during the work day for nursing mothers
to express breast milk for her nursing child. Break time and a designated
location shall be available to employee nursing mothers for one year following
the child’s birth. Employees shall not be compensated for breaks taken for the
purpose of expressing breast milk, although nothing herein shall prevent
employee mothers from expressing during their normal employee break times and
being compensated in the same way that other employees are compensated for the
same break times.
         (b)   Consistent with the requirements of the PPACA and FLSA, the
county will provide a designated location other than a bathroom, wherein
employee mothers can express breast milk in a space that is sufficiently sized,
shielded from view, and free from intrusion from co-workers and the public.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-08, passed - -)
§ 32.201 TIMEKEEPING.
   Timekeeping requirements are as follows.
   (A)   Nonexempt employees must accurately record the time they begin and end
their work as well as the beginning and ending time of each lunch break
   (B)   Employees must sign/approve their time record to certify the accuracy
of time recorded.
   (C)   The department head must review and approve time prior to submitting
to payroll
   (D)   Any errors on the time record must immediately be reported to
department head.
   (E)   Any changes to time record must be pre-approved by department head.
   (F)   Altering, falsifying, tampering with time records or recording time on
another employee’s time record will result in disciplinary action. This is a
form of fraud and could also result in criminal charges.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-08, passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 32.202 UNFORESEEN WORK INTERRUPTIONS.
   (A)   It is the policy of the county that on those days when there is an
interruption of work for causes outside the control of the county (e.g., snow
day) employees shall be compensated for the entire day of the occurrence,
regardless of the time released from work. This is to be determined by the
County Administrator.
   (B)   On the day immediately following the occurrence, employees shall be
expected to report to work at his or her regularly scheduled start time, unless
otherwise notified by the department head/elected official/supervisor.
   (C)   (1)   Such notification shall be initiated no later than one hour
prior to the regular start time.
      (2)   Reasonable diligence to make contact is the responsibility of both
the department head/elected official/supervisor and employee.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-08, passed - -)
§ 32.203 JOB ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Any employee who fails to report for work or notify his or her
supervisor prior to his or her scheduled start time for a period of three days
or more will be considered to have abandoned the job and voluntarily terminated
the employment relationship.
   (B)   Notification must be made prior to scheduled start time.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-08, passed - -)
§ 32.204 OVERTIME/AFTER HOURS.
   (A)   The county understands that for some departments overtime is
unavoidable. However, every effort should be made to keep the accumulation of
overtime hours to a minimum.
   (B)   For nonexempt employees, all hours over 40 worked in one week are
considered overtime.
   (C)   All overtime must be pre-approved by department head.
   (D)   (1)   Reading and sending e-mails or text messages, responding to
phone calls and related duties are compensable time and thus should be
performed when the employee is at work on county time.
      (2)   Convenience of technology is not an excuse to work outside of
regularly scheduled hours.
   (E)   Any correspondence that is greater than ten minutes and cannot wait
until regular scheduled work hours must be reported.
   (F)   Unapproved overtime could result in disciplinary action.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-08, passed - -)
WORK POLICIES
§ 32.215 GENERAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   The very nature of governmental business makes relations with the
public one of the most important aspects of the job. The quality of county
employee interactions with the public reflects on all employees as well as the
county as a whole. Employees should take every opportunity to create good will
with the public as they perform their job duties. Employees are required to be
courteous and show understanding in spite of foreseeable difficult situations
which may arise. Reports to the contrary will be investigated by department
heads/elected officials or supervisors and may result in disciplinary action
against the employee.
   (B)   Employees are expected to apply themselves to their assigned duties
during the full schedule for which they are being compensated.
   (C)   Employees are expected to make prudent and frugal use of county funds,
equipment, buildings and supplies.
   (D)   Employees are expected to observe workplace rules.
   (E)   Employees are to report conditions or circumstances that would prevent
them from performing their jobs effectively or completing assigned tasks.
   (F)   Employees are expected to practice dress and grooming habits
consistent with the business environment and beneficial in promoting a
favorable public image.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.216 PERFORMANCE DOCUMENTATION.
   It is the responsibility of the immediate supervisor or department head/
elected official to properly and in a timely manner document noteworthy or
critical incidents of employee behavior. Such records may be used to support
decisions which affect employee status related to job advancement, rewards,
discipline and discharge.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.217 OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   No employee may engage in any outside employment which in any manner
interferes with the proper and effective performance of his or her official
duties, creates a conflict of interest or is deemed detrimental to county
service. In the event that an employee’s outside employment adversely affects
the performance of county responsibilities, disciplinary action may be taken by
the department head/elected official, and may result in separation from county
employment. Some department policies may be more stringent than the general
county personnel policy and procedures because of legal requirements of the job
or other special needs. Supervisors will have such special department policies
reviewed by the County Attorney’s office and approved by the Board of County
Commissioners prior to their implementation. It will be the responsibility of
the individual supervisor or department head/elected official to properly
orient the employee of special departmental policies and their potential
consequences.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.218 POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   Except as otherwise provided by law or by rules and regulations promulgated
by the state or the federal government for federally-aided programs, county
employees may voluntarily participate in political activity subject to the
following provisions.
   (A)   No employee shall be denied the opportunity to become an applicant for
a position by virtue of political opinion or affiliation.
   (B)   No employee, other than an employee appointed as a political
appointment by an elected official, may be dismissed from service due to
political opinion or affiliation.
   (C)   An employee may voluntarily contribute funds to political groups and
become a candidate for public office. The intent of this provision is to allow
the individual freedom of political expression, and to allow employees to serve
as voting county officers and as stated or county delegates without
jeopardizing public programs for which they are responsible.
   (D)   No employee, whether elected or appointed, or department head/elected
official may directly or indirectly coerce, command, advise or solicit any
officer or employee covered under the personnel system to pay, lend or
contribute part of his or her salary or compensation or anything else of value
to any party, committee, organization, agency or person for political purposes.
No supervisor, manager, department head or employee, whether elected or
appointed, may attempt to make any officer’s or employee’s employment status
dependent upon the employee’s support or lack of support for any political
party, committee, organization, agency or person engaged in a political
activity.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.219 GARNISHMENTS.
   (A)   The county encourages its employees to manage their financial affairs
responsibly. A wage garnishment against a county employee reflects poorly upon
the employee and imposes administrative expenses on the county.
   (B)   Employees whose wages are garnished should discuss the matter with
their department head/elected official and arrange to pay off the judgment as
soon as possible.
   (C)   As determined by state law, the county will not discipline any
employee whose earnings have been subject to garnishment in connection with any
one judgment. UCA § 70c-7-104 (1953, as amended). However, the county may take
disciplinary action if an employee is subject to garnishment for more than one
judgment.
   (D)   The county may charge the employee an administrative fee for
processing a garnishment action.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.220 DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE.
   (A)   General provisions. The county is a drug-free workplace. Employees who
are under the influence of, in possession of, or have in their system, any
illegal or prohibited controlled substances or alcohol while at work are
subject to discipline, up to and including termination. Employees who use,
possess or distribute illegal controlled substances at any time, whether at
work or not, are subject to discipline up to and including termination. County
employees are subject to the terms and conditions outlined in this section. The
county reserves the right to implement a drug testing program consistent with
state law. The county complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
   (B)   Policy statements.
      (1)   It is the policy of the county to provide and foster a drug- and
alcohol-free workplace. A drug- and alcohol-free workplace protects the safety
of the public as well as the county’s workforce. The county believes that the
abuse of drugs and/or alcohol creates a variety of workplace problems including
increased injuries on the job, increased absenteeism, increased financial
burden on the health and benefit programs, decreased employee morale, decreased
productivity, and decline in the quality of services rendered by the county.
      (2)   All employees are prohibited from using, consuming, buying,
possessing or selling drugs or alcoholic beverages in the workplace as
specified by this policy, and are prohibited from reporting to work or being
subject to work (specifically while on-call or on break) with drugs active in
their systems or while under the influence of alcohol. The county also
discourages the detrimental or illegal use of alcohol and/or drugs by its
employees when off-duty.
      (3)   It shall be a condition of employment and continued employment that
all employees and prospective employees comply with the provisions of this
policy and all other relevant state and federal statutes. It shall be a
condition of authorization as a volunteer that all volunteers and prospective
volunteers comply with the provisions of this policy and all other relevant
state and federal statutes. While the county will be supportive of those who
seek help voluntarily with a drug or alcohol addiction, the county will be
equally firm in identifying and disciplining those who continue to violate this
policy and/or do not seek rehabilitative assistance.
      (4)   This policy is intended to conform with the requirements set forth
in the Local Government Entity Drug-Free Workplace Policies Act, UCA, Title 34,
Ch. 41, and all other relevant state and federal statutes including the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The provisions of any applicable law,
statute, regulation or ordinance (e.g., The Omnibus Transportation and Employee
Testing Act of 1991 and the Federal Highway Administration and Department of
Transportation rules of February 1994) shall prevail in the event of any
conflict with the provisions of this policy.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALCOHOL TESTING. The scientific analysis of a sample for the presence of
alcohol.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. A drink containing ethanol or alcohol.
      APPLICANT. Any person who has made a written or oral application to
become an employee or authorized volunteer of the county.
      DRUG. Any substance recognized as a drug in the United States
Pharmacopeia, the National Formulary, the Homeopathic Pharmacopeia, or other
drug compendia, including those included in the Utah Controlled Substances Act,
UCA Title 58, Ch. 37, (1953, as amended) or supplement to any of those
compendia. Drugs may include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Marijuana (THC);
         (b)   Cocaine;
         (c)   Phencyclidine (PCP);
         (d)   Opiates;
         (e)   Amphetamines (including methamphetamine);
         (f)   Barbiturates;
         (g)   Benzodiazepines;
         (h)   Methadone; and
         (I)   Propoxyphene.
      DRUG TESTING. The scientific analysis of a sample for the presence of
drugs or their metabolites in the human body.
      EMPLOYEE. Any person or officer in the service of the county including
volunteers.
      MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER (MRO). A licensed physician with knowledge of drug
abuse disorders that is employed or contracted to conduct reviews of drug test
results.
      POSITIVE DRUG /ALCOHOL TEST. Any test result showing a blood alcohol
content of 0.02 or greater or the presence of any drug in the test subject.
      PRESCRIPTION DRUGS. Those medications (containing drugs or other
controlled substances) that are prescribed to an individual by an authorized
physician, carried in its original container that is labeled by a licensed
pharmacist, and taken as directed.
      RANDOM TESTING. The unannounced drug and/or alcohol testing of safety
sensitive employees or volunteers who have been selected for testing by using a
method uninfluenced by any personal characteristic other than job category.
      REASONABLE SUSPICION FOR TESTING. An articulated belief based on
recorded, specific facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts that
an employee or volunteer has the presence of drugs and/or alcohol in his or her
system, or has used drugs or alcohol on county-paid time.
      REFUSAL TO SUBMIT TO TESTING. Failure to provide an adequate breath or
urine sample without a valid and verified medical explanation, after the
employee has received notice that he or she is being tested and a breath or
urine sample is required, or engages in conduct that clearly obstructs the
testing process.
      SAFETY SENSITIVE POSITION. Any county position involving duties which
directly affects the safety of the county employees, volunteers or the general
public. As defined in the Local Government Entity Drug-Free Workplace Policies,
UCA § 34-41-101(10),(1953, as amended). This definition would include all
positions assigned essential functions involving:
         (a)   Emergency dispatch, firefighting, sworn law enforcement
activities and other jail services requiring daily contact with inmates
including janitorial services;
         (b)   The use of heavy and/or dangerous equipment in facility
construction, maintenance, engineering, grounds and roads services;
         (c)   Maintenance and repair of heavy equipment;
         (d)   Electrical work;
         (e)   Operation of a motor vehicle to transport passengers;
         (f)   Operation of equipment requiring the driver to hold a CDL; and
         (g)   Operation of equipment in kitchen facilities to mass produce
meals.
      SAMPLE. Urine, blood, breath, saliva, perspiration or hair sample
gathered for the purpose of a drug or alcohol test.
      USE. To consume, sell, purchase, manufacture, distribute, be under the
influence of, report to work under the influence of or be in possession of
drugs or alcohol. The term USE shall also include the presence of drugs or
alcohol in the body of the individual being tested, including the presence of
metabolite, and the use of prescription drug without a current valid
prescription from a licensed physician or using a prescription drug beyond the
prescribed therapeutic dosage.
   (D)   Drug and alcohol testing. It is the policy of the county that the
unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of drugs
and/or alcoholic beverages in the workplace is expressly prohibited. In order
to achieve a drug-free workplace, employees shall be required to participate in
drug and alcohol testing. This policy includes all employees who occupy and all
applicants who may apply for safety sensitive positions with the county.
      (1)   Such testing may occur:
         (a)   When an applicant is offered a position with the county.
            1.   The county may require an applicant for a position with the
county to undergo an alcohol and drug screen test to detect the presence of
alcohol or drugs in the body.
            2.   Refusal to take such a test shall be grounds for denial of
employment.
            3.   An applicant who tests positive for drugs or whose test
detects a Blood Alcohol Content of 0.04 or higher may be denied employment with
the county.
         (b)   When there is a reasonable suspicion to believe that the
employee is in an impaired state.
            1.   If a trained supervisor makes a determination that there is
reasonable suspicion to believe that an employee is using, is under the
influence of or is in possession of alcohol or drugs, the employee shall be
subject to drug/alcohol testing.
            2.   Upon testing due to reasonable suspicion, the employee tested
shall not engage in the operation of any county equipment or engage in any
employment-related duties, which the Human Resource Director deems dangerous to
the employee or to others, until the results of the tests are received by the
Medical Review Officer and the employee is cleared to resume normal job duties
by the department head and the Human Resource Department.
         (c)   Upon request from a department head that his or her entire
department submit to testing (“unit sweep”);
         (d)   When the employee has been involved in an on-duty accident or
unsafe work practice; and
         (e)   On a random basis.
            1.   Employees assigned to or performing safety sensitive duties
are subject to random drug/alcohol tests.
            2.   By the end of the calendar year, at least 50% of employees
occupying safety sensitive positions must have been tested for drugs and at
least 25% of employees occupying safety sensitive positions must have been
tested for alcohol.
            3.   Selection will be made by a computer-based random number
generator and other methods using the employee number.
            4.   Selection will be unannounced and will be performed at on-site
or location designated by the county.
            5.   Departments heads or supervisors of the selected employees
will be notified and those employees will proceed, accompanied by their
supervisor, immediately to a designated facility.
            6.   A refusal to submit to a drug and alcohol test shall be
considered the same as a positive test for drugs.
            7.   An employee determined to have tampered with, adulterated or
substituted his or her sample will also be considered to have the same as a
positive test result for drugs.
      (2)   Medical reports, lab reports, test results and observation/incident
reports shall not be filed in an employee’s official personnel file.
Information of this nature will be contained in a separate confidential medical
record that will be securely kept under the control of Human Resources. The
county will not release such medical information to anyone without the express
written authorization of the tested employee unless ordered by means of proper
legal procedure and appropriate legal authority, such as a court-ordered
subpoena or in connection with a disciplinary proceeding.
      (3)   If any drug/alcohol test result shows a blood alcohol content of
0.02 or greater, or a positive screen for drugs, the safety sensitive position
employee shall immediately be removed from his or her duties and may be
terminated upon further investigation.
   (E)   Other provisions.
      (1)   Employees shall not use, be under the influence of (0.02 blood
alcohol content), or be in possession of alcoholic beverage(s) while on duty,
on county premises or while in county vehicles. County premises includes county
buildings, parking lots, grounds or vehicles owned by the county or personal
vehicles being used for county business.
      (2)   Employees shall not use, be under the influence of, be in
possession of or be in such condition to test positive for drugs while on duty,
on county premises, or while in county vehicles. County premises includes
county buildings, parking lots, grounds or vehicles owned by the county or
personal vehicles being used for county business.
      (3)   Employees using, possessing or being at the workplace under the
influence of alcohol or drugs shall be subject to investigation and
disciplinary action.
      (4)   Any employee violating this policy may be subject to immediate
termination.
      (5)   The county maintains the right to assemble an investigative team
and conduct unannounced searches and inspections of county owned property, work
stations, equipment, desks, cabinets, vehicles and the like.
      (6)   The county maintains the right to utilize detection methods
necessary for the enforcement of this policy, including blood, urine or other
tests and the use of electronic detection equipment and trained animals.
         (a)   Failure to co-operate with these detection methods or
inspections is grounds for disciplinary action up to and including termination
of employment.
         (b)   Drug testing shall be conducted at National Institute of Drug
Abuse (NIDA) certified labs.
      (7)   No prescription drug will be brought on county premises by a person
other than the one for whom it is prescribed. Such drugs will be used only in
the manner, combination and quantity prescribed.
      (8)   Any employee using prescription drugs that may impair his or her
ability to perform safety sensitive essential functions must notify his or her
supervisor, department head or Human Resources to determine if modifications or
accommodations are necessary to protect other employees and the general public.
This requirement does not require the employee to notify the county of the
medical condition for which the prescription drug is being taken.
      (9)   Any employee whose off-duty abuse of drugs, alcohol or illegal use
of prescription drugs results in excessive absenteeism or tardiness, is the
cause of or contributes to a workplace accident or poor work performance may be
subject to discipline, including termination.
      (10)   Any employee who is convicted under a federal or state criminal
statute regulating the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use
of a controlled substance for a violation occurring in the workplace is to
notify his or her department head of the conviction no later than five calendar
days after the conviction. Upon said notification, the department head shall
immediately notify the Human Resource Director. The Human Resource Director
will notify the County Board of Commissioners and maintain documentation of the
incident.
      (11)   Discipline procedures for substance abuse may include probation
contingent upon successful rehabilitation or immediate termination.
   (F)   Policy exceptions. The Board of County Commissioners may approve
special exceptions to the provisions of policy when it is not contrary to the
Federal Drug-Free Workplace Act and state law, and when justified by compelling
individual and county circumstances. Employees may direct any questions
regarding this policy to the County Human Resource Department, San Juan County
Courthouse, 117 South Main, Monticello, Utah 84535.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-10, passed 11-16-2021) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 32.221 NON-SMOKING POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the county to comply with all applicable federal,
state and local regulations regarding smoking in the workplace and to provide a
healthy work environment that promotes productivity.
   (B)   The county recognizes that smoking in the workplace can adversely
affect employees. Accordingly, smoking is restricted at all of its facilities.
All county vehicles are designated as non-smoking vehicles.
   (C)   Smoking is prohibited inside all county facilities except for special
areas where it is specifically authorized. The Human Resource Director is
responsible for implementing and monitoring smoking regulations, and
supervisors/elected officials/department heads are expected to enforce such
regulations. The smoking policy applies to employees during working time and to
customers and visitors while on county premises.
   (D)   Employees are expected to exercise common courtesy and to respect the
needs and sensitivities of co-workers with regard to the smoking policy.
However, smokers have a special obligation to keep smoking areas litter-free
and not to abuse rest break and work rules. Employees who violate the policy
may be subject to disciplinary action.
   (E)   The county does not discriminate against individuals on the basis of
their use of legal products, such as tobacco, if the use occurs during non-
working time and off the county premises.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 32.222 RACIAL AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   The county will not tolerate racial or sexual harassment. Sexual and
racial harassment are prohibited personnel practices and are against the law.
Harassment is a form of employee misconduct that interferes with workplace
productivity and wrongfully deprives employees of the opportunity to work in an
environment free from a racially or sexually charged or hostile atmosphere.
Offenders are subject to discipline, up to and including termination. All
employees are responsible for ensuring that the workplace is free from all
forms of sexual and racial harassment.
   (B)   Sexual harassment encompasses a wide range of behaviors, including
sexual attention, sexual advances, request for sexual behaviors and other
verbal, visual or physical conduct of a sexual nature. Examples of sexual
harassment may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Implying or threatening adverse employment actions if sexual
actions are not granted;
      (2)   Promising preferential treatment in return for sexual favors;
      (3)   Subtle pressure for sexual activity;
      (4)   Inappropriate touching of any individual (e.g., petting, pinching,
grabbing, hugging or repeated brushing against another employee’s body);
      (5)   Offensive remarks, including unwelcome comments about appearance,
obscene jokes or other inappropriate use of sexually explicit or offensive
language;
      (6)   The display of sexually suggestive objects or pictures;
      (7)   Disparaging remarks about a person’s gender;
      (8)   Spreading stories about a person’s sexual conduct;
      (9)   Questions about a person’s sexual activity;
      (10)   Physical aggression such as pinching or patting;
      (11)   Verbal sexual abuse disguised as humor;
      (12)   Obscene gestures;
      (13)   Horseplay or bantering of a sexual or off-color nature;
      (14)   Other actions of a sexual nature which affect the terms and
conditions of a person’s employment; and/or
      (15)   Conduct or comments consistently targeted at only one gender, even
if the content is not sexual.
   (C)   Racial harassment encompasses a wide range of behaviors, including
racially based derogatory comments, taunting or treatment. Examples of racial
harassment may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Epithets, slurs, negative stereotyping or put-downs based on race;
      (2)   Materials such as cartoons or e-mails making fun or derogatory
statements based on race; and/or
      (3)   Threats, assault or any physical interference with an employee’s
normal work or movement, directed at individual employees, their relatives,
friends or associates based on race.
   (D)   (1)   The county considers prompt reporting of harassment to be a
condition of employment. If an employee believes he or she has experienced or
witnessed racial or sexual harassment, he or she must immediately report his or
her concern to your department head/elected official.
      (2)   If an employee feels uncomfortable reporting to his or her
department head/elected official, he or she should contact a staff member of
the Human Resource Department, a staff member of the County Attorney’s Office
or a member of the Board of County Commissioners.
   (E)   The county will not tolerate retaliation against any person who is the
victim of or the reporter of racial or sexual harassment.
   (F)   (1)   The county will investigate allegations of racial or sexual
harassment and will take appropriate action against any person found to have
violated this policy. County employees agree to co-operate fully in any
investigation involving harassment, sexual or otherwise.
      (2)   Individuals who engage in racial or sexual harassment are subject
to discipline, which may include, but is not limited to, reprimand,
reassignment, suspension, demotion or other sanctions.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 32.223 DISCRIMINATION/HARASSMENT BASED ON OTHER PROTECTED CATEGORIES.
   (A)   The county believes that a workplace free from hostile, intimidating
or offensive behavior is the most productive workplace.
   (B)   Employees should use courtesy and common sense when interacting with
co-workers. Employees who harass others based upon their color, national
origin, age, religion, sexual orientation and/or gender identity as that term
is defined by UCA § 34-A-5-102(o) (or as subsequently amended), marital status
or disability are subject to discipline, up to and including termination.
   (C)   All employees should work together in a professional manner with
courteous, mutual respect.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 32.224 RELIGIOUS LIBERTY PROTECTIONS.
   (A)   The county will permit an employee to express the employee’s religious
or moral beliefs and commitments in the workplace in a reasonable, non-
disruptive and non-harassing way on equal terms with similar types of
expression of beliefs or commitments allowed by the county in the workplace,
unless the expression is in direct conflict with the essential business-related
interests of the county.
   (B)   The county will not discharge, demote, terminate or refuse to hire any
person, or retaliate against, harass or discriminate in matters of compensation
or in terms, privileges and conditions of employment against any person
otherwise qualified, for lawful expression or expressive activity outside of
the workplace regarding the employee’s religious, political or personal
convictions, including convictions about marriage, family or sexuality, unless
the expression or expressive activity is in direct conflict with the essential
business-related interests of the county.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.225 ACCEPTABLE USE OF COUNTY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESOURCES POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose/background. The purpose of county-provided information
technology (IT) resources (e.g., e-mail, electronic voice and video
communication, facsimile, the Internet and future technologies) is to support
county departments in achieving their mission and goals, and to improve county
government in general. These resources are intended to assist in the efficient
and effective day-to-day operations of county departments, including
collaboration and exchange of information within and between county departments
and other branches of government and others.
   (B)   Policy.
      (1)   Effective use of county-provided IT resources are important to the
county.
         (a)   The use of county-provided IT resources are related to, or for
the benefit of, county government. County-provided IT resources are to be used
productively. Disruptions to county government activities, because of
inappropriate use of county-provided IT resources, are to be avoided.
         (b)   Incidental and occasional personal use is permitted, as long as
such use does not interfere with existing rules or policies pertaining to the
department, disrupt or distract the conduct of county business (e.g., due to
volume or frequency), involve solicitation, have potential to harm the county
or involve illegal activities
      (2)   All county-supplied technology, including computer systems and
company-related work records, belong to the county and not the employee. The
county routinely monitors usage patterns for its e-mail and Internet
communications. Although encouraged to explore the vast resources available on
the Internet, employees should use discretion in the sites that are accessed.
Since all the computer systems and software, as well as the e-mail and Internet
connection, are county-owned, all county policies related to such property are
in effect at all times. Any employee who abuses the privilege of county-
facilitated access to e-mail or the Internet, may be denied access to the
Internet and, if appropriate, be subject to disciplinary action up to and
including termination. At no time should the employees of the county assume
privacy of computer usage, e-mail or call records. Employees have no right to
keep contents of e-mail and files private. With regard to privacy issues and
legal implications, the county has the right to access and disclose the
contents of electronic files, as required for legal, audit or legitimate county
operational or management purposes.
      (3)   The county will review complaints or instances of unacceptable use
brought to its attention. Violators are subject to corrective action and
perhaps discipline, and may also be prosecuted under state and federal
statutes.
      (4)   When using county-provided IT resources the employee or volunteer
is a representative of county government at all times. At a minimum, this means
that IT resources will not be used to:
         (a)   Distribute offensive or harassing statements, disparage other
based on race, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age,
disability or political or religious beliefs;
         (b)   Distribute incendiary statements which might incite violence or
describe or promote the use of weapons or devices associated with terrorist
activities; and/or
         (c)   Distribute or solicit sexually-oriented messages or images.
      (5)   E-mail consists not only of county-provided e-mail system, but also
the act of sending and receiving e-mail through the Internet.
      (6)   Any use of county-provided IT resources for inappropriate purposes
or in support of such activities is prohibited (unless authorized through job
responsibilities).
      (7)   Unacceptable use of information technology resources includes, but
is not limited to:
         (a)   Any use of county-provided IT resources for illegal purposes, or
in support of such activities. Illegal activities shall be defined as any
violation of local, state or federal laws;
         (b)   Any sexually explicit use, whether visual or textual, such as
viewing, transmitting, retrieving, saving or printing an electronic file which
may be deemed sexually explicit. Sexually explicit files are not solely defined
as pornographic but simply sexually explicit;
         (c)   Any use for political lobbying, such as using e-mail to
circulate solicitations or advertisements;
         (d)   Duplicating, transmitting or using software not in compliance
with software license agreements;
         (e)   Unauthorized use of the copyrighted materials or another
person’s original writings;
         (f)   Accessing accounts within or outside the county’s computers and
communications facilities for which an employee is not authorized or does not
have a business need;
         (g)   Knowingly or inadvertently spreading computer viruses;
         (h)   Violating the privacy of individual users by reading e-mail or
private communications unless you are specifically authorized to maintain and
support the system;
         (i)   Distributing “junk” mail (e.g., spam, chain letters,
advertisements or unauthorized solicitations); and/or
         (j)   Transmitting classified information under the Governmental
Records Access and Management Act (GRAMA) without proper security.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.226 SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The county offices and departments may use social media tools such
as Facebook, Twitter and Instagram to reach a broader audience. While the
county’s website (www.sanjuancounty.org) is the county’s primary Internet
presence, the county recognizes that when used appropriately, social media may
be useful in furthering the goals of the county and the missions of its offices
and departments.
      (2)   This directive provides policies, standards and procedures for the
use of social media sites. All official county presences on social media sites
or services are considered extensions of the county’s information networks and
are governed by the responsibilities set forth in this and related policies and
procedures (such as § 32.225) and in the county’s standard of conduct.
Violations of this policy may be considered misconduct and may result in
discipline up to and including suspension or even termination.
      (3)   Additionally, the county recognizes that many county employees use
social media tools such as Facebook, Twitter and Instagram in their personal
lives. Therefore, this policy provides guidelines for county employees when
they communicate on social media sites as a private citizens.
   (B)   Objective. To maintain the integrity of the county’s presence in
social media and to ensure that social media is used appropriately and within
county guidelines and policies.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COUNTY SOCIAL MEDIA SITES. Those pages, sections or posting locations in
social media websites established or maintained by an employee of the county
authorized to do so as part of the employee’s job and that are used to
communicate with the public on county business.
      SOCIAL MEDIA. Internet-based technology communications tools with a focus
on immediacy, interactivity, user participation and information sharing. These
venues include social networking sites, forums, weblogs (blogs, vlogs,
microblogs), online chat sites and video/photo posting sites or any other such
similar output or format. Examples include Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and
YouTube.
      SOCIAL MEDIA ADMINISTRATORS. County employees expressly designated by
their department heads to maintain oversight of their department’s social media
sites. A social media administrator’s authority is limited to actions that
directly reflect guidance from the social media administrator’s department head
and the policies and procedures of the social media administrator’s department
and the county.
   (D)   Scope. This directive applies to all county employees, including
contract employees and volunteers for the county when working with social media
tools on behalf of the county and applies to the extent specified herein with
regard to personal social media sites; provided, however, that this directive
does not apply to social media sites of the county’s elected officials used
solely for campaign or personal purposes.
   (E)   Responsibilities. County employees whose official duties include
creating or posting information to a county social media site are responsible
for ensuring that such information is accurate, professionally presented,
respectful, relevant and on-topic with the department’s mission. Care must be
taken to ensure that grammar and spelling are correct. Mistakes must be
corrected quickly.
   (F)   General governance and oversight of county social media sites. The
county’s social media sites may contain information that represents or appears
to represent the county’s position on policy issues or other matters affecting
county business and/or the positions of the county’s leaders. Thus, the
county’s Office of Administration has general oversight of all county social
media sites.
   (G)   Design and content of county social media sites.
      (1)   Departments and offices will use proper grammar, and where
possible, avoid jargon. Social media tools are often more casual than most
communication tools, but all county social media, such as Facebook, Twitter and
Instagram, shall represent the county appropriately and professionally.
      (2)   Departments and offices may use a departmental logo in their social
media tools. Where appropriate for a particular site, social media pages will
include the county’s logo. Page names should be descriptive of the department/
office.
      (3)   All content-sharing activities, such as video-sharing, shall be in
good taste, appropriate and consistent with the county’s policies.
      (4)   Comments from the public are allowed and encouraged on the county’s
social media sites and shall be monitored daily to ensure the comments meet
certain criteria; the county’s social media sites must be structured narrowly
to focus discussions on a particular interest of the county rather than
creating a “public forum”.
      (5)   Information that is proprietary, subject to the attorney-client
privilege or state or federal privacy laws, and information not subject to
disclosure under the state’s Governmental Records Management Act shall not be
posted on any county social media site. Each department’s social media
administrator shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this rule.
   (H)   Appropriate employee use of social media.
      (1)   Employees assigned to maintain county social media sites shall
adhere to the principles articulated in this policy. Employees shall not work
on departmental social media sites during off-duty hours unless specifically
pre-approved to do so by the employee’s supervisor. All such time worked
outside the employee’s normal work scheduled shall be reported and included in
the employee’s 40-hour work week. Any work in excess of 40 hours will be paid
overtime as required by law and county policy.
      (2)   Consistent with the county’s policies on use of the county’s
telephone and e-mail systems, incidental and occasional personal use of social
media is permitted during work hours provided it is very limited in duration
and does not have a detrimental effect on employee productivity.
      (3)   County resources, work time, social media tools and a county
employee’s official position shall not be used for personal profit or business
interests or to participate in political activity.
      (4)   If commenting on county business, employees should use a disclaimer
which establishes that their comments represent their own opinions and do not
represent those of the county.
      (5)   Employees may not attribute personal statements or opinions to the
county when engaging in private blogging or postings on social media sites.
      (6)   County employees, contract employees for the county and county
volunteers shall not post images, files or text depicting county property,
equipment or personnel in any manner that would adversely affect the reputation
of the county or a county department or office.
      (7)   The following guidelines apply to personal communications using
various forms of social media.
         (a)   Employees should use common sense when using social media sites.
Employees should remember that what they write is public, may be public for a
long time and may spread to large audiences. Employees should refrain from
posting information that they would not want their supervisor or other
employees to read or that they would be embarrassed to see in the newspaper or
on television.
         (b)   The county expects its employees to be truthful, courteous and
respectful toward supervisors, coworkers, citizens, customers and other persons
associated with the county. Employees shall not engage in name-calling,
personal attacks or other such demeaning behavior.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.227 RETURN TO WORK POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. The county strives to create a balance between returning
employees to work at the earliest date following an injury or illness and the
disruption caused by employees returning to work in a limited capacity.
   (B)   Policy. Employees with a medical limitation expected to last 90
calendar days or less may request to return to work on light or restricted
duty. Supervisors/elected officials may use discretion in balancing the
benefits and disruptions of returning employees to work at less than full duty.
When appropriate, light or restricted duty assignments lasting 90 calendar days
or less may be provided subject to approval by the supervisor/elected official.
   (C)   Procedures.
      (1)   An injured/ill employee may request return to work on light or
restricted duty for up to 90 calendar days. The county has no obligation to
create a light or restricted duty position and may deny the request.
      (2)   Prior to or upon returning to work, the employee must submit a
medical release signed by their medical provider which includes:
         (a)   Medical release to return to work on light or restricted duty
based on the employee’s job description;
         (b)   A list of physical or mental work limitations; and
         (c)   Expected date of return to work with full recovery based on the
employee’s job description.
      (3)   A supervisor/elected official will not contact the employee’s
health care provider. However, a supervisor/elected official may, in
consultation with the Human Resources Department, as an employee to provide
additional information from the health care provider. If no information is
received the request will be denied.
      (4)   Approval to return to work and work options are as follows.
         (a)   If a request for light or restricted duty is approved, the
supervisor/elected official will provide the employee with written notification
outlining the employee’s work related activities consistent with the medical
release.
         (b)   It is the responsibility of the employee to work within the
physical limitations specified by the health care provider and to perform only
the duties assigned as outlined in the approval letter.
         (c)   An employee released for full duty will return to the same or a
comparable position or to a position with a lower grade at the same rate of
pay.
      (5)   An employee who is unable to return to full duty at the end of the
90-calendar day period to a light or restricted duty assignment may take leave
consistent with this policy until medically released for full duty. The
employee may consult with the Human Resource Director or designee to discuss
other options available under county policy.
      (6)   An employee who refuses to return to work either in the current
position or on light or restricted duty after being released by a health care
provider may be terminated unless the employee is entitled to another type of
qualifying leave such as FMLA, ADA or sick leave.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
Editor’s note:
   This section references the Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988.
§ 32.228 CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY.
   (A)   Overview. The county officers and employees individually commit
themselves in their official capacity to ethical, businesslike, and lawful
conduct, including appropriate use of their authority and decorum at all times.
Officers and employees must avoid even the appearance of impropriety to ensure
and maintain public confidence in the county. Officers and employees owe a
fiduciary duty to the county and must not act in a manner that is contrary to
that duty or to the interests of the county. Officers and employees must place
the interests of the county over their own personal interests with respect to
the governance, policy, strategic direction and operations of the county.
   (B)   Policy.
      (1)   It is the intent of the Board of County Commissioners to meet and
exceed those protections against conflicts of interest contained in state law.
Under this policy, a conflict of interest arises when an officer or employee
has a personal interest in a matter that is or may be in conflict with or
contrary to the county’s interests and objectives to such an extent that the
officer or employee is or may not be able to exercise independent and objective
judgment within the context of the best interest of the county. For the
purposes of this policy, an officer or employee’s “personal interest” includes
those of his or her relatives, business associates or other persons or
organizations with whom he or she is closely associated.
      (2)   The following provisions shall serve as a guide to officers with
respect to the affairs of the county.
         (a)   County officers and employees shall not receive, accept, take or
solicit, directly or indirectly, anything of economic value as a gift, gratuity
or favor from a person or entity if it could be reasonably expected that the
gift, gratuity or favor would influence the vote, action or judgment, or be
considered as part of a reward for action or inaction. Officers and employees
are required to submit a report to the county commission and the county’s
Internal Auditor of the actual or estimated value of any gifts or casual
entertainment received as an officer that exceeds $50.
         (b)   The complete confidentiality of proprietary business information
must be respected at all times. Officers and employees are prohibited from
knowingly disclosing such information, or in any way using such information for
personal gain or advancement, or to the detriment of the county, or to
individually conduct negotiations or make contacts or inquiries on behalf of
the county unless officially designated by the county commission.
      (3)   Officers and employees are prohibited from acquiring or having a
financial interest in any property that the county acquires, or a direct or
indirect financial interest in a supplier, contractor, consultant or other
entity with which the county does business. This does not prohibit the
ownership of securities in any publicly-owned company except where such
ownership places the officer in a position to materially influence or affect
the business relationship between the county and such publicly-owned company.
Any other interest in or relationship with an outside organization or
individual having business dealings with the county is prohibited if this
interest or relationship might tend to impair the ability of the officer(s) to
be independent and objective in his or her service to the county.
      (4)   If members of the immediate family of an officer or employee have a
financial interest as specified above, such interest shall be fully disclosed
to the county commission which shall decide if such interest should prevent the
county from entering into a particular transaction, purchase or engagement of
services. The term IMMEDIATE FAMILY means officer’s spouse, parent, dependent
children and other dependent relatives.
      (5)   When a conflict of interest exists, the officer or employee shall
publicly declare the nature of the conflict and may recuse himself or herself
on any official action involving the conflict.
      (6)   Officers and employees may not realize, seek or acquire a personal
interest in a business that does business with the county.
      (7)   Officers and employees shall complete a conflict of interest
disclosure form annually by the end of January. This form shall be signed and
notarized. Completed forms shall be submitted to the Clerk/Auditor and made
available to the public upon request.
      (8)   The Clerk/Auditor shall provide copies of all completed forms to
the County Commission Chair at the end of January each year.
      (9)   The Commission Chair shall review all completed forms and consider
the disclosures. The Commission Chair should make changes to assignments,
duties or contracts deemed appropriate to eliminate or mitigate conflicts of
interest within the county.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
OCCUPATIONAL LAWS
§ 32.240 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY.
   No job is so important and no service so urgent that time cannot be taken to
perform work safely. Equipment, materials and operations must be understood
before they are utilized. It is the intent of the county to comply with all
applicable rules and regulations pertaining to the Occupation Safety and Health
Act (OSHA) as established under federal law or state law. To that end, the
county has instituted a comprehensive health and safety program, and its
provisions are found in a separate manual entitled, “San Juan County
Comprehensive Health and Safety Program, for Compliance with OSHA General Rules
and Regulations”.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.241 WORKER’S COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Employees injured on the job, no matter how slight, must report the
incident promptly to a supervisor and fill out and submit a “First Report of
Injury” report to the Human Resource Department and the County Risk Manager.
Levels of compensation and county participation in payments to the worker shall
be according to standards established by the State Industrial Commission.
   (B)   In conjunction with §
32.220, every employee involved in an on-duty accident or unsafe work practice,
shall immediately submit to a drug and alcohol test at the Blanding Medical
Clinic or the San Juan County Clinic in Monticello if by observation of the
employee and the circumstances of the accident reasonably could indicate
violation of the county’s drug policy.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
EMERGENCIES AND ACCIDENTS
§ 32.255 ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   Employees involved in a traffic accident while on duty are required to
notify law enforcement (city police, county sheriff or highway patrol), the
employee’s immediate supervisor and the County Risk Manager immediately, or as
soon as practical, to report the accident and fill out necessary accident
forms. For clarity, an ACCIDENT is defined as an unfortunate or negligent event
resulting from carelessness, unawareness, ignorance or a combination of causes.
An INCIDENT is defined as wear and tear that can be expected on a vehicle or
equipment through normal usage. It is the employee’s responsibility to secure
the names and addresses of any witnesses in addition to requesting the other
party to prepare a statement to be written and delivered to the County Risk
Management Manager. Notification to the supervisor, the proper accident reports
and related information should be expedited to enable the timely filing of
insurance claims.
   (B)   Failure to notify law enforcement, the supervisor and/or County Risk
Manager of a traffic accident immediately shall result in a reprimand or other
disciplinary action.
   (C)   Depending upon the seriousness of the accident in which the employee
is involved and the causation for such an accident, the employee job status and
compensation could be affected through reassignment, reclassification, demotion
or dismissal. Employees who have their driver’s license suspended or revoked,
who are no longer able to perform the essential functions of the job may be
placed upon leave without pay or be terminated. Each situation shall be given
case-by-case consideration and employees so affected may appeal through the
established grievance procedure.
   (D)   Drug and alcohol testing will occur when an employee has been involved
in an on-duty accident if by observation of the employee and the circumstances
of the accident reasonably could indicate violation of the county’s drug
policy, as detailed in §
32.220.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.256 VEHICLE SAFETY AND OPERATOR GUIDELINES.
   The county has established standard operating procedures with regard to the
operation of office/department vehicles and equipment. These guidelines
include, but are not limited to, mandatory use of seat belts (driver and all
passengers), driver safety training and the like. Non-compliance by employees
with established standard operating procedures may be grounds for disciplinary
action. All employees who operate county vehicles must complete driver safety
training within one year of hire date. Additionally, county procedures relative
to vehicle operation and safety are contained within the “San Juan County
Safety Manual”, which combined with this policy, constitutes the complete
county vehicle and safety program.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 32.257 PROVIDING ASSISTANCE TO STRANDED MOTORISTS.
   (A)   The county employees may assist stranded motorists on state or county
highways, or in other areas of the county, only through the following methods:
      (1)   Stopping to ask if assistance is necessary; and/or
      (2)   Contacting the road office or law enforcement via mobile phone or
radio, requesting an ambulance, police and/or wrecker service. A courtesy
telephone call can be made to another party in which assistance could be
delivered to the stranded party.
   (C)   County employees should not use county vehicles or equipment to pull
out private vehicles that are stuck, make or assist with repairs to private
vehicles, provide fuel to private vehicles, tow vehicles to any location and
the like. If there is a life threatening situation, employees may use county
vehicles or equipment to move or assist vehicles at the scene or to prevent
further damage or injury.
   (D)   While it is understood that with some assistance, motorists may be
able to continue, there are private companies that are in the business to
provide these types of services and the county should not be in competition
with such businesses. County employees, especially those with mobile phones and
radios, should assist as possible, in accordance with this policy.
   (E)   (1)   This policy is not intended to eliminate those duties that are
regularly performed by law enforcement officers and emergency response team
operations.
      (2)   The policy is not intended to eliminate or alter the operating
procedures of the Sheriff’s office in regards to the call out of wrecker
services, and the like.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.258 EMERGENCY CALL OUT.
   The county employees who willingly respond to emergency response during non-
scheduled work hours in which the employees are not performing their normal or
routine county jobs for which they are hired, will be paid at the rate of $8.50
per hour and any hours worked that create overtime will be paid at $12.75 per
hour. This rate may be adjusted from time to time. If, however, employees are
called out to perform his or her regular job duties, such employees will be
paid his or her regular wage at regular and overtime rates.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
§ 32.259 PERSONAL SAFETY.
   (A)   Policy. The county employees are the most valuable asset the county
has. It is not the intent of the county to have an employee work in harm’s way.
It is therefore the policy of the county that each employee be accountable for
his or her own actions with regard to personal safety. Each employee is
expected to work in a safe manner, using reasonable precautions to care not
only for himself or herself, but for the tools and equipment that he or she has
been assigned to use.
   (B)   Cell phone use. While operating a county vehicle it is impermissible
for a county employee to use his or her county-issued or private cell phone to
call or text. Shall an accident occur where a cell phone is suspected to have
been in use prior to or during the accident, the county has the right to view
the phone to obtain information or subsequently obtain records pertaining to
the phones use.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019)
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 32.270 SUPPLIES, TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT.
   All employees are charged with the responsibility of maintaining the
county’s property in the best condition possible and making the most economical
use of supplies issued to them. Safe and courteous operation is mandatory.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-07, passed - -)
§ 32.271 COUNTY VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is the responsibility of each county employee to get to his or her
designated workplace. Once an employee has reported to their assigned
workplace, a county vehicle will be provided should it be necessary to travel
on county business or travel allowance will be provided. The department head/
elected official shall be responsible for scheduling county vehicles for
departmental use. County vehicles will not be used for private use or
convenience, except when the employee is assigned a vehicle in which he or she
may use to commute from his or her residence. The value of commuting in a
county vehicle is taxable to the employee.
   (B)   Each employee must possess a valid state driver’s license before
operating a county vehicle.
      (1)   The class of license required will be identified in the employee’s
job description. Additionally, the employee’s driving record must be such that
the county’s liability carrier will provide coverage. The employee shall notify
his or her supervisor within three working days of the loss or suspension of
his or her driver’s license.
      (2)   Failure of an employee to obtain and keep current a state driver’s
license may be cause for termination, especially in positions that require the
employee to operate a motor vehicle.
   (C)   Employees are responsible for any driving infractions or fines that
result while they are driving county or personally-owned vehicles.
   (D)   Only county employees/elected officials, employee/elected official
spouses and authorized volunteers may drive county vehicles. The county carries
liability and property damage insurance on all vehicles and such insurance
covers all employees driving vehicles on official county business. However,
accidents which are found to have been avoidable or to be the fault of the
employee may subject the employee to disciplinary action.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-07, passed - -)
§ 32.272 COUNTY VOLUNTEERS.
   (A)   All county volunteers must be approved annually by the county pursuant
to UCA § 67-20-4 prior to service.
   (B)   A VOLUNTEER, as defined by state law, is a person who donates service
without pay or other compensation except expenses actually and reasonably
incurred as approved by the supervising agency.
   (C)   Volunteers may be reimbursed for actual expenses up to $10 and up to
$600 with receipt.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-07, passed - -)
§ 32.273 TELEPHONE USE (PERSONAL).
   (A)   Personal long distance/toll calls will not be charged to the county at
any time.
   (B)   Emergency personal toll calls will be placed collect to the receiving
number or charged to the employee’s private home number.
   (C)   Employees should keep personal telephone calls, either incoming or
outgoing to a minimum. Failure to do so may result in disciplinary action.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-07, passed - -)
§ 32.274 USE OF COUNTY PROPERTY OR FACILITIES.
   (A)   County property or facilities cannot be used by any employee or by the
general public for any purpose other than official county business.
   (B)   Contractors and developers will not be supported by the use of county
equipment or property at any time or by work performed by employees.
   (C)   No purchase shall be made through the county for personal use by any
employee, except where otherwise provided for under special agreements or
contracts.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-07, passed - -)
§ 32.275 UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE.
   Offices desiring to utilize allowances for uniform purchase and maintenance
or for non-issued equipment must do so through the budget process to assure
availability of funds. Such allowances shall apply to entire job
classifications.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-07, passed - -)
§ 32.276 RECEIVING GIFTS, GRATUITIES OR OTHER REMUNERATION.
   (A)   No county employee or officer shall knowingly receive, accept, take,
seek or solicit, directly or indirectly for himself or another a gift of
substantial value or a substantial economic benefit tantamount to a gift that:
      (1)   Would tend improperly to influence a reasonable person in the
person’s position to depart from the faithful and impartial discharge of the
person’s public duties;
      (2)   The county employee or officer knows or that a reasonable person in
that position should know under the circumstances is primarily for the purpose
of rewarding the county employee or officer for official action taken; or
      (3)   If the county employee or officer recently has been, is now, or in
the near future may be involved in any governmental action directly affecting
the donor or lender, unless a disclosure of the gift or compensation and other
relevant information has been made in the manner provided UCA § 67-16-6.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above do not apply:
      (1)   To an occasional non-pecuniary (not consisting of money) gift,
having a value of not in excess of $50; or
      (2)   To an award publicly presented in recognition of public services.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-07, passed - -)
§ 32.277 PROVIDING OF GIFTS AND AWARDS.
   (A)   Policy. The policy of the county is to recognize the deaths,
significant hospitalization, retirement from county service, acknowledgments of
exceptional service of county employees and to outline the amount of county
funds to be spent on such recognition.
   (B)   Condolences.
      (1)   Acknowledgment of relatives who have died will be made for spouse
and children of county employees. The maximum that can be spent for condolences
of relatives is $50. Gifts of cash are not allowed.
      (2)   Acknowledgment of current county employees who have died will be
made from the county and the amount of county funds to be spent for such
condolences will be determined by the County Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   Significant hospitalizations. Acknowledgment of a significant hospital
stay will be for the county employees only and the maximum amount of county
funds that can be spent for this acknowledgment is $50. Gifts of cash are not
allowed.
   (D)   Retirement. The county acknowledges the significance of retirement of
its employees by providing a gift upon their retirement. The amount of county
funds for retirement are established for employees with at a minimum of five
years of service a maximum of $10 per year of service.
      (1)   The individual department can choose to do a gift either a gift or
a check.
      (2)   Any reception will be at the discretion of the individual
department.
      (3)   Reception and gift/check combined cannot exceed the approved amount
based on years of service.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-07, passed - -)
§ 32.278 EMPLOYEE PARKING.
   Employees are to park their personal vehicles in locations that make public
access easier to the county buildings. Employees who work at the County
Administration Building are requested to park in the east lot or the north side
of 100 South Street.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-07, passed - -)
§ 32.279 USE OF COUNTY PROPERTY.
   (A)   From time to time, employees will be given the use of county property
to perform their jobs.
   (B)   County property includes, but is not limited to, all equipment,
vehicles, electronics, cell phones and computers given or issued to the
employee for the performance of his or her job.
   (C)   All employees shall use county property for the use intended and at
the direction of their supervisors.
   (D)   County property shall not be used for personal purposes.
   (E)   Theft or willful destruction of county property is prohibited.
Additionally, the county maintains all ownership in any county property, may
demand the return of the property or may assign the property to another
employee at its sole discretion.
   (F)   Employees have no right to exclude the county from entering, searching
or reviewing at any time anything in the county property, created with the
assistance of the county property, or stored by, within or in the county
property.
   (G)   Employees have no expectation of privacy in the use of any county
property.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-07, passed - -)
§ 32.280 PERSONAL USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY POLICY.
   (A)   Effective date and frequency of review.
      (1)   The effective date of this policy is June 30, 2019.
      (2)   (a)   This policy should be reviewed annually, but not less than
every three years by the County Board of Commissioners.
         (b)   This policy will also be reviewed any time that changes to laws
or rules governing personal use of public property of interlocal agencies are
amended in a manner which would require review and update to this policy.
   (B)   Purpose.
      (1)   This policy is meant to assure responsible use of public property
and control excessive or unlawful use of public property by county employees.
      (2)   This policy provides guidance as to authorized personal use of
public property to avoid unintentional violations of UCA § 76-8-402 and UCA §
67-16-4(1)(c).
   (C)   Authority. The County Board of Commissioners has authority to
implement this policy as the governing body of the county.
   (D)   Applicability and scope.
      (1)   This policy applies to all use of all public property as defined
herein.
      (2)   This policy supersedes and replaces all other county policies
related to the personal use of public property, except where specific
department or county policies are or have been established to address the
particular needs of an individual department or the use of a specific category
of public property.
   (E)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMMISSION. The Board of County Commissioners.
      COUNTY. San Juan County.
      DE MINIMIS. A nominal value of less than $100, but does not include value
of damage to public property when used by an employee for personal use when the
employee timely reimburses the county for such damage.
      EMPLOYEE. All elected officials, directors, officers, employees and
independent contractors of the county.
      INCIDENTAL. Has the meaning defined in division (F) below. Any use
identified as INCIDENTAL under this policy which is not considered incidental
under UCA § 76-8-402 or UCA § 67-16-4(1)(c) is an authorized use under this
policy.
      OTHER COUNTY BOARD. Any board that has been created by the county to
oversee specific business (e.g., Weed Board, Transportation Service District
and the like)
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any real or personal property:
         (a)   Owned, leased or rented by the county, until such time as the
property has been surplused; or
         (b)   Provided to an independent contractor of the county for the
purpose of providing a program or service for, or on behalf of, the county.
   (F)   Policy statements.
      (1)   The Commission means for this policy to constitute a written policy
of the county for purposes of UCA § 76-8-402(1)(b)(iii).
      (2)   The Commission means to restrict unreasonable personal use of
public property by employees.
      (3)   The Commission considers that the penalty under UCA § 76-8-402 of a
felony for any level of unauthorized personal use of public property as extreme
and therefore the Commission means to protect its employees from
unintentionally violating UCA § 76-8-402 and/or UCA § 67-16-4(1)(c).
      (4)   The Commission means to broadly authorize de minimis personal use
of public property by employees with a procedure to limit personal use in
specific cases only after providing written notice.
      (5)   Personal use of public property is considered to be unauthorized
when it occurs after the employee has received a written notice that the use is
unauthorized or prohibited under this policy and the employee does not appeal
the written notice, or that which occurs after the employee receives a written
decision from the Commission finding that the personal use is considered
unauthorized or prohibited under this policy.
      (6)   The Commission means to provide broad discretion to the County
Administrator, department heads, and other County boards in authorizing
personal use of public property by employees under their supervision or
control.
      (7)   The Commission recognizes that incidental personal use of public
property by an employee is authorized under UCA § 76-8-402 and further
authorizes incidental personal use under this policy. The Commission considers
incidental personal use to include:
         (a)   Use of public property for limited use of a personal nature when
the individual is using the public property to perform their duties of office,
employment or service under contract; and
         (b)   Use of public property of a personal nature when such use of the
public property:
            1.   Is available to the general public;
            2.   Does not create more than a de minimis cost to the county;
            3.   Is provided or required to be provided to the employee as an
employee benefit or convenience, such as lunchroom and nursing room facilities;
            4.   Is not clearly prohibited by this policy; or
            5.   Is accidental or unintentional and the employee timely
reimburses the cost of the personal use to the county.
   (G)   Procedures and responsibilities.
      (1)   If the County Administrator, a department head or a supervisor or
believes that an employee is using public property in a manner that is not
incidental or should not be authorized, they shall give the employee a written
notice that specifically informs the employee that the personal use is not
considered incidental and will not be considered authorized as of the date of
the written notice, or as of the date of a final written determination by the
Commission of an appeal of the written notice.
      (2)   In determining if personal use should be authorized, the County
Administrator or a department head shall consider whether the personal use of
public property:
         (a)   Does not substantially interfere with the use of the public
property to perform duties of office, employment or service under contract;
         (b)   Creates only a de minimis cost to the county;
         (c)   Creates more than a de minimis cost to the county but provides a
benefit to the county or its employees as determined by the Commission;
         (d)   Creates more than a de minimis cost to the county but the
employee reimburses the county for the cost of the personal use of the public
property at a rate determined by the county;
         (e)   Provides the employee with training and familiarity with the
public property which will allow them to be more proficient with its use to
perform their public duties;
         (f)   Provides support of other agencies or community organizations
which promotes good will between those agencies or community organizations and
the county; or
         (g)   Provides a reasonably arguable benefit to the county.
      (3)   An employee may appeal a written notice provided under this section
to the Commission if they believe their personal use of public property should
be authorized by providing a written request for appeal of the written notice
within five business days of receipt of the written notice. The Commission
shall hear either in writing or in person the person who issued the written
notice and the employee, and make a decision on whether the personal use of the
public property will be authorized or prohibited. The Commission shall inform
the County Administrator and the employee of their decision within ten days of
their decision.
      (4)   The CFO shall notify an employee of the cost to be reimbursed to
the county for personal use of public property, which was not clearly
prohibited by this policy, when that use was accidental or unintentional or due
to damage to public property during personal use of public property by the
employee.
      (5)   The employee shall timely reimburse the county the amounts
determined by the CFO under this section or contest the amount of the
reimbursement to the CEO within five business days of notice from the CFO. The
CFO shall within five business days of receipt of such notice to contest the
amount of reimbursement provide the employee and the CFO a decision regarding
the amount of reimbursement.
      (6)   If the employee does not agree with the decision of the CFO of the
amount of reimbursement for personal use of public property, the employee shall
request an appeal of the CFO’s decision to the County Commission within five
business days of receipt of the CFO’s decision. The Commission shall consider
the requested appeal at their next scheduled meeting and provide the employee
notice of its final decision on the amount of reimbursement within ten business
days of that meeting.
(Ord. passed 6- -2019; Ord. 2021-07, passed - -)
§ 32.281 CREDIT CARD USE POLICY.
   (A)   Policy.
      (1)   All transactions charged to credit cards shall be made in
compliance with adopted county policies and procedures. County credit cards
shall not be used to avoid or bypass adopted purchasing or procurement rules.
Employees should exercise good judgement and act responsibly when using a
county-issued credit card. Credit cards are to be used only by authorized
county government employees.
      (2)   Credit cards should be used as often as possible when making
approved purchases. Employees are discouraged from using personal funds to pay
for county expenses. The county will only reimburse employees who use personal
funds to pay for legitimate county expenses. Department head must provide
written approval of the purchase.
   (B)   Requesting a credit card. Department must request the credit card for
the employee. Before a card is issued, an employee must sign the credit card
usage agreement form. Distribution of credit cards should be limited to those
employees who have a compelling business need. Credit cards should not be
provided to employees and officers who have only an occasional or infrequent
use. The sharing of credit cards is discouraged as it further weakens
oversight.
   (C)   Responsibility for credit cards. The department head is ultimately
accountable for use of any county credit cards assigned to their department.
   (D)   Custody of credit card.
      (1)   The credit card is the property of the county and must be kept
secure at all times.
      (2)   If a credit card is lost or stolen, the employee shall immediately
notify the County Administrator to cancel the credit card, then shall notify
his or her department head.
   (E)   Sales tax. As a governmental agency county is exempt from paying sales
tax on everything except hotel reservations.
      (1)   When payment is made using a county credit card, sales tax shall
not be paid.
      (2)   In those cases where sales tax is unavoidable, approval of the tax
must be obtained from the County Clerk/Auditor.
   (F)   Limits and restrictions.
      (1)   Each county credit card is assigned a monthly, daily and per-
transaction limit as determined by the County Administrator.
      (2)   A single purchase cannot be split into multiple transactions to
bypass card limits.
      (3)   If authorized limits become insufficient to meet department needs,
an increase may be requested by the department head.
      (4)   Temporary, per-transaction limit increases for purchases may be
approved on an approved purchase order.
      (5)   County credit cards have been set up to block some transactions
based on supplier’s merchant category code.
      (6)   If the department head believes a transaction should not have been
declined they can request that the category is added to the cardholder’s
profile.
   (G)   Card payments. Purchases made over $1,000 must have an approved
purchase order prior to purchase being made.
   (H)   Credit card reconciliation.
      (1)   All credit card users will submit a credit card reconciliation
monthly, no later than the twenty-fifth of the month, with an itemized receipt
for each charge.
      (2)   Receipt must include:
         (a)   Vendor name;
         (b)   Quantity purchased;
         (c)   Unit cost;
         (d)   Description of product (e.g., for the purchase of food, include
what it was purchased for, such as a staff meeting and who attended the
meeting); and
         (e)   Transaction date.
      (3)   If no itemized receipt is submitted a missing receipt form must be
completed signed by both card holder and department head. Excessive use of the
missing receipt form may result in loss of credit card privileges.
   (I)   Unauthorized uses.
      (1)   Any employee found using a county credit card for an unauthorized
use may be subject to the employment disciplinary process, in accordance with
this chapter, the following as examples of unauthorized charges:
         (a)   Personal, non-official expenses of any kind, for any reason;
         (b)   Purchases considered an inappropriate use of public funds;
         (c)   Using the county credit card to get a cash, gift cards or other
cash equivalents; and/or
         (d)   Professional services without a current county agreement.
      (2)   Any unauthorized use may result in criminal charges.
      (3)   If a county credit card is used for personal expenditures by
accident the employee can reimburse the county for expense at 150% of the
expense charged (this is a requirement of state law and cannot be waived or
changed by the county).
   (J)   Audits/reviews. Credit cards are subject to audits and reviews by the
office of the County Administrator or its agent.
(Ord. 2021-06, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 32.282 COUNTY OWNED CELL PHONE AND STIPEND POLICY.
   (A)   Policy.
      (1)   Eligible employees, as defined in division (B) below, may receive a
cell phone stipend from the county for business-related costs incurred when
using their personal cell phones.
      (2)   Except for a limited number of positions, the county will not own
cell phones for the use of individual employees.
   (B)   Eligibility. An employee may be eligible for the stipend if at least
one of the following criteria is met, as determined by the employee’s
department head or elected official:
      (1)   Employee frequently uses cell phone for work related purposes;
      (2)   The job function of the employee requires him or her to have
wireless data and internet access while away from the office; and/or
      (3)   The employee is designated as a first responder to emergencies.
   (C)   Oversight, approval and funding.
      (1)   Department heads/elected officials are responsible for determining
employee cell phone needs and assessing continued eligibility for the cell
phone stipend by setting stipend amount of either $20 or $50.
      (2)   The County Administrator is responsible for approving eligible
employees.
      (3)   Once approved, the employee will be eligible to receive the stipend
automatically each month.
      (4)   Stipends are funded by the eligible employee’s department.
   (D)   Employees rights and responsibilities. Employee rights and
responsibilities are as follows:
      (1)   The eligible employee is responsible for purchasing a cell phone
and establishing and maintaining service with the cell phone service provider
of his or her choice. The cell phone contract is in the name of the eligible
employee, who is solely responsible for all payments to the service provider;
      (2)   To the extent allowed by law, the stipend provided is not
considered taxable income;
      (3)   Comply with all federal, state and local laws regarding record
retention (e.g. GRAMA requirements) as well as county policy, including those
pertaining to data security acceptable use and e-mail;
      (4)   The eligible employee can use the phone for both business and
personal purposes, as needed;
      (5)   If the employee terminates their cell phone service plan at any
point, he or she must notify his or her supervisor within five business days to
terminate the stipend;
      (6)   The county does not accept any liability for claims, charges or
disputes between the cell phone service provider and the eligible employee; and
      (7)   Employee must delete all county data from the cell phone when
employment with county is severed, except when required to maintain the data in
compliance with a litigation hold notice.
   (E)   Cancellation or reduction of cell phone stipend. Any stipend will
immediately cease or be reduced if:
      (1)   An employee’s employment with the county terminates;
      (2)   An employee is no longer eligible for the stipend;
      (3)   The eligible employee no longer has a cell phone or cell phone
service plan;
      (4)   The county decides to eliminate or reduce the stipend or the
eligible employee’s department head or elected official determines to reduce
the amount of the stipend; or
      (5)   The eligible employee uses the cell phone in any manner contrary to
local, state, or federal laws or county policy.
   (F)   County-owned cell phones. Executive administrative staff and elected
official may choose to have a county-owned cell phone issued to them, instead
of receiving a stipend.
      (1)   County-owned cell phones are intended to be used for county
business only, usage is subject to review by [reserved].
      (2)   County-owned cell phones will only be upgraded/replaced at county
expense once every three years. If the county owned cell phone is lost/broken
prior to the three-year replacement, employee/elected official will be
responsible for the cost of the replacement.
(Ord. 2021-09, passed 9-21-2021)
APPENDIX A: FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT GUIDELINES
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
UNDER THE FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT
Basic Leave Entitlement
FMLA requires covered employers to provide up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-
protected leave to eligible employees for the following reasons:
   ·   For incapacity due to pregnancy, prenatal medical care or child birth;
   ·   To care for the employee’s child after birth, or placement for adoption
or foster care;
   ·   To care for the employee’s spouse, son or daughter, or parent, who has a
serious health condition; or
   ·   For a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform
the employee’s job.
Military Family Leave Entitlements
Eligible employees with a spouse, son, daughter, or parent on active duty or
call to active duty status in the National Guard or Reserves in support of a
contingency operation may use their 12-week leave entitlement to address
certain qualifying exigencies. Qualifying exigencies may include attending
certain military events, arranging for alternative childcare, addressing
certain financial and legal arrangements, attending certain counseling
sessions, and attending post-deployment reintegration briefings.
FMLA also includes a special leave entitlement that permits eligible employees
to take up to 26 weeks of leave to care for a covered service member during a
single 12-month period. A covered service member is a current member of the
Armed Forces, including a member of the National Guard or Reserves, who has a
serious injury or illness incurred in the line of duty on active duty that may
render the service member medically unfit to perform his or her duties for
which the service member is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or
therapy; or is in outpatient status; or is on the temporary disability retired
list.
Benefits and Protections
During FMLA leave, the employer must maintain the employee’s health coverage
under any “group health plan” on the same terms as if the employee had
continued to work. Upon return from FMLA leave, most employees must be restored
to their original or equivalent positions with equivalent pay, benefits, and
other employment terms. Use of FMLA leave cannot result in the loss of any
employment benefit that accrued prior to the start of an employee’s leave.
Eligibility Requirements
Employees are eligible if they have worked for a covered employer for at least
one year, for 1,250 hours over the previous 12 months, and if at least 50
employees are employed by the employer within 75 miles.
Definition of Serious Health Condition
A serious health condition is an illness, injury, impairment, or physical or
mental condition that involves either an overnight stay in a medical care
facility, or continuing treatment by a health care provider for a condition
that either prevents the employee from performing the functions of the
employee’s job, or prevents the qualified family member from participating in
school or other daily activities.
Subject to certain conditions, the continuing treatment requirement may be met
by a period of incapacity of more than 3 consecutive calendar days combined
with at least two visits to a health care provider or one visit and a regimen
of continuing treatment, or incapacity due to pregnancy, or incapacity due to a
chronic condition. Other conditions may meet the definition of continuing
treatment.
Use of Leave
An employee does not need to use this leave entitlement in one block. Leave can
be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when medically
necessary. Employees must make reasonable efforts to schedule leave for planned
medical treatment so as not to unduly disrupt the employer’s operations. Leave
due to qualifying exigencies may also be taken on an intermittent basis.
Substitution of Paid Leave for Unpaid Leave.
Employees may choose or employers may require use of accrued paid leave while
taking FMLA leave. In order to use paid leave for FMLA leave, employees must
comply with the employer’s normal paid leave policies.
Employee Responsibilities
Employees must provide 30 days advance notice of the need to take FMLA leave
when the need is foreseeable. When 30 days notice is not possible, the employee
must provide notice as soon as practicable and generally must comply with an
employer’s normal call-in procedures.
Employees must provide sufficient information for the employer to determine if
the leave may qualify for FMLA protection and the anticipated timing and
duration of the leave. Sufficient information may include that the employee is
unable to perform job functions, the family member is unable to perform daily
activities, the need for hospitalization or continuing treatment by a health
care provider, or circumstances supporting the need for military family leave.
Employees also must inform the employer if the requested leave is for a reason
for which FMLA leave was previously taken or certified. Employees also may be
required to provide a certification and periodic recertification supporting the
need for leave.
Employer Responsibilities
Covered employers must inform employees requesting leave whether they are
eligible under FMLA. If they are, the notice must specify any additional
information required as well as the employees’ rights and responsibilities. If
they are not eligible, the employer must provide a reason for the
ineligibility.
Covered employers must inform employees if leave will be designated as FMLA-
protected and the amount of leave counted against the employee’s leave
entitlement. If the employer determines that the leave is not FMLA-protected,
the employer must notify the employee.
Unlawful Acts by Employers
FMLA makes it unlawful for any employer to:
   ·   Interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of any right provided
under FMLA;
   ·   Discharge or discriminate against any person for opposing any practice
made unlawful by FMLA or for involvement in any proceeding under or relating to
FMLA,
Enforcement
An employee may file a complaint with the U.S. Department of Labor or may bring
a private lawsuit against an employer. FMLA does not affect any Federal or
State law prohibiting discrimination, or supersede any State or local law or
collective bargaining agreement which provides greater family or medical leave
rights.
APPENDIX B: UTAH PROTECTION OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES ACT
   § 67-21-1. Short title.
   Utah Statutes
   Title 67. State Officers and Employees
   Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
   Current through 2018 General Session
   § 67-21-1. Short title.
   This chapter is known as the “Utah Protection of Public Employees Act”.
   Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-1
   History. Enacted by Chapter 216, 1985 General Session
_____________________________________________________________
   § 67-21-2. Definitions.
   Utah Statutes
   Title 67. State Officers and Employees
   Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
   Current through 2018 General Session
   § 67-21-2. Definitions.
   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   “Abuse of authority” means an arbitrary or capricious exercise of
power that:
         (a)   Adversely affects the employment rights of another; or
         (b)   Results In personal gain to the person exercising the authority
or to another person.
      (2)   “Adverse action” means to discharge, threaten, or discriminate
against an employee In a manner that affects the employee’s employment,
Including compensation, terms, conditions, location, rights, immunities,
promotions, or privileges.
      (3)   “Communicate” means a verbal, written, broadcast, or other
communicated report.
      (4)   “Damages” means general and special damages for Injury or loss
caused by each violation of this chapter.
      (5)   “Employee” means a person who performs a service for wages or other
remuneration under a contract of hire, written or oral, express or implied.
      (6)   (a)   “Employer’ means the public body or public entity that
employs the employee.
         (b)   “Employer” includes an agent of an employer.
      (7)   “Gross mismanagement” means action or failure to act by a person,
with respect to a person’s responsibility, that causes significant harm or risk
of harm to the mission of the public entity or public body that employs, or is
managed or controlled by, the person.
      (8)   “Judicial employee” means an employee of the judicial branch of
state government.
      (9)   “Legislative employee” means an employee of the legislative branch
of state government.
      (10)   “Political subdivision employee” means an employee of a political
subdivision of the state.
      (11)   “Public body” means any of the following:
         (a)   A state officer, employee, agency, department, division, bureau,
board, commission, council, authority, educational institution, or any other
body in the executive branch of state government;
         (b)   An agency, board, commission, council, institution member, or
employee of the legislative branch of state government;
         (c)   A county, city, town, regional governing body, council, school
district, local district, special service district, or municipal corporation,
board, department, commission, council, agency, or any member or employee of
them;
         (d)   Any other body that is created by state or local authority, or
that is primarily funded by or through state or local authority, or any member
or employee of that body;
         (e)   A law enforcement agency or any member or employee of a law
enforcement agency; and
         (f)   The judiciary and any member or employee of the judiciary.
      (12)   “Public entity” means a department, division, board, council,
committee, institution, office, bureau, or other similar administrative unit of
the executive branch of state government.
      (13)   “Public entity employee” means an employee of a public entity.
      (14)   “Retaliatory action” is as defined in Section 67-19a-101.
      (15)   “State institution of higher education” is as defined in Section
53B-3-102.
      (16)   “Unethical conduct” means conduct that violates a provision of
Title 67, Chapter 16, Utah Public Officers’ and Employees’ Ethics Act.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-2
History. Amended by Chapter 427, 2013 General Session, § 7, eff. 5/14/2013.
Amended by Chapter 329, 2007 General Session
_______________________________________________________________
   § 67-21-3. Reporting of governmental waste or violations of law - Employer
action - Exceptions.
   Utah Statutes
   Title 67. State Officers and Employees
   Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
   Current through 2018 General Session
   § 67-21-3. Reporting of governmental waste or violations of law - Employer
action - Exceptions.
      (1)   (a)   An employer may not take adverse action against an employee
because the employee, or a person authorized to act on behalf of the employee,
communicates in good faith:
            (i)   The waste or misuse of public funds, property, or manpower;
            (ii)   A violation or suspected violation of a law, rule, or
regulation adopted under the law of this state, a political subdivision of this
state, or any recognized entity of the United States; or
            (iii)   As it relates to a state government employer:
               (A)   Gross mismanagement;
               (B)   Abuse of authority; or
               (C)   Unethical conduct.
         (b)   For purposes of Subsection (1)(a), an employee is presumed to
have communicated in good faith if the employee gives written notice or
otherwise formally communicates the conduct described in Subsection (1)(a) to:
            (i)   A person in authority over the person alleged to have engaged
in the conduct described in Subsection (1)(a);
            (ii)   The attorney general’s office;
            (iii)   Law enforcement, if the conduct is criminal in nature;
            (iv)   If the employee is a public entity employee, public body
employee, legislative employee, or a judicial employee:
               (A)   The state auditor’s office;
               (B)   The president of the Senate;
               (C)   The speaker of the House of Representatives;
               (D)   The Office of Legislative Auditor General;
               (E)   The governor’s office;
               (F)   The state court administrator; or
               (G)   The Division of Finance;
            (v)   If the employee is a public entity employee, but not an
employee of a state institution of higher education, the director of the
Division of Purchasing and General Services;
            (vi)   If the employee is a political subdivision employee:
               (A)   The legislative body, or a member of the legislative body,
of the political subdivision;
               (B)   The governing body, or a member of the governing body, of
the political subdivision;
               (C)   The top executive of the political subdivision; or
               (D)   Any government official with authority to audit the
political subdivision or the applicable part of the political subdivision; or
            (vii)   If the employee is an employee of a state institution of
higher education:
               (A)   The State Board of Regents or a member of the State Board
of Regents;
               (B)   The commissioner of higher education;
               (C)   The president of the state institution of higher education
where the employee is employed; or
               (D)   The entity that conducts audits of the state institution
of higher education where the employee is employed.
         (c)   The presumption described in Subsection (1)(b) may be rebutted
by showing that the employee knew or reasonably ought to have known that the
report is malicious, false, or frivolous.
      (2)   An employer may not take adverse action against an employee because
an employee participates or gives information in an investigation, hearing,
court proceeding, legislative or other inquiry, or other form of administrative
review held by the public body.
      (3)   An employer may not take adverse action against an employee because
the employee has objected to or refused to carry out a directive that the
employee reasonably believes violates a law of this state, a political
subdivision of this state, or the United States, or a rule or regulation
adopted under the authority of the laws of this state, a political subdivision
of this state, or the United States.
      (4)   An employer may not implement rules or policies that unreasonably
restrict an employee’s ability to document:
         (a)   The waste or misuse of public funds, property, or manpower;
         (b)   A violation or suspected violation of any law, rule, or
regulation; or
         (c)   As it relates to a state government employer;
            (i)   Gross mismanagement;
            (ii)   Abuse of authority; or
            (iii)   Unethical conduct.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-3
History. Amended by Chapter 178, 2018 General Session, § 2, eff. 5/8/2018.
Amended by Chapter 427, 2013 General Session, § 8, eff, 5/14/2013,
Amended by Chapter 324, 2010 General Session
_______________________________________________________________
§ 67-21-3.5. Administrative review of adverse action against a public entity
employee.
Utah Statutes
Title 67. State Officers and Employees
Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
Current through 2018 General Session
§ 67-21-3.5. Administrative review of adverse action against a public entity
employee
   (1)   A public entity employee who believes that the employee’s employer has
taken retaliatory action against the employee in violation of this chapter may
file a grievance with the Career Service Review Office in accordance with
Section 67-19a-402.5 and subject to Section 67-21-4.
   (2)   If the Career Service Review Office determines that retaliatory action
is taken in violation of this chapter against the public entity employee, the
Career Service Review Office may order:
      (a)   Reinstatement of the public entity employee at the same level held
by the public entity employee before the retaliatory action;
      (b)   The payment of back wages, in accordance with Subsection 67-19a-406
(5)(b);
      (c)   Full reinstatement of benefits;
      (d)   Full reinstatement of other employment rights; or
      (e)   If the retaliatory action includes failure to promote, as described
in Subsection 67-19a-101(11)(d), a pay raise that results in the employee
receiving the pay that the employee would have received if the person had been
promoted.
   (3)   A public entity employer has the burden to prove by substantial
evidence that the public entity employer’s action was justified.
   (4)   A public entity employee or public entity employer may appeal a
determination of the Career Service Review Office as provided in Section 67-
19a-402.5.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-3.5
History. Amended by Chapter 390, 2018 General Session, § 1-4, eff. 5/8/2018.
Added by Chapter 427, 2013 General Session, § 9, eff. 5/14/2013.
Related Legislative Provision: See Chapter 427, 2013 General Session, § 17.
______________________________________________________________
§ 67-21-3.6. Administrative review for political subdivision employees.
Utah Statutes
Title 67. State Officers and Employees
Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
Current through 2018 General Session
§ 67-21-3.6. Administrative review for political subdivision employees
   (1)   (a)   A political subdivision may adopt an ordinance to establish an
independent personnel board to hear and take action on a complaint alleging
adverse action.
      (b)   The ordinance described in Subsection (1)(a) shall include:
         (i)   Procedures for filing a complaint and conducting a hearing; and
         (ii)   A burden of proof on the employer to establish by substantial
evidence that the employer’s action was justified by reasons unrelated to the
employee’s good faith actions under Section 67-21-3.
   (2)   If a political subdivision adopts an ordinance described in Subsection
(1), a political subdivision employee may file a complaint with the independent
personnel board alleging adverse action.
   (3)   If an independent personnel board finds that adverse action is taken
in violation of the ordinance described in Subsection (1)(a), the independent
personnel board may order:
      (a)   Reinstatement of the employee at the same level as before the
adverse action;
      (b)   The payment of back wages;
      (c)   Full reinstatement of fringe benefits;
      (d)   Full reinstatement of seniority rights; or
      (e)   If the adverse action includes failure to promote, as described in
Subsection 67-19a-101 (8)(d), a pay raise that results in the employee
receiving the pay that the employee would have received if the person had been
promoted.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-3.6
History. Added by Chapter 427, 2013 General Session , § 10, eff. 5/14/2013.
___________________________________________________________________
§ 67-21-3.7. Administrative review for state institution of higher education
employees.
Utah Statutes
Title 67. State Officers and Employees
Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
Current through 2018 General Session
§ 67-21-3.7. Administrative review for state institution of higher education
employees
   (1)   (a)   As used in this section, “independent personnel board” means a
board where no member of the board:
         (i)   Is in the same department as the complainant;
         (ii)   Is a supervisor of the complainant; or
         (iii)   Has a conflict of interest in relation to the complainant or
an allegation made in the complaint.
      (b)   A state institution of higher education shall adopt a policy to
establish an independent personnel board to hear and take action on a complaint
alleging adverse action.
      (c)   The policy described in Subsection (1)(b) shall include:
         (i)   Procedures for filing a complaint and conducting a hearing; and
         (ii)   A burden of proof on the employer to establish by substantial
evidence that the employer’s action was justified by reasons unrelated to the
employee’s good faith actions under Section 67-21-3.
   (2)   (a)   An employee of a state institution of higher education may file
a complaint with the independent personnel board described in Subsection (1)(b)
alleging adverse action.
      (b)   An independent personnel board that receives a complaint under
Subsection (2)(a) shall hear the matter, resolve the complaint, and take action
under Subsection (3) within the later of:
         (i)   30 days after the day on which the employee files the complaint;
or
         (ii)   A longer period of time, not to exceed 30 additional days, if
the employee and the independent personnel board mutually agree on the longer
time period.
   (3)   If an independent personnel board finds that adverse action is taken
in violation of the policy described in Subsection (1)(b), the independent
personnel board may order, or recommend to a final decision maker:
      (a)   Reinstatement of the employee at the same level as before the
adverse action;
      (b)   The payment of back wages;
      (c)   Full reinstatement of fringe benefits;
      (d)   Full reinstatement of seniority rights; or
      (e)   If the adverse action includes failure to promote, as described in
Subsection 67- 19a-101 (8)(d), a pay raise that results in the employee
receiving the pay that the employee would have received if the person had been
promoted.
   (4)   A final decision maker who receives a recommendation under Subsection
(3) shall render a decision and enter an order within seven days after the day
on which the final decision maker receives the recommendation.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-3.7
History. Amended by Chapter 178, 2018 General Session, § 3, eff. 5/8/2018.
Added by Chapter 427, 2013 General Session, § 11, eff. 5/14/2013.
_____________________________________________________________________
§ 67-21-4. Choice of forum - Remedies for employee bringing action - Proof
required.
Utah Statutes
Title 67. State Officers and Employees
Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
Current through 2018 General Session
§ 67-21-4. Choice of forum - Remedies for employee bringing action - Proof
required
   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in Subsection (1)(b) or (d), and subject to
Subsections (1)(d) through (e), an employee who alleges a violation of this
chapter may bring a civil action for appropriate injunctive relief, damages, or
both, within 180 days after the occurrence of the alleged violation of this
chapter.
      (b)   Except as provided in Subsection (1)(d):
         (i)   An employee of a political subdivision that has adopted an
ordinance described in Section 67-21-3.6:
            (A)   May bring a civil action described in Subsection (1)(a)
within 180 days after the day on which the employee has exhausted
administrative remedies; and
            (B)   May not bring a civil action described in Subsection (1)(a)
until the employee has exhausted administrative remedies; and
         (ii)   An employee of a state institution of higher education:
            (A)   May bring a civil action described in Subsection (1)(a)
within 180 days after the day on which the employee has exhausted
administrative remedies; and
            (B)   May not bring a civil action described in Subsection (1)(a)
until the employee has exhausted administrative remedies.
      (c)   Except as provided in Subsection (1)(d), a public entity employee
who is not a legislative employee or a judicial employee may bring a claim of
retaliatory action by selecting one of the following methods:
         (i)   Filing a grievance with the Career Service Review Office in
accordance with Section 67-19a-402.5; or
         (ii)   Bringing a civil action for appropriate injunctive relief,
damages, or both, within 180 days after the occurrence of the alleged violation
of this chapter.
      (d)   (i)   A claimant may bring an action after the 180-day limit
described in this Subsection (1) if:
            (A)   The claimant originally brought the action within the 180-day
time limit;
            (B)   The action described in Subsection (1)(d)(i)(A) failed or was
dismissed for a reason other than on the merits; and
            (C)   The claimant brings the new action within 180 days after the
day on which the claimant originally brought the action under Subsection (1)(d)
(i)(A).
         (ii)   A claimant may commence a new action under this Subsection (1)
(d) only once.
      (e)   A public entity employee who files a grievance under Subsection (1)
(d)(i):
         (i)   May not, at any time, bring a civil action in relation to the
subject matter of the grievance;
         (ii)   May seek a remedy described in Subsection 67-21-3.5(2); and
         (iii)   Waives the right to seek a remedy or a type of damages not
included in Subsection 67-21-3.5(2).
      (f)   A public entity employee who files a civil action under Subsection
(1)(d)(ii) may not, at any time, file a grievance with the Career Service
Review Office in relation to the subject matter of the civil action.
   (2)   An employee who brings a civil action under this section shall bring
the action in the district court for the county where the alleged violation
occurred, the county where the complainant resides, or the county where the
person against whom the civil complaint is filed resides or has the person’s
principal place of business.
   (3)   To prevail in an action brought under this section, the employer shall
prove by substantial evidence that the employer’s action was justified.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-4
History. Amended by Chapter 178, 2018 General Session, § 4, eff. 5/8/2018.
Amended by Chapter 427, 2013 General Session , § 12, eff. 5/14/2013.
Amended by Chapter 177, 1999 General Session
________________________________________________________________
§ 67-21-5. Court orders for violation of chapter.
Utah Statutes
Title 67. State Officers and Employees
Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
Current through 2018 General Session
§ 67-21-5. Court orders for violation of chapter
   (1)   A court, in rendering a judgment in an action brought under this
chapter, may order reinstatement of the employee at the same level, the payment
of back wages, full reinstatement of fringe benefits and seniority rights,
damages, or any combination of these remedies.
   (2)   A court shall award the complainant all or a portion of the costs of
litigation, which are defined to include reasonable attorney fees and witness
fees, if the court determines that the complainant prevails.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-5
History. Amended by Chapter 427, 2013 General Session , § 13, eff. 5/14/2013,
Amended by Chapter 177, 1999 General Session
__________________________________________________________________
§ 67-21-6, Civil fine.
Utah Statutes
Title 67. State Officers and Employees
Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
Current through 2018 General Session
§67-21-6. Civil fine
   (1)   (a)   A person who violates this chapter is liable for a civil fine of
not more than $500.
      (b)   The person who takes an adverse action against an employee in
violation of this chapter, and not the public body that employs the employee,
shall, after receiving notice and an opportunity to be heard, pay the civil
fine under this Subsection (1).
      (c)   If a person is ordered to pay a civil fine under this Subsection
(1), the employer may dismiss the person who took the adverse action in
violation of this chapter.
   (2)   A civil fine ordered under this chapter shall be submitted to the
state treasurer for deposit in the General Fund.
   (3)   The civil fine described in this section may be imposed if a violation
of this chapter is found by:
      (a)   An independent personnel board described in Subsection 67-21-3.6(1)
(a) or 67-21-37(1)(a);
      (b)   The Career Service Review Office; or
      (c)   A court.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-6
History. Amended by Chapter 427, 2013 General Session, § 14, eff. 5/14/2013.
Enacted by Chapter 216, 1985 General Session
___________________________________________________________________
§ 67-21-7. No impairment of employee rights under collective bargaining
agreement.
Utah Statutes
Title 67. State Officers and Employees
Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
Current through 2018 General Session
§ 67-21-7. No impairment of employee rights under collective bargaining
agreement
   This chapter shall not be construed to diminish or impair the rights of an
employee under any collective bargaining agreement.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-7
History. Enacted by Chapter 216, 1985 General Session
________________________________________________________________
§ 67-21-8. No compensation when participation in public inquiry.
Utah Statutes
Title 67. State Officers and Employees
Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
Current through 2018 General Session
§ 67-21-8. No compensation when participation in public inquiry
   This chapter shall not be construed to require an employer to compensate an
employee for participation in an investigation, hearing, or inquiry held by a
public body in accordance with § 67-21-3.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-8
History. Enacted by Chapter 216, 1985 General Session
_________________________________________________________________
§ 67-21-9. Notice of contents of this chapter - Posting.
Utah Statutes
Title 67. State Officers and Employees
Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
Current through 2018 General Session
§ 67-21-9. Notice of contents of this chapter - Posting
   (1)   An employer shall post notices and use other appropriate means to keep
employees informed of their protections and obligations under this chapter.
   (2)   An employer shall provide an employee with a copy of this chapter:
      (a)   When the employee is hired;
      (b)   Upon a request by the employee; and
      (c)   When the employee files a grievance under this chapter.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-9
History. Amended by Chapter 178, 2018 General Session, § 5, eff. 5/8/2018.
Amended by Chapter 427, 2013 General Session , § 15, eff. 5/14/2013.
Enacted by Chapter 216, 1985 General Session
_____________________________________________________________
§ 67-21-10. False accusations.
Utah Statutes
Title 67. State Officers and Employees
Chapter 21. Utah Protection of Public Employees Act
Current through 2018 General Session
§ 67-21-10. False accusations
   (1)   An employee violates this chapter if the employee knowingly makes a
false accusation against an employer under this chapter.
   (2)   An employee who violates Subsection (1), is subject to:
      (a)   A fine not to exceed $5,000; and
      (b)   Dismissal from employment.
Cite as Utah Code § 67-21-10
History. Added by Chapter 427, 2013 General Session, § 16, eff. 5/14/2013.
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
33.001   911 emergency number; surcharge
   
33.002   Notary service; Recorder services
   
33.003   Board of Equalization Standards of Practice
Cash Receipt and Deposit Policy
   
33.015   Purpose
   
33.016   Cash receipts at separate individual locations
   
33.017   Deposits with Treasurer
   
33.018   Real property tax payments
   
33.019   Assessor’s tax payments
Investment Policy
   
33.030   Introduction
   
33.031   Scope
   
33.032   General objectives
   
33.033   Delegation of authority
   
33.034   Authorized financial institutions, depositories and brokers/dealers
   
33.035   Safekeeping and custody
   
33.036   Authorized deposits or investments of public funds
   
33.037   Performance standards; evaluation
   
33.038   Reporting; disclosure
Transient Room Tax
   
33.050   Title
   
33.051   Purpose
   
33.052   Statutes adopted by reference
   
33.053   Definition
   
33.054   Tax imposed; amount
   
33.055   Exclusions
   
33.056   Contributions and donations
   
33.057   Audits
   
33.058   Remittance of tax
   
33.059   Appeals
   
33.060   Penalties and interest
Sales and Use Tax
   
33.075   Title
   
33.076   Purpose
   
33.077   Sales tax
   
33.078   Use tax
   
33.079   Contact with state’s Tax Commission
Method of Sale; Tax Sale Rules
   
33.090   Definitions
   
33.091   Public notice
   
33.092   Bidder registration requirement
   
33.093   Redemption rights and procedures
   
33.094   Prohibited conduct
   
33.095   Conflict of interest prohibitions and disclosure requirements
   
33.096   Criteria for accepting or rejecting bids
   
33.097   Sale ratification procedures
   
33.098   Method and procedure of payment, fees and premiums
   
33.099   Procedures for contesting bids and sales
   
33.100   Criteria for striking properties to the county
   
33.101   Procedures for disclosing properties withdrawn from the sale
   
33.102   Disclaimer by county with respect to tax sale
Fee Schedule
   
33.115   Fees by statute, by policy and by schedule
   
33.116   Adopting and amending fee schedules
   
33.117   Commission, department heads and elected officials powers; fees
   
33.118   Fees for Recorder, Sheriff and surveyors
   
33.119   Common fees for all county offices
   
33.120   Fees of the Assessor’s Office
   
33.121   Fees of the Attorney’s Office
   
33.122   Fees of the Planning and Zoning Department
   
33.123   Fees of the Clerk/Auditor’s Office
   
33.124   Fees of the Economic Development/Visitor Services Department
   
33.125   Fees of the emergency medical services
   
33.126   Fees of the public library
   
33.127   Fees for non-departmental services
   
33.128   Fees of the Landfill Department
   
33.129   Fees of the Public Health Department
   
33.130   Fees of the Recorder’s Office
   
33.131   Fees of the Road Department
   
33.132   Fees for the Sheriff’s Office
   
33.133   Fees for the Surveyor’s Office
   
33.134   Fee waivers
   
33.135   Return of fees
   
33.136   Additional fees
 
   
33.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.001 911 EMERGENCY NUMBER; SURCHARGE.
   The surcharge for the establishment and funding of a 911 emergency number
within the county is increased to $0.53 per month, to include wireless
telephone service as well as hard-line telephone service.
(Ord. 2002-04, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 33.002 NOTARY SERVICE; RECORDER SERVICES.
   (A)   Pursuant to UCA § 17-21-18.5, paragraph 6, allows the county the right
to determine and collect a fee for all services not enumerated in that section
of code.
   (B)   In an effort to create efficiencies in processes within the County
Recorder’s Department, the County Recorder is requesting to add a notary
service and fee for the Mylar documents which require a notary seal and
authenticity of signature following UCA Title 46, Notarization and
Authentication of Documents, Electronic Signatures, and Legal Material.
   (C)   The fee charged for said services shall not exceed $5 per stamp for
all of those needing notary.
   (D)   The revenue generated for said services shall be collected as county
revenue to the General Fund which funds the expenses of the Recorder’s
Department.
   (E)   The use of the notary service is applicable only to those duties and
operations of the Recorder’s Department.
   (F)   All other applicable fees pursuant to UCA § 17-21-18.5 of the
Recorder’s Department remain the same.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.003 BOARD OF EQUALIZATION STANDARDS OF PRACTICE.
   (A)   The county adopts by reference the State Tax Commission’s Board of
Equalization Standards of Practice. These rules are supplemented by relevant
provisions in UCA §§ 59-2-1001 through 1006 and 59-2-1017 (hereafter section
refers to the Utah Code); U.A.C. R884-24P-66 (County Board of Equalization
Procedures and Appeals) and State Tax Commission Standards of Practice
(Procedures and Guidelines for Boards of Equalization). The County Board of
Commissioners, acting as the County Board of Equalization, may assign the
Administrative Law Judge to review and hear appeals filed under Chapter 33 of
this code. Such review and hearings by the Administrative Law Judge shall be
conducted pursuant to Chapter 11 of this code. The Administrative Law Judge
shall attend and complete training offered by the Utah State Tax Commission
relevant to the review and hearing of appeals under Chapter 33 of this code.
   (B)   The county shall use the most current version of the Board of
Equalization Standards of Practice issued by the State Property Tax Division.
(Ord. 2022-03, passed 8-16-2022; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
CASH RECEIPT AND DEPOSIT POLICY
§ 33.015 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a uniform control design for
all departments of the county that receive cash. This subchapter has been
developed by the Treasurer with input received from the Clerk/Auditor, external
auditors and approved by the Board of County Commissioners, who ultimately is
responsible for the overall design and implementation of organizational
controls. Over time it is expected this subchapter will be adjusted for changes
in systems and organizational structure, at which time the Treasurer will
propose changes to the Board of County Commissioners for review and approval.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.016 CASH RECEIPTS AT SEPARATE INDIVIDUAL LOCATIONS.
   (A)   All funds received are entered into the accounting system at the time
of the transaction or if the transaction occurs at a location without access to
the accounting system the funds will be logged into a pre-numbered receipt book
with enough detail to determine where/who the funds came from, the purpose for
receiving the funds, the method of payment (cash, check, credit card and the
like) and designate the appropriate account. Manual receipts should have three
copies: customer copy; Treasurer copy; and a location copy.
   (B)   At the end of each day, the person responsible for receiving cash will
close out his, her or their cash drawer, reconcile the system generated report
to the cash in the drawer, place cash, checks and credit card receipts received
along with the report in a deposit bag and deliver it to the Treasurer’s office
or place it in a secure (locked) place for deposit as soon as possible but at
least every three days. Choosing two set days per week (e.g., Tuesday and
Thursday) is recommended.
   (C)   Void/adjusted transactions, if a transaction needs to be voided or
adjusted it should be done by someone who does not receive cash, if an office
doesn’t have enough employees to have adjustments made by a supervisor that
doesn’t receive cash, two employees will sign off on the adjustment or voided
transaction explaining the circumstances causing the adjustment. If the
location is using a manual receipt book all copies of the receipt should be
present for any voided receipt. The system should be designed to generate a
report of all adjusted/voided transactions to facilitate monitoring of this
process.
   (D)   Every effort should be made to ensure large quantities of cash are not
on hand at any location overnight. If a location has a large transaction or
series of transactions leaving cash on hand over $2,000, the deposit should be
made in the same day.
   (E)   When deposits are made with the Treasurer’s office the employee making
the deposit will turn over the funds and watch as it is counted, receive a
receipt detailing the amount, date of receipt and the signature of the
Treasurer’s office employee who took custody of the funds. This receipt will be
returned to the location and kept with the receipt records. In order to receive
a receipt, the originating department should bring two signed copies of the
ticket, one for the Treasurer and one for the originating department to keep.
Any discrepancy in the funds being deposited and the supporting documentation
should occur when custody of the funds changes.
   (F)   The Treasurer’s office enters the deposit into the accounting system
and takes funds to the bank. Deposits are made each business day by the
Treasurer’s office.
   (G)   Mail will be opened by an authorized employee and any correspondence
containing payments will be removed and processed prior to distributing mail to
individual persons or departments.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.017 DEPOSITS WITH TREASURER.
   (A)   A Treasurer’s office employee will receive all department funds, count
the funds, compare the amount received to the supporting documentation provided
and give a receipt to the employee who turned over the funds with the amount
received, date and that employee’s name and signature. The originating
department needs to bring two signed copies of each cash ticket, one for the
Treasurer and one for the originating department to keep.
   (B)   An employee from the Treasurer’s office enters the information from
the deposit into the accounting system.
   (C)   Each day, the Treasurer will compile all cash and checks received,
match the total to the total receipts in the accounting system and create a
deposit slip (deposit information should be sufficiently detailed to allow a
reviewer to trace individual transactions from satellite locations into the
deposit and verify that the funds were received by the bank).
   (D)   Copies of deposit slips are maintained and used to reconcile bank
statements to the accounting records.
   (E)   Department heads for departments that collect cash should review the
revenue recorded into the accounting system with their copy of the deposits to
ensure correct recording of cash. Where practicable the system should be
designed to only allow receipts for cash receipts to be recorded to accounts
that pertain to that office or department.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.018 REAL PROPERTY TAX PAYMENTS.
   (A)   Real property tax payments are made directly to the Treasurer. They
are entered into the tax system immediately upon receipt. Payments will be
either for pre-payments, for current taxes or for redemption (past due) taxes.
   (B)   If a parcel is underpaid by $5 or less, the Treasurer’s office is
authorized to adjust the amount due to eliminate the outstanding balance. If
the underpayment is greater than $5, the Treasurer’s office will bill the
taxpayer for the additional amount due. At the end of each business day, cash
receipts entered into the tax system will be balanced with the cash and checks
received for the day, A deposit for the tax receipts will then be made the next
business day. Reports for each type of receipt will be balanced with the bank
and PTIF (Public Treasurer’s Investment Fund) balances each day.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.019 ASSESSOR’S TAX PAYMENTS.
   Each morning, the Assessor’s office will bring to the Treasurer’s office a
report of the motor vehicle and personal property taxes received by the
Assessor the previous day. The Treasurer will verify the receipt totals and
return a signed T-bill for the receipts to the Assessor. The Assessor’s office
deposits the PTIF receipts and the Treasurer’s office deposits the UPP
receipts.
(Ord. 2021-03, passed 1-19-2021)
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 33.030 INTRODUCTION.
   The intent of this subchapter (“policy”) of the County Treasurer is to
define the parameters within which funds are to be managed. In methods,
procedures and practices, the policy formalizes the framework for the county’s
investment activities that must be exercised to ensure effective and judicious
fiscal and investment management of the county’s funds. The guidelines are
intended to be broad enough to allow the investment officer to function
properly within the parameters of responsibility and authority, yet specific
enough to adequately safeguard the investment assets. The county shall comply
with the state’s Money Management Act, being UCA Title 51, Ch. 7. Any revisions
or extensions of these sections of the state’s Money Management Act will be
assumed to be part of this policy immediately upon being enacted.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.031 SCOPE.
   This subchapter applies to activities of the county with regard to investing
the financial assets of all funds. Funds held by trustees or fiscal agents are
excluded from these rules; however, all funds are subject to regulations
established by the state. Certain funds are exempt from this policy and may be
covered by separate policies. Exempt funds are specified in the state’s Money
Management Act, UCA § 51-7-2.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.032 GENERAL OBJECTIVES.
   The primary objectives, in priority order, of investment activities shall be
(as specified in the state’s Money Management Act, UCA § 51-7-17).
   (A)   Safety of principal. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of
the investment program. Investments shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks
to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. The goal will
be to mitigate credit risk and interest rate risk.
   (B)   Need for liquidity. The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently
liquid to meet all operating requirements that may be reasonably anticipated.
   (C)   Yield on investments. The investment portfolio shall be designed with
the objective of attaining a market rate of return throughout budgetary and
economic cycles, taking into account the investment risk constraints of safety
and liquidity needs, as regulated by the state’s Money Management Act and rules
of the state’s Money Management Council, including rules of pertinent bond
resolutions or indentures, or other pertinent legal restrictions.
   (D)   Different objectives. Recognition of the different investment
objectives of operating and permanent funds.
   (E)   Maturities. Maturity of investments, so that the maturity date of the
investment does not exceed the anticipated date of the expenditure of funds.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.033 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Treasurer has authority to invest any funds in the name of the
county or as fiduciary for tax collections.
   (B)   The Deputy Treasurer will act as Investment Officer when the Treasurer
is not able for any reason to function in that capacity.
   (C)   As allowed by the state’s Money Management Act, under UCA § 51-7-11,
the Treasurer may designate a certified investment adviser to make trades on
behalf of the Treasurer.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.034 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS, DEPOSITORIES AND BROKERS/ DEALERS.
   The county may conduct investment transactions only through qualified
depositories, certified dealers or directly with issuers of the investment
securities as regulated by the state’s Money Management Act, UCA § 51-7-11.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.035 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   (A)   Trades of marketable securities will be executed (cleared and settled)
on a delivery versus payment (DVP) basis, held in custody basis or bank safe
keeping basis to ensure that securities are deposited in the county’s
safekeeping institution prior to the release of funds.
   (B)   (1)   Securities will be held by an independent third-party
safekeeping institution selected by the county.
      (2)   All securities will be evidenced by safekeeping receipts in the
county’s name.
   (C)   (1)   The Treasurer shall establish a system of internal controls
designed to ensure that the assets of the county are protected from loss, theft
or misuse.
      (2)   The Treasurer shall provide all documentation necessary to comply
with the required annual audit and evaluation by the independent external
auditor, presently, Larson & Company CPA.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.036 AUTHORIZED DEPOSITS OR INVESTMENTS OF PUBLIC FUNDS.
   All public funds of the county may be deposited or invested only in assets
specified in the state’s Money Management Act, UCA § 51-7-11.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.037 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; EVALUATION.
   (A)   (1)   The investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the
parameters specified within this policy.
      (2)   The portfolio should obtain a market average rate of return during
a market/economic environment of stable interest rates.
   (B)   (1)   A series of appropriate benchmarks shall be established against
which portfolio performance shall be compared on a regular basis.
      (2)   The benchmarks shall be reflective of the actual securities being
purchased and risks undertaken and the benchmarks shall have a similar weighted
average maturity and credit profile as the portfolio.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 33.038 REPORTING/DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   The Treasurer will submit to the state’s Money Management Council
reports of all cash and investments on a semi-annual basis as required.
   (B)   (1)   The Treasurer will make available to the County Auditor, at any
time, reconciliation and bank statement copies of all investments and bank
activity.
      (2)   The Treasurer will also inform the County Auditor of any large
investment activity over and above warrants, payroll or tax distribution.
Investment records will be available for inspection by the County Auditor.
   (C)   The Treasurer will provide investment information to the Board of
County Commissioners at the end of each month through the monthly financial
reports. The Board of County Commissioners may inspect the investment records
of the Treasurer at any time.
(Ord. 2021-04, passed 1-19-2021)
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
§ 33.050 TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this subchapter shall be known as the “Transient
Room Tax Ordinance of the County of San Juan”.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 10-27-2003)
§ 33.051 PURPOSE.
   The County Board of Commissioners declares that the ordinance codified in
this subchapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and
directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish these
purposes:
   (A)   To adopt a transient room tax ordinance that complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in UCA Title 17, Ch. 31, and Title 59,
Ch. 12, part 3, as amended;
   (B)   To adopt a transient room tax ordinance that incorporates provisions
identical to those of UCA Title 17, Ch. 31, and Title 59, Ch. 12, part 3, as
amended:
   (C)   To adopt a transient room tax ordinance that imposes a tax not to
exceed 3%, and provide a measure therefor that can be administered and
collected by the county in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to
the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state’s
Tax Commission in administering and collecting the sales and use taxes of the
state; and
   (D)   To adopt a transient room tax ordinance that can be administered in a
manner that will provide funds for the purposes of establishing, financing and
promoting recreational, tourist and convention bureaus and such other purposes
as have authorized by law for the expenditure of transient room taxes and for
that purpose create, at the discretion of the Board of County Commissioners, a
reserve fund comprised of any funds collected by expended during any financial
year.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 10-27-2003)
§ 33.052 STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   All applicable provisions of UCA Title 17, Ch. 31, as amended, and Title 59,
Ch. 12, part 3, are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this
subchapter by this reference thereto.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 10-27-2003)
§ 33.053 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the term TRANSIENT means and is defined
as any individual who occupies any suite, room or rooms in a motel, hotel,
motor court, inn or similar public accommodation for fewer than 30 consecutive
days.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 10-27-2003)
§ 33.054 TAX IMPOSED; AMOUNT.
   (A)   There is hereby levied on all persons, companies, corporations or
other like and similar persons, groups or organizations doing business in the
county as motor courts, motels, hotels, inns or like and similar public
accommodations a transient room tax at the rate of 3% of the rent for every
occupancy of a suite, room or rooms by a transient.
   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of UCA Title 59, Ch. 12, part 1, as amended,
known as the Local Sales and Use Tax Law of the state, are hereby adopted and
made a part of this subchapter as though fully set forth herein to the extent
the said provisions are relevant and pertinent to the administrations and the
collection of taxes by the county.
   (C)   Wherever and to the extent that in UCA Title 59, Ch. 12, part 1, the
state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of “San Juan
County” shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this division (C) shall be
deemed to require substitution of the name of the county for the word “state”
when that word is used as part of the title of the state’s Tax Commission or of
the Constitution of the state.
   (D)   If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under UCA § 59-12-
106, an additional license shall not be required by reason of this section, but
a copy of such license shall be provided to the county within 30 days after the
effective date of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 10-27-2003)
§ 33.055 EXCLUSIONS.
   There shall be excluded from the rent paid or charged by which the tax is
measured:
   (A)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state or by any
other governmental agency upon a retailer or consumer; and
   (B)   Receipts form the sale or service charge for any food or beverage or
room service charges in conjunction with the occupancy of the suite, room or
rooms.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 10-27-2003)
§ 33.056 CONTRIBUTIONS AND DONATIONS.
   The County Administrator is authorized to accept, on behalf of the county,
funds contributed, donated or supplied by any person, corporation, other
governmental agency or from any other source whatever for the purposes outlined
in §
33.051 of this chapter and, when such funds are received, they shall be
deposited and used in the same manner as though they were derived from the tax
imposed hereby.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 10-27-2003)
§ 33.057 AUDITS.
   (A)   Any records, tax returns or other information of any person,
corporation, company or other group or organization subject to the taxes
imposed by this subchapter which relate to the calculation, collection or
remittance to the county of said taxes shall be subject to review, inspection
and auditing by the county.
   (B)   The records of the state’s Tax Commission relating to the collection
of sales and use taxes, or Tourism, Recreation and Convention Center taxes on
the same transactions which are subject of this tax shall be subject to review
and audit is provided in the county’s contract with the Commission for the
collection of the local sales and use tax and as provided by law.
   (C)   The taxpayer shall also be subject to such audits and reviews by the
state’s Tax Commission as are provided for by law.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 10-27-2003)
§ 33.058 REMITTANCE OF TAX.
   If the annual tax liability imposed under this subchapter is less than $100,
the tax shall be remitted as directed by the county and a tax return filed on
forms provided by the county quarterly by January 10, April 10, July 10 and
October 10 for the preceding quarter. If the annual tax liability is $100 or
more, that tax shall be remitted as directed by the county and a tax return
filed on forms provided by the county monthly by the tenth day of the month
following the month in which the tax is collected. The county reserves the
right, at its sole discretion upon 30 days’ written notice, to require any
taxpayer to file and remit taxes on a monthly basis. All returns filed pursuant
hereto shall accurately identify the locations where the transactions occurred
and the gross sales upon which the tax for each location is computed.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 10-27-2003)
§ 33.059 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any party aggrieved by any action of the county relating to the
assessment, auditing, calculation or collection of the tax including any notice
of deficiency issued by the county, may request a hearing by filing a written
request for redetermination and hearing with the County Clerk/Auditor no later
than 30 days after the effective date of the county’s action or the date of
issuance of the notice of deficiency. The appeal herein shall be reviewed and
heard by the county’s Administrative Law Judge pursuant to
Chapter 11 of this code.
   (B)   The party shall have an additional right of administrative appeal to
the state’s Tax Commission in accordance with UCA § 59-12-302.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 10-27-2003; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 33.060 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   Any person who fails to file any tax return or information required by this
subchapter, who fails to pay any tax due hereunder or who fails to timely pay
such tax shall be subject to the imposition of penalties and interest by the
county in accordance with UCA §§ 59-1-401 and 59-1-402 or any successor
provision thereto.
(Ord. 2003-01, passed 10-27-2003)
SALES AND USE TAX
§ 33.075 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax
Ordinance of the County of San Juan, Utah”.
(Ord. 1975-1, passed 5-12-1975)
§ 33.076 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The 41st Session of the Utah Legislature has authorized the counties
and municipalities of the state to enact sales and use tax ordinances imposing
a 0.75% tax thus enabling the county to increase its local option sales and use
tax from 0.5% to 0.75%.
   (B)   Additionally, said session of the legislature has enacted amendments
to UCA Title 59, Ch. 15 and 16, sufficiently to require the county to modify
its sales and use tax ordinance to bring about conformity to those changes.
   (C)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to conform the uniform local
sales and use tax of the county to the requirements of the Uniform Local Sales
and Use Tax Law of the state, UCA Title 11, Ch. 9, as currently amended and
renumbered as UCA Title 59, Ch. 12, by repealing the previously enacted Uniform
Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the municipality and re-enacting by this
subchapter a new Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.
(Ord. 1975-1, passed 5-12-1975)
§ 33.077 SALES TAX.
   (A)   (1)   From and after the effective date of this subchapter, there is
levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of
tangible personal property, services and meals made within the county at the
rate of 0.75%.
      (2)   For the purpose of this subchapter, all retail sales shall be
presumed to have been consummated at the place of business of the retailer
unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his
or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery
to an out-of-state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place
of business in the state, or has more than one place of business, the place or
places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under
the rules and regulations prescribed and adopted by the state’s Tax Commission.
Public utilities, as defined by UCA Title 54, shall not be obligated to
determine the place or places within any county or municipality where public
utilities services are rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax
revenues arising from such service allocable to the county shall be as
determined by the state’s Tax Commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and
other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
   (B)   (1)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of
the state, all of the provisions of UCA Title 59, Ch. 15, as amended, and in
force and effect on the effective date of this subchapter, insofar as they
relate to sales taxes, excepting UCA § 59-12-1 thereof, and excepting for the
amount of the sales tax levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of
this subchapter as though fully set forth herein.
      (2)   Wherever, and to the extent that, in UCA Title 59, Ch. 15, the
state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this county
shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this division (B) shall be deemed to
require substitution of the name of the county for the word “State” when that
word is used as part of the title of the state’s Tax Commission, or of the
Constitution of the state, nor shall the name of the county be substituted for
that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would
require action to be taken by or against the municipality or any agency
thereof, rather than by or against the state’s Tax Commission in performing the
functions incident to the administration or operation of this subchapter.
      (3)   If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under UCA § 59-
15-3, an additional license shall not be required by reason of this section.
      (4)   There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by
which the tax is measured:
         (a)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer; and
         (b)   Receipts from the sale of tangible personal property upon which
a sales or use tax has become due by reason of the same transaction to any
municipality and any other county in the state, under a sales or use tax
ordinance enacted by that county or municipality in accordance with the Uniform
Local Sales and Use Tax Law of the state.
(Ord. 1975-1, passed 5-12-1975)
§ 33.078 USE TAX.
   (A)   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in the municipality of tangible personal property from any retailer
on or after the operative date of this subchapter for storage, use or other
consumption in the county at the rate of 0.75% of the sales price of the
property.
   (B)   (1)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of said Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of
the state, all of the provisions of UCA Title 59, Ch. 16, as amended and in
force and effect on the effective date of this subchapter, applicable to use
taxes, excepting the provisions of UCA § 59-12-1 thereof, and excepting for the
amount of the tax levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this
section as though fully set forth therein.
      (2)   (a)   Wherever, and to the extent that, in said UCA Title 59, Ch.
16, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the
municipality shall be substituted therefor.
         (b)   Nothing in this division (B) shall be deemed to require the
substitution of the name of the municipality for the word “State” when that
word is used as part of the title of the state’s Tax Commission, or of the
Constitution of the state, nor shall the name of the municipality be
substituted for that of the state in any section when the results of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the municipality or
any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state’s Tax Commission in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
subchapter.
      (3)   There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
         (a)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer; and
         (b)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of which has been
subject to sales or use tax under a sales or use tax ordinance enacted in
accordance with the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of the state by any
other municipality and any county of the state.
(Ord. 1975-1, passed 5-12-1975)
§ 33.079 CONTRACT WITH STATE’S TAX COMMISSION.
   Heretofore, the municipality has entered into an agreement with the state’s
Tax Commission to perform all functions incident to the administration or
operation of the sales and use tax ordinance of the county. That contract is
hereby confirmed and the Commission is hereby authorized to enter into such
supplementary agreement with the state’s Tax Commission, as may be necessary to
the continued administration and operation of the local sales and use tax
ordinance of the county as re-enacted by this subchapter.
(Ord. 1975-1, passed 5-12-1975)
METHOD OF SALE; TAX SALE RULES
§ 33.090 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE COST. Expenses incurred by the county in preparation of the
tax sale.
   BID. An offer of a purchase price for a property.
   BIDDER. A natural person, corporation or licensed business entity.
   COLLUSIVE BIDDING. Any agreement or understanding reached by two or more
parties that in any way alters the bids the parties would otherwise offer
absent the agreement or understanding.
   COUNTY. San Juan County, a political subdivision of the State of Utah.
   PUBLIC EMPLOYEE. A person who is not a public officer who is employed on a
full-time, part-time or contract basis by the county.
   PUBLIC OFFICER. All elected or appointed officers of the county who occupy
policy making posts.
   SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST. The ownership, either legally or equitably, by an
individual, the individual’s spouse or the individual’s minor child, of at
least 10% of the outstanding capital stock of a corporation or 10% interest in
any other business entity, including a trust.
   TAX SALE. The sale of properties with delinquent property tax due as
authorized by UCA § 59-2-1351 et seq.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 33.091 PUBLIC NOTICE.
   (A)   Notice is hereby given that unless noticed otherwise, the annual
county tax sale shall be held every year in May. The auction will be conducted
on site at 117 South Main Street in Monticello, Utah at the County
Administration Building. Advertising and auctions may be presented live using
publicsurplus.com as needed and appropriate. At such time, the county will
offer for sale at public auction and sell to the highest bidder pursuant to UCA
§ 59-2-1351 et seq., the real property as listed
by the County Treasurer on the tax sale listing pursuant to UCA § 59-2-1343 and
described herein located in the county and delinquent and subject to tax sale.
   (B)   Notice of an alternative date of sale shall be given in the form
pursuant to UCA § 59-2-1351. Such tax sale shall proceed pursuant to UCA § 59-
2-1351 and this subchapter.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 33.092 BIDDER REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Each bidder must register in the manner required by the county or
entity conducting the tax sale on behalf of the county. Any such requirement
will be posted on the county website. If an auction company or using
publicsurplus.com, the name of the company or means of auction will be
indicated on the county website. Any registration requirement must be completed
by the date and time indicated.
In the registration, the bidder shall properly and clearly identify the correct
information and address for use in issuance of deeds. At the time of
registration, the bidder shall also disclose any substantial interest as
required in §
33.095.
   (B)   Neither the county nor an auction company can or will be held
responsible for late or misdirected bid deposits, proxy bids or any other
transmission, mailing, e-mail or other correspondence necessary to participate
in the bid.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 33.093 REDEMPTION RIGHTS AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   A property may be redeemed in behalf of the record owner, by any
person, at any time prior to 5:00 p.m. of the business day prior to the start
time of the tax sale.
   (B)   Property is redeemed by paying to the County Treasurer, all delinquent
taxes, interest, penalties and administrative costs which have accrued on the
property.
   (C)   Paying the delinquent amount does not grant ownership to the party(s)
paying all delinquent taxes, interest, penalties and administrative costs.
Redemption only removes the property from the tax sale.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 33.094 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   Collusive bidding is not permitted and is punishable as a Class C
misdemeanor. COLLUSIVE BIDDING further means to conspire with another party to
intentionally rig bids or fix prices to make it difficult or impossible for any
other parties to take part in the bidding process. Any bid that was accepted
from a bidder discovered to have engaged in collusive bidding is void, and any
property acquired through collusive bidding is stricken without cost to the
county as if a minimum bid had not been made consistent with §
33.096.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 33.095 CONFLICT OF INTEREST PROHIBITIONS AND DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every county official or employee who purchases or has a substantial
interest in any business entity which purchases property at the tax sale must
disclose said interest in a sworn statement filed with the Clerk/Auditor and a
copy of which is provided to the Board of County Commissioners, the County
Attorney, and the employee’s or official’s immediate supervisor. These
disclosures are public information and are available for public inspection.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any disclosure, no official or employee may have a
personal investment in a business entity which will create a substantial
conflict between private interests and public duties related to the tax sale.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 33.096 CRITERIA FOR ACCEPTING OR REJECTING BIDS.
   (A)   Bidding will advance in increments of a minimum of $100 or as
indicated on each property listed for sale with the minimum acceptable bid
starting at “Taxes”.
   (B)   All bids shall be considered conditional, whether or not the bid is
contested, until reviewed and accepted by the Board of County Commissioners
acting at a regularly scheduled Commission meeting.
   (C)   The county reserves the right to reject any and/or all bids.
   (D)   All bidders have an equal opportunity to offer a bid on properties.
There is no preferential bidding. Bidders who make a bona fide bid in the
highest amount for a property become the successful bidder of the property
auction.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 33.097 SALE RATIFICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The County Auditor, or assigned deputy, shall present the results of
the tax sale no later than two regularly scheduled Board of County Commission
meetings after the sale. The County Auditor, or assigned deputy, will inform
the commission regarding the number of properties sold, the number of
properties struck off to the county, and the high bid amount for each property
offered for sale at the tax sale.
   (B)   The County Commission may ratify the results of the tax sale after
hearing the details offered by the County Auditor or assigned deputy.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 33.098 METHOD AND PROCEDURE OF PAYMENT, FEES AND PREMIUMS.
   (A)   (1)   All bids are an irrevocable offer to purchase the property in
question. A bidder is legally and financially responsible for all properties
bid upon.
      (2)   Payment in full by either money order, credit card or wire transfer
will be required no later than three business days after the tax sale closes,
unless otherwise advertised.
      (3)   No personal checks and no financing is available. Other methods of
payment may be accepted if an auction company is used and the company provides
alternative payment methods.
   (B)   There is a recording fee and administrative costs per transaction
which will be required to be paid in addition to the winning bid to be paid by
the winning bidder at the time of payment.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 33.099 PROCEDURES FOR CONTESTING BIDS AND SALES.
   Any person wishing to contest any action taken in connection with the tax
sale must present such protest to the Board of County Commissioners, by filing
a written notice of contest through the Clerk/Auditor’s office within ten
calendar days of the date of the tax sale. The protest shall be reviewed and
heard by the county’s Administrative Law Judge pursuant to
Chapter 11 of this code.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 33.100 CRITERIA FOR STRIKING PROPERTIES TO THE COUNTY.
   (A)   Any property which does not receive a minimum bid shall be struck off
to the county. Property struck off to the county may be available for sale
through the Clerk/Auditor’s office when approved by the Board of County
Commissioners.
   (B)   Upon any final bid being rejected, the property may be offered to a
bidder who offered the second highest bid in the amount of that bid. If the
second highest bidder does not accept and make payment on the offer within 30
days of the offer, the property shall be struck off to the county.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 33.101 PROCEDURES FOR DISCLOSING PROPERTIES WITHDRAWN FROM THE SALE.
   (A)   The county website will be updated daily with any changes in the
available properties. If the list is published in a local newspaper, it will be
updated with any changes prior to its publication each week.
   (B)   If advertising and auction is taking place on a auction website, that
website will be updated daily with any changes in the available properties.
   (C)   Any properties which are redeemed or removed immediately prior to the
beginning of the tax sale auction, will be removed from live bidding prior to
the bid group.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 33.102 DISCLAIMER BY COUNTY WITH RESPECT TO TAX SALE.
   (A)   Properties sold via tax sale shall be conveyed by auditor’s tax deed.
This form of deed is not a warranty deed. No warranty or guarantee is made,
expressed or implied, relative to the title, location or condition of
properties for sale. In addition, the county assumes no responsibility, implied
or otherwise, that tax sale properties are in compliance with zoning
ordinances, mining and reclamation regulations, building codes or permits and/
or any other applicable regulations or permits. In addition, the county makes
no warranties or representations as to whether the property is buildable or
developable.
   (B)   (1)   Any property sold pursuant to a tax sale is without guarantee or
warranty whatsoever as to existence, correctness of ownership, size,
boundaries, location, structures or lack of structures upon the land, liens,
titles or any other matter or thing whatsoever.
      (2)   The county does not warrant or represent that any property
purchased during a tax sale is habitable or in any particular condition.
   (C)   The county also makes no warranties or representations regarding the
accuracy of the assessment of the property or accuracy of the legal description
of the real estate or improvements thereon. It is the responsibility of the
bidder to determine the physical aspects of the property, its geographical
location, and accessibility. The county makes no warranties regarding the
availability, validity or existence of water rights associated with any of the
properties sold during a tax sale.
   (D)   It is the bidder’s responsibility to determine the liabilities,
including other liens and encumbrances, that exist on each property before and
after the sale. The properties are sold “as is”. Additionally, the county is
not liable in any way whatsoever for damages sustained to property purchased
from the time of sale until the recording of the Auditor’s tax deed to a
purchaser.
   (E)   All properties sold at a tax sale fall under the rule of caveat
emptor, or “let the buyer beware”, and all purchasers are hereby so notified.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 9-6-2022)
FEE SCHEDULE
§ 33.115 FEES BY STATUTE, BY POLICY AND BY SCHEDULE.
   (A)   In any case, where the process or authority for adopting fees or
specific fees are set in statute, these fees shall be adopted or imposed by the
affected county office, department, board, or entity in accordance with the
governing statute.
   (B)   In the case of fees regarding records, records duplication and related
subjects, fees shall be imposed as provided in countywide records policies,
adopted in accordance with §
32.037 of the San Juan County Code.
   (C)   In the case of fees not set in statute and not covered by records
policies, fees shall be imposed as provided by law or this subchapter.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024; Ord. 2024-04A, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 33.116 ADOPTING AND AMENDING FEE SCHEDULES.
   San Juan County fee schedules shall be adopted according to the following
process.
   (A)   Unless otherwise authorized by statute for adoption by a separate body
or entity, non-statutory fees to be charged by a county office, department or
agency shall be proposed by the office or agency each year as part of the
annual budget processes or at such other time(s) as the Board of County
Commissioners shall provide for by ordinance.
   (B)   Fees shall be separately listed for each office, department or agency
and shall be compiled and separately set forth by the Chief Administrative
Officer in the tentative budget.
   (C)   Upon review and approval of fees by the County Board of Commissioners,
the fee schedule shall be placed on file with the County Clerk/Auditor.
   (D)   Each office, department and agency shall post its approved fee
schedule and shall additionally post a listing of statutory fees it is
authorized by law to charge and collect.
   (E)   New fees may be adopted and existing fees may be amended or repealed
at any time by ordinance.
   (F)   Fees adopted or amended pursuant to this section shall become
effective on the date specified in the ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024; Ord. 2024-04A, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 33.117 COMMISSION, DEPARTMENT HEADS AND ELECTED OFFICIALS POWERS; FEES.
   (A)   The County Chief Administrative Officer shall review and approve a
schedule of all fees imposed by divisions within the office, departments, or
agency prior to submission to the County Board of Commissioners during the
budget approval process.
   (B)   The County Chief Administrative Officer may recommend that the
Commission waive or adjust fees in accordance with the following standards and
procedures:
      (1)   A fee imposed by an executive branch office, department, agency or
division may be waived or adjusted by the recommendation of the Chief
Administrative Officer and approval of the Commission unless that fee is
specifically established by state statute or regulation. Fees established by
ordinance may be waived by the commission and fees established by state law may
only be waived in accordance with state law.
         (a)   Department heads and elected officials may waive or adjust fees
in accordance with §
33.134.
         (b)   The Planning Administrator may waive or adjust fees in
accordance with §
33.134.
      (2)   Waiver shall be upon good cause shown to contribute to the safety,
health, prosperity, moral well-being, peace, order, comfort, or convenience of
county residents. Any waiver shall be in writing submitted to the Chief
Administrative Officer.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024; Ord. 2024-04A, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 33.118 FEES FOR RECORDER, SHERIFF AND SURVEYORS.
   The Recorder, Sheriff and surveyors shall adopt, amend, publish and post
fees according to state statute. Fees adopted by the Recorder, Sheriff and
surveyors and fees authorized for adoption shall be included in the tentative
budget and posted in accordance with §
33.117 within.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.119 COMMON FEES FOR ALL COUNTY OFFICES.
   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed by all
county offices unless otherwise specifically noted with their respective
sections.
Services Fees
Services                      Fees
Postage                       Actual cost to county
Other costs allowed by law    Actual cost to county
Dishonored/returned check     $25.00
Copies/print- black and white  
   Paper size: 8 ½ x 11   $0.10/single-sided page
   Paper size: 8 ½ x 11   $0.15/double-sided page
   Paper size: 8 ½ x 14   $0.15/printed page
   Paper size: 11 x 17     $0.20/printed page
Copies/print- color            
   Paper size: 8 ½ x 11   $1.00/printed page
   Paper size: 8 ½ x 14   $1.50/printed page
   Paper size: 11 x 17     $2.00/printed page
Fax                            
   Send                    $1.50 first page/$0.50 each additional
   Receive                 $0.25
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.120 FEES OF THE ASSESSOR’S OFFICE.
   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed and
collected by the Assessor’s Office: none, except as authorized in §
33.119.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.121 FEES OF THE ATTORNEY’S OFFICE.
   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed and
collected by the Attorney’s Office: none, except as authorized in §§
33.119 and
33.122.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.122 FEES OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT.
   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed and
collected by the Planning and Zoning Department for review of development
applications.
Building Permit Fees
                                                                        Plan review
Plan review                                                             and building
                                                                        permit
                                                                        1.75x to
                                                                        square
Building permit                                                         footage. (ex.
                                                                        2,000 sq. ft.=
                                                                        $3,500.00)
                                                                        $65.00/
Inspections                                                             inspection +
                                                                        state milage
                                                                        rate
Appeal for time extension                                               $150.00
Business sign permit                                                    $150.00
                                                                        2x permit
                                                                        price +
Work done without permit                                                $150.00/week
                                                                        if continued
                                                                        beyond 30-day
                                                                        notice
                                                                        Actual costs
Outside consultant                                                      for consulting
                                                                        or inspections
Planning Fees
                                                                        Subdivision
                                                                        plan prelim
Preliminary subdivision plat review                                     and final
                                                                        $500.00 (Minor
                                                                        < 4) $2,000.00
                                                                        + 50 per lot
                                                                        5+ lots
Final subdivision plat review                                           $500.00 +
                                                                        $10.00/
                                                                        additional lot
                                                                        $2,000.00 +
                                                                        $50.00/
Planned unit development                                                residential
                                                                        lot + $100.00/
                                                                        commercial
Subdivision changes (amendments, vacating, lot line adjustments, and    $500.00
the like)
Right-of-way/alley vacating                                             $750.00
Conditional use permit - small project (less than $25,000.00)           $500.00
Conditional use permit - medium project ($25,000.00 - $250,000.00)      $1,000.00
Conditional use permit - large project (more than $250,000.00)          $2,000.00
Planning commission review (variance, zone change, overnight            $500.00
accommodation, overlay, and the like)
                                                                        $500.00 +
                                                                        additional
Appeal of land-use decision or code violation                           sums charged
                                                                        by the
                                                                        Administrative
                                                                        Law Judge
                                                                        $150.00 +
Short-term rental inspection                                            state milage
                                                                        rate
Overnight accommodations permit                                         $500.00
Sign permit                                                             $75.00
Temporary use permit                                                    $150.00
Engineering review (extraordinary engineering review if applicable)     Actual cost
Legal review - charged in the event application documents need          $500.00
substantive legal revision and review by the County Attorney’s office
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.123 FEES OF THE CLERK/AUDITOR’S OFFICE.
   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed and
collected by the Clerk/Auditor’s Office.
Marriage license                                      $50.00
Marriage license copy (certified)                     $10.00
Marriage license copy (non certified)                 $2.00 copy sent by email
Initial off-premise/retail beer (Class A) application $250.00
Bar establishment (Class B) application               $400.00
On-premise beer (Class C) application                 $400.00
Restaurant beer only (Class D) application            $250.00
Restaurant limited (Class D) application              $250.00
Restaurant - full (Class D) application               $250.00
Off-premise/retail beer (Class A) renewal application $250.00
Bar establishment (Class B) renewal application       $400.00
On-premise beer (Class C) renewal application         $400.00
Restaurant beer only (Class D) renewal application    $250.00
Restaurant limited (Class D) renewal application      $250.00
Restaurant - full (Class D) renewal application       $250.00
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.124 FEES OF THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT/VISITOR SERVICES DEPARTMENT.
   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed and
collected by the Economic Development/Visitor Services Department.
Co-working space fees in the Monticello Library basement
Monthly dedicated pass 24/7 access unlimited access $150.00
Monthly flex 24/7 access unlimited access           $100.00
Punch pass for up to 8 workspaces 24/7 access       $4.00
Drop in 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.                      $5.00
Community member                                    $0.00
Business license fees
Business license fee                                $50.00
Home based business license fee                     $15.00
Renewal late fee                                    $100.00
Renewal late fee #2                                 $250.00
Violation of ordinance                              $1,000.00
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.125 FEES OF THE EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed and
collected by the Emergency Medical Services. The following fees and charges are
required by UCA § 26-81-403 and Administrative Rule R426-8-2 l 7. If there is a
conflict between the fees contained herein and the Utah Code Annotated (UCA),
the UCA shall govern. Other fees are set by the county.
Ambulance fees for events
ALS ambulance with two EMTs             $125.00
Quick response vehicle                  $70.00
UTV                                     $70.00
Single paramedic                        $45.00
Single advanced EMT                     $40.00
Single basic EMT                        $35.00
Supervisor (IC)                         $70.00
EMS basic rates for response and transportation
San Juan County emergency medical services will charge at the allowable state
mandated rates. Pursuant to UCA § 26-81-403 and Administrative Rule R426-8-
2 the allowable ambulance rates beginning July 1, 2023 are as follows.
Ground ambulance                        $1,090.00
Advanced EMT ground ambulance           $1,439.00
Paramedic ground ambulance              $2,104.00
Mileage rates
The standard milage rate is $31.65 per mile or a fraction thereof. In all
cases, mileage shall be computed from the point of pick-up to the point of
patient delivery.
Fuel fluctuation rate changes may be added when diesel fuel exceeds $5.10 per
gallon or when gasoline exceeds $4.25 per gallon as invoiced; a surcharge of
$0.25 per mile traveled may be assessed.
An off-road may be charged when an ambulance is required to travel for ten
miles or more on unpaved roads. A surcharge of $1.50 per mile may be assessed.
Supplies and medications
A licensed ambulance provider may charge for supplies and for providing
supplies, medications, and administering medications used on any response if
(1) supplies and medication are priced fairly and competitively, (2) the
individual does not refuse service, and (3) the licensed personnel for the
licensed ambulance provider assessment or to treat the individual.
Special provisions
Waiting time - a licensed ambulance provider shall allow 15 minutes of time at
no charge to the patient at both pick-up and delivery. Once 15 minutes have
elapsed, a licensed ambulance provider may charge $22.05 per quarter hour or
fraction thereof. On round trips, a licensed ambulance provider shall allow 30
minutes at no charge from the time the ambulance reaches the point of delivery
until starting the return trip. Once 30 minutes have elapsed, the licensed
ambulance provider may charge $22.05 per quarter hour or fraction thereof.
EMS stand-by fees                       Hourly rate
Ambulance (3-hour minimum)              $125.00
Quick response vehicle (3-hour minimum) $70.00
UTV (3-hour minimum)                    $70.00
Single paramedic (3-hour minimum)       $45.00
Single advanced EMT (3-hour minimum)    $40.00
Single basic EMT (3-hour minimum)       $35.00
Supervisor (IC) (3-hour minimum)        $70.00
BLS cards                               $5.00
Heartsaver CPR and AED cards            $19.00
Heartsaver CPR/AED and FA cards         $19.00
Hours are calculated from the time the unit leaves the station to the time the
unit returns and is in service. Lunch breaks, or other pauses in service of
less than four hours will be charged at the standard stand-by rate. Ambulances
include two providers with at least one provider being ALS (advanced life
support). If a patient requires transport from a stand-by event, they will be
billed at the regular ambulance transport fee rate. A supervisor will be
required on any event with more than three EMS resources. Cancellation fees
apply to any event canceled with less than 24-hour notice. Overnight services
will be subject to a surcharge.
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024; Ord. 2024-04A, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 33.126 FEES OF THE PUBLIC LIBRARY.
   (A)   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed and
collected by the public library.
   (B)   The following exceptions are approved as follows.
      (1)   Library intra-library loan postage fee may be waived when an active
grant covers cost.
      (2)   Library lost or damaged item fees may be waived by Library Director
or designee.
      (3)   Community room fee may be waived for public service events approved
by Library Director or designee.
      (4)   Deposit will be refunded if room is left in the same condition or
better than it was found before setting up.
Intra-library loan postage (1)                               $2.00
Replacement library card                                     $1.00
Lost or damaged library materials (2)                        Replacement cost
Copies/printouts
Black and white per side                                     $0.20
Color per-side                                               $0.50
Fax per page to send or receive (3)                          $0.50
Scanner                                                      Free
Prints on photo paper (provided by patron) per page          $1.00
Disk cleaner per disk per session                            $1.00
Laminating per half sheet                                    $0.50
Laminating per full sheet                                    $1.00
Community room rental per hour (4a)                          $15.00
(4b) Community room with food or beverage refundable deposit $30.00
Hot spot fees
Lost or damaged case, charger, or cord                       $16.00
Damaged or lost battery up to                                $25.00
Damaged or lost hot spot up to                               $109.00
Hot spot overdue fees
1-7 days overdue                                             $10.00
8-14 days overdue                                            $20.00
15+ days overdue                                             $25.00
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.127 FEES FOR NON-DEPARTMENTAL SERVICES.
   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed and
collected by the non-associated departments.
Fair building deposit (refundable)    $200.00
Fair building (per day)               $50.00
Arena (per day)                       $50.00
Stage deposit (refundable)            $300.00
Stage - first day                     $300.00
Stage - each additional day           $100.00
Stage - mileage                       $0.70
Fairgrounds (deposit)                 $200.00
Fairgrounds (per day)                 $200.00
Fairgrounds arena prep                $150.00
Fairgrounds stable use cleanup charge $50.00
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.128 FEES OF THE LANDFILL DEPARTMENT.
   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed and
collected by the Landfill Department.
Minimum charge per drop off                $10.00
Punch pass - good for 4 separate dumps of  $10.00
4 bags or less each dump - residential
Pickup/car load (residential)              $10.00
Single axle trailer only (residential)     $10.00
Double axle trailer only (residential)     $15.00
Pickup + single axle trailer (residential) $20.00
Pickup + double axle trailer (residential) $25.00
Commercial/construction (landfill only)    $46.00
Non-hazardous contaminated soil (landfill  $30.00
only)
Electronics, large (over 24")              $10.00
Electronics, small (under 24") - no cell   $5.00
phones
Mattresses - all sizes, each               $15.00
Box springs - all sizes, each              $15.00
Non-friable asbestos, per ton (minimum 1   $100.00
ton)
Non-infectious bio-hazard (red bag), per   $100.00
ton (minimum 1 ton)
Tires, passenger vehicle (off rim)         $5.00
Tires, passenger vehicle (on rim)          $10.00
Tires, semi truck (off rim)                $15.00
Tires, semi truck (on rim)                 $30.00
Tires, equipment sized (larger than semi   $60.00
tires, off rim)
Tires, equipment sized (larger than semi   $120.00
tires, on rim)
Refrigerators, freezer, A/C units          $40.00
(contains freon)
White goods (washer/dryer/water heater/    $10.00
stove/ect.)
Dead animals (small)                       $7.00
Dead animals (large)                       $10.00
Used oil (residential only) - no charge    $0.00
Untarped or unsecured load fee, state      $10.00 minimum or double the charged
mandated                                   tipping fee, whichever is greater.
Interest on late payments (billed monthly  1.50%
@ 1.5%)
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024; Ord. 2024-04A, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 33.129 FEES OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed and
collected by the Public Health Department.
Waste water
Records review                                   $25.00
Site and soil evaluation review                  $300.00 + $1.12/mile (one way)
Basic septic system application, site/soil       $400.00
evaluation, plan review and final inspection
Graywater system permit (does not include        $85.00
design)
Recertification of old septic system             $78.00
Alternative waste water system                   $524.00
Renewable waste water operating permit           $78.00/hr
inspection report review 1-hr minimum
Certification of illegal installation            $524.00
New subdivision fee                              $87.00
Liquid waste hauler permit                       $78.00/hr
Septic tank abandonment permit                   $25.00
Septic tank locate                               $78.00/hr
On-site consultation/inspection                  $78.00/hr
Facilities
School inspection                                $85.00
Contamination cleanup permit (meth, asbestos,    $320.00
bio- hazard, etc.)
Onsite inspection/hr (restaurant, pool, housing, $78.00/hr
etc.)
Group home                                       $78.00/hr
Daycare
New daycare inspection                           $0.00
Food service
Tier/Risk 1 food establishment permit fee (see   $109.00
risk level tab)
Tier/Risk 2                                      $131.00
Tier/Risk 3                                      $164.00
Tier/Risk 4                                      $219.00
Tier/Risk 2 food establishment and micro-         
enterprise permit fee
Seating 0-10                                      
Seating 11-75                                     
Seating 76-150                                    
Seating 151 or more                               
Schools                                          $126.00
Review restaurant plans (2-hr minimum)           $382.00
Seasonal food establishment fee (6 months or     $55.00
less)
Grade not posted
Permit reinstatement after revocation/suspension $436.00
(2-hr minimum)
Temporary food service
Prior plan review (current year)                 $0.00
Standard plan review                             $16.00
Late plan review (submitted < 2 days prior to    $33.00
event)
Site review (permitted on-site)                  $41.00
Single event - Tier/Risk 1 - (less than 5        $27.00
potentially hazardous foods)
Single event - Tier/Risk 2 (more than 5          $32.00
potentially hazardous foods)
Annual - Tier/Risk 1 (less than 5 potentially    $86.00
hazardous foods)
Annual - Tier/Risk 2 (more than 5 potentially    $115.00
hazardous foods)
Food handler
Food handler’s permit                          $20.00
Replacement food handler’s card                $5.00
Mobile food service
Food truck Tier 1 primary permit - low risk      $133.00
Food truck Tier 2 primary permit - high risk     $400.00
Pool
Pool/spa annual                                  $133.00
Pool monthly inspections per water sample        $53.00
Pool and spa operators course (first time)       $174.00
Pool and spa operator registration (one time fee $12.00
if course not taken at department)
Review of new pool plans (2-hr minimum)          $130.00 + $78.00/hr
Permit reinstatement after revocation/suspension $436.00
Body art and tanning
Body art                                         $109.00
Body artist registration                         $33.00
Tanning salon permit fee                         $109.00
Man camps
Temporary labor community permit - wastewater -  $524.00
includes food permit
Waste tires
Waste tire storage facility permit 0-200 tons/   $240.00
day (currently does not exist)
Waste tire storage facility MIT 201-700 tons/day $320.00
Waste tire storage facility permit 701 + tons/   $400.00
day
Solid waste management facility follow-up        $80.00
inspection
Other
Special event review                             $87.00
Mass gathering                                   $605.00
Late fee (if not paid by Feb. 1)                 $20.00
Late fee (if not paid by Mar. 1)                 $42.00
Reinstatement fee (if not paid by Apr. 1)        $0.00
Multiple inspection penalty                      $78.00/hr
Plan review - 2-hr minimum                       $130.00 + $78.00/hr
Construction/application inspection/consultation $78.00/hr
1-hr minimum
Business license inspection                      $78.00/hr
Mileage radius over 15 miles                     $0.655/mile
Permit reinstatement after revocation/suspension $436.00
Closed to occupancy reopening fee per unit       $436.00
Invoice late fee after 30 days                   $25.00
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024; Ord. 2024-04A, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 33.130 FEES OF THE RECORDER’S OFFICE.
   The following fees and charges are required by UCA § 17-21-18.5. If there is
a conflict between the fees contained herein and the Utah Code Annotated (UCA),
the UCA shall govern.
Basic recording                                      $40.00
Recording each additional legal description          $2.00
Plat of subdivision or condo, and the like per sheet $50.00
Each additional lot                                  $2.00
Retrieval fee                                        $3.00
Per page email                                       $1.00
Certified copy                                       $5.00
Plus per page certified copy                         $1.00
Copies/electronic or printout per page (on site)     $0.50
Irregular and/or large copies each                   $6.00
18" x 18" ownership plats                            $5.00
18" x 24"                                            $8.00
24" x 36"                                            $10.00
36" x 36"                                            $12.00
36" x 48" or larger                                  $15.00
36" x 48" color                                      $30.00
36" x 56" color                                      $50.00
With aerial photos (add per sq. ft.)                 $5.00
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.131 FEES OF THE ROAD DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The following fees and charges are approved and shall be assessed and
collected by the Road Department.
   (B)   The Road Superintendent may waive fees based on circumstance or
practical reasons.
Right-of-way encroachment permit including driveways and access    $200.00
roads; pavement
Right-of-way encroachment permit including driveways and access    $50.00
roads; gravel
Street vacation request                                            $300.00
Creating street signs                                              $50.00
Installation of signs                                              $250.00
Non paved excavation                                               $100.00
Cuts in paved surfaces (that can not be bored)                     $200.00
Road bores across a paved road                                     $50.00
Unauthorized excavation in county right-of-way                     $1,000.00
Unauthorized encroachment on county road (plus encroachment permit $50.00
fee)
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.132 FEES FOR THE SHERIFF’S OFFICE.
   The following fees and charges are required by UCA § 17-22-2.5. If there is
a conflict between the fees contained herein and the UCA, the UCA shall govern.
Other fees associated are county fees for services.
Serving notices, rules, order subpoena, garnishments, summons, or summons and  $20.00 (UCA § 17-22-2.5(2)(a)) Plus, traveling feel of $2.50 for each mile
complaint, garnishee execution, or other process by which an action or         necessarily traveled, in going only, computed from the courthouse for each
proceeding is commenced on each defendant (UCA § 17-22-2.5(2)(a))             person served, to a maximum of 100 miles (UCA § 17-22-2.5(4)(a)(i))
Serving an attachment on property, or levying an execution, or executing an    $20.00 (UCA § 17-22-2.5(2)(d)) Plus, traveling fees 1 only collected for the
order of arrest for an order for the delivery of personal property (UCA § 17- actual distance traveled beyond the distance required to serve the summons if
22-2.5(2)(d))                                                                  the attachment of those orders accompany the summons in the action and may be
                                                                               executed at the time of the service of the summons (UCA § 17-22-2.5(5))
Obtaining a saliva DNA specimen under § 53-10-404 (UCA § 17-22-2.5 (6))      $150.00
Accident reports                                                               $7.50
Per page for reports                                                           $1.00
Posting                                                                        $5.00 per posting
Commercial, security, etc.                                                     $100.00 per hour/4-hour minimum
Vehicle use for commercials, movies, security                                  $35.00 per hour plus $1.25 per mile
Bailiff/security fee                                                           $21.00
Photo evidence                                                                 $1.50 per picture
In-car video reproduction                                                      $40.00 depending on time to transfer video footage
Audio/research                                                                 $25.00 plus $25.00 per hour for reproductions that require extensive labor
Jail fees
Charge to state per inmate                                                     $67.73
Housing for non-law enforcement transportation agencies                        $75.00 cost to house inmate
Housing for out of county commitments                                          $45.00
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024; Ord. 2024-04A, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 33.133 FEES FOR THE SURVEYOR’S OFFICE.
   The following fees and charges are required by UCA § 17-21-18.5m(5, 6). If
there is a conflict between the fees contained herein and the UCA, the UCA
shall govern. Other fees associated are county fees for services.
 
Record of survey (hard copy filing)              $20.00
Record of survey (electronic filing)             $40.00
Final local entity plat (hard copy filing)       $40.00
Final local entity plat (electronic copy filing) $80.00
Subdivision plat (review)                        $20.00
 
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.134 FEE WAIVERS.
   (A)   By elected officials, County Chief Administrative Officer and
department heads. Elected officials, County Chief Administrative Officer and
department heads may waive fees required herein up to $250 for services
provided to other governmental entities.
   (B)   By Planning and Zoning Administrator. The Planning and Zoning
Administrator may waive or defer all or part of the fees of the Planning and
Zoning Department set forth in §
33.122 above up to $5,000 for development activity attributable to low-income
housing, as defined in the San Juan County Land Use Code, that ensures, via
deed restriction, affordability pursuant to a stated maximum resale formula for
primary residents who are actively employed or disabled, or a reasonable
combination thereof, as defined by Section 4.7 and the Utah Fair Housing Act.
   (C)   By County Board of County Commissioners. The Board of County
Commissioners may waive or defer all or part of any of the fees set forth
herein for i) governmental entities or ii) development activity attributable to
low-income housing, as defined in the San Juan County Land Use Code, that
ensures, via deed restriction, affordability pursuant to a stated maximum
resale formula for primary residents who are actively employed or disabled, or
a reasonable combination thereof, as defined by Section 4.7 and the Utah Fair
Housing Act, upon a finding of public benefit.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024)
§ 33.135 RETURN OF FEES.
   Return of fees. If service is not rendered, the elected official, County
Chief Administrative Officer, or department head may recommend to the Clerk/
Auditor in writing and approved by the Chief Administrative Officer that the
fees paid by an individual or entity be returned. Aggrieved individuals may
appeal to the County’s Administrative Law Judge for reconsideration if fees are
not waived and by paying the appropriate appeal fee.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024; Ord. 2024-04A, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 33.136 ADDITIONAL FEES.
   (A)   Additional fees. If services require more resources than anticipated
in the original application fee, either by county staff, services rendered by a
professional, or other third-party services, the customer shall be responsible
to reimburse San Juan County for these charges plus 10% of the charges to cover
administrative costs, which shall include extraordinary attorneys’ fees. Such
fees and charges shall accrue to, and are payable by, the entity which receives
service executes an application, enters into a development agreement, or
requests the service.
   (B)   Billing statements. The county shall bill customers for excess
reimbursable fees accruing under this section and all other charges on a
regular basis within 45 days of services. The billing by the county shall be in
reasonable detail to permit the customer to determine the reason for the
expenditure, and fees or charges incurred, along with the rate or other basis
for the charge. Billings for reimbursable fees are due upon receipt and if the
balance due is not paid within 30 days of mailing, the customer is delinquent
and is in default to the county billing statements from the county to the
customer shall be deemed correct, accurate, undisputed and due in full unless
the Clerk Auditor shall receive in writing a disputed bill in reasonable detail
to ascertain the exact question or matter in dispute within 30 days of the
postmarked date on the mailed statement or the date of hand-delivery if the
statement is not delivered through the U.S. Mail.
   (C)   Conference with customer. The customer, or their representatives, may
informally confer with county staff to obtain further information, ask
questions, and receive clarification of charges included on the billings. An
informal conference may result in changes to the invoice from the county to the
customer. If the invoice is corrected or changed, the customer shall pay the
corrected invoice within 15 days of receipt of the corrected invoice.
   (D)   Disputed amount to County Board of Commissioners. Any disputed amount
after the customer has conferred with the county staff may be disputed to the
County Board of Commissioners. The customer shall notify the Clerk Auditor
again in writing regarding the contested amount. The Clerk Auditor shall notify
the Commission Administrator to the need to place the issue on the County Board
of Commissioners agenda. The County Board of Commissioners shall consider the
payment dispute in a regularly scheduled county meeting. Notice of the time,
date and place of the meeting where the disputed statement will be considered
by the County Board of Commissioners will be mailed to the customer not less
than five days before the date of the meeting. The customer may present any
statement or evidence supporting the customer’s position with respect to the
dispute. The County Board of Commissioners shall vote on each disputed charge
by the customer to determine whether or not to reduce or eliminate the disputed
charges. The decision of the County Board of Commissioners shall be final.
   (E)   Customers in default. Customers must remain in good standing with all
amounts due and payable to the county paid as such amounts become due.
Customers who are delinquent in payment of reimbursable fees and charges to the
county shall be deemed to be in default and future requests for services shall
be delayed until the customer has remedied the default.
(Ord. 2024-04, passed 3-5-2024; Ord. 2024-04A, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
33.075 through
33.079 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine in an amount less than $300
or imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
(Ord. 1975-1, passed 5-12-1975)
CHAPTER 34: PURCHASING POLICY
Section
General Provisions
   
34.001   Purpose
   
34.002   Compliance
   
34.003   Definitions
   
34.004   Ethics
   
34.005   Purchasing Agent; authority and duties
   
34.006   Department director’s or supervisor’s responsibilities
   
34.007   Authority to enter into and execute contracts
   
34.008   Competitive procurement
   
34.009   Participation in state procurement unit agreement, contracts
   
34.010   Sales tax
   
34.011   Expenditure of state or federal funds
Purchases; Authorization Requirements
   
34.025   Purchases of specific amounts
   
34.026   Avoidance of approval and written contract requirements
   
34.027   Sole source procurement
Competitive Sealed Bids
   
34.040   Requirement
   
34.041   Negotiation of adjustments
   
34.042   Content of invitation for bids
   
34.043   Amendments to invitation for bids
   
34.044   Pre-opening modification of withdrawal of bids
   
34.045   Late bids, late withdrawal and late modifications
   
34.046   Receipt, opening and recording of bids
   
34.047   Mistakes in bids
   
34.048   Bid evaluation and award
   
34.049   Tie bids
   
34.050   Multi-step sealed bidding
   
34.051   Purchase of items separately from construction contract
   
34.052   Exceptions to process
   
34.053   Proposal preparation time
   
34.054   Form of proposal
   
34.055   Public notice
   
34.056   Pre-proposal conferences
   
34.057   Evaluation of proposals
   
34.058   Oral presentations
   
34.059   Award
   
34.060   Exceptions to competitive sealed proposal process
   
34.061   Emergency exemption
   
34.062   Protests
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The underlying purposes of this policy are:
      (1)   To ensure fair and equitable treatment of all persons who wish to,
or do conduct business with the county;
      (2)   To provide for the greatest possible economy in the county’s
procurement activities; and
      (3)   To foster effective broad-based competition within the free
enterprise system to ensure that the county will receive the best possible
services or products at the lowest possible price and/or the most responsive
price based on quality of workmanship and performance.
   (B)   (1)   It is the intention of the county to get the best value on
purchases.
      (2)   The lowest price provider does not always constitute the best value
to the county.
      (3)   When purchasing equipment or services, considerations should
include product quality, product support, service provider experience,
maintenance fees, renewal fees and end-user application of the purchase.
      (4)   In instances in which the low quote is not selected, the Department
must provide written justification for not selecting the lowest quote and
include this written justification with the purchasing record.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.002 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   This policy shall not prevent the county from complying with the terms
and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest that is otherwise consistent with
law.
   (B)   When procurement involves the expenditure of federal and/or state
funds the county shall comply with all applicable federal and/or state laws and
regulations.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATE PROCUREMENT METHOD. Those methods of procuring goods and services
allowed, beside from sealed bidding.
   BEST VALUE. The basis for awarding contracts for services to the offeror
which optimizes quality, cost and efficiency, among responsive and responsible
offerors. Such basis shall reflect, wherever possible, objective and
quantifiable analysis.
   BLANKET PURCHASE ORDER. A purchase order containing multiple delivery dates
over a period of time, often negotiated to take advantage of predetermined
pricing; normally used when there is a recurring need for goods.
   BOARD. The San Juan County Board of Commissioners.
   BUSINESS. Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship,
joint stock company, joint venture, vendor, contractor or any other private
legal entity.
   CONTRACT. A written document that includes an agreement between the County
Board of Commissioners and another party regardless of whether or not the
document is labeled or characterized as a “contract”, “agreement”,
“memorandum”, “letter of understanding”, “statement of understanding”, “grant
application”, “donation form” or other legally binding document. All COUNTY
CONTRACTS shall be approved as to content and form by the County Attorney.
   EMERGENCY PURCHASES. If the governing body determines that a natural
disaster or fiscal emergency exists, and that the expenditure of money in
excess of County General Fund budget is necessary to respond to the natural
disaster or fiscal emergency, the County Board of Commissioners may make
expenditures and incur deficits that are reasonably necessary to meet the
natural disaster or fiscal emergency. (See UCA § 17-36-27.)
   ENCUMBRANCE. The county shall use an encumbrance system or other budgetary
controls to ensure that no expenditure is made for any item of an appropriation
unless there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in the appropriation and
available funds, except in cases of an emergency. (See UCA § 17-36-19.)
   EQUIPMENT. Tangible property (other than land and buildings) used in the
operation of a department.
   INVOICE. A formal billing, submitted by a vendor, showing the amount due and
terms of payment for supplies delivered or services rendered.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Those services provided to the county, including
those that involve specialized expertise, use of professional judgment and/or a
high degree of creativity. The individual or company may be based on
qualifications to include, but not limited to, specialized skills, education
and training, experience, demonstrated effectiveness, judgment and integrity.
These qualifications are not necessarily found in the individual or company
that offers the lowest price.
   PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS. All works constructed for public use, protection or
enjoyment, ordinarily of a fixed nature, such as buildings, docks, canals,
waterworks, highways, roads and the like and shall apply to those commodities
or projects involving labor or both materials and labor and shall include such
items as construction, paving and repair contracts.
   QUOTE. A stated price by a vendor for goods, services or equipment. QUOTES
may be provided by fax, mail, e-mail or by printing listed prices of vendor
websites.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP). A formal competitive solicitation made to
potential vendors in which vendors propose the best method or solution to a
clearly defined county need.
   REQUEST FOR QUOTES (RFQ). The process to request information, where quotes
are obtained from vendors without formal advertising or receipt of sealed bids.
Used where price competition is desired, but the situation does not require
competitive sealed bids, small or emergency purchases.
   REQUISITION. A request to the Purchasing Agent for the purchase of one or
more goods or services necessary to carry on or improve a particular function
of the county.
   SOLE SOURCE PURCHASE. A procurement method that allows, under certain
conditions, for procuring goods or services from a single source without
soliciting bids from multiple sources.
   SPECIFICATIONS. A written description of the physical functional
characteristics needed commodities and/or services setting forth, in a clear
concise manner, the performance and/or physical characteristics of the
commodities and/or services to be purchased, and the circumstances under which
the purchase shall be made.
   STATE CONTRACT. Any contract entered into by the State of Utah from which
counties within the State of Utah are authorized to make purchases from and
pursuant to the terms of said contract.
   VENDOR. A supplier of goods or services to the county.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.004 ETHICS.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to avoid both direct conflicts as well
as the appearance of impropriety in purchasing and procurement of goods and
services in the county. Questions regarding this section should be directed to
the County Attorney’s office.
   (B)   The county elected officials, employees and agents shall procure
goods, equipment, and services and shall make purchases with County funds in
accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and
regulations (UCA § 67-16, the state’s Public Officers’ and Employees’ Ethics
Act).
   (C)   The county elected officials, employees and agents shall recuse
themselves and shall not participate in selecting, awarding or administering
procurement, purchasing or procurement and purchasing if, he or she knew or
should have known, any of the following has a financial, or other interest, in
a prospective company, contractor, vendor, entity or person considered to be
paid by the county in exchange for goods, equipment or services:
      (1)   The elected official, employee or agent;
      (2)   Any member of his or her immediate family (“immediate family” is
defined as wife, husband, child, mother, father, brother, sister, mother-in-
law, father-in-law, grandmother, grandfather, grandchild, brother-in-law,
sister-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, stepchild, stepmother and
stepfather);
      (3)   His or her partner or significant other; or
      (4)   An organization which employs any of the above, which any of them
have any arrangement concerning prospective employment, or any of them have an
independent contractor relationship or similar arrangement.
   (D)   No personal benefit should be incurred by any individual as a result
of purchases made using public funds regardless of their source (e.g., federal,
state or local funds).
   (E)   The county elected officials, employees or agents should neither
solicit, nor accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from
vendors or potential vendors or from any county purchasing action. Strict
compliance with the county’s Personnel Policy regarding professional conduct
should be observed.
   (F)   The county elected officials, employees and agents should demonstrate
appropriate duty of care when engaging in fiduciary activities, including
obtaining and assessing appropriate materials/ documentation in a judicious
manner to ensure the promotion of the best interest of the county.
   (G)   No purchase shall be intentionally or knowingly be split or divided
into two or more smaller purchases with the intent of avoiding the competitive
bidding process or other requirements contained in this policy. This includes:
making two or more separate purchases; dividing an invoice or purchase order
into two or more invoices or purchase orders; or making smaller purchases over
a period of time. A person who divides purchases may be subject to the criminal
penalties described in UCA § 63G-6a-2404.3.
   (H)   All San Juan County elected officials, employees, and agents shall
comply with the provisions set for in UCA Title 67, Ch. 16, the state’s Public
Officers’ and Employees’ Ethics Act.
   (I)   Cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contracts are prohibited (see UCA §
63G-6a-1205). Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract
which will promote the best interest of the county may be used, provided that
the use of a cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost is prohibited. A cost-reimbursement
contract may be used only when a determination is made in writing that such
contract is likely to be less costly to the county than any other type of
contract or that it is impracticable to obtain the supplies, services or
construction required except under such a contract.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.005 PURCHASING AGENT; AUTHORITY AND DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   Authority. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Purchasing
Agent shall serve as the principal purchasing official for the county. The
Purchasing Agent is authorized to enforce and review of this policy.
      (2)   Duties. In accordance with this policy, the Purchasing Agent or his
or her designee shall:
         (a)   Periodically review this policy and recommend changes to be
approved by the County Board of Commissioners;
         (b)   Review and confirm that goods and services are purchased in
accordance with this policy;
         (c)   Maintain all supporting documentation (e.g., requisitions,
quotes, RFPs and proposals, RFIs and responses, sole source requests, notices,
correspondence);
         (d)   Open and record RFP responses and detail the history of
procurement, rationale for method of procurement, selection of contract type,
selection or rejection and the basis for price;
         (e)   Work with the respective department director(s) to review
approval of a bid if the cost of a good or service is expected to exceed the
bid limit;
         (f)   Work with the respective department director(s) to determine
whether it is advantageous to bid any purchase contracts less than the
statutory limits;
         (g)   Review forms for completeness and approve or deny the request,
thereby converting the requisition to a purchase order;
         (h)   Oversee the P-Card program, including issuing cards, suspending
cards and closing cards when employees terminate;
         (i)   Determine when open vendor accounts may be necessary and in the
best interest of the county, and establish terms and conditions of use for such
accounts (including Sam’s Club, Costco, Amazon and the like); and
         (j)   Oversee capital equipment purchases.
   (B)   The chief administrative officer is hereby appointed and designated as
the county’s Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing Agent may from time to time
appoint another person to undertake all or some of the duties of the Purchasing
Agent set forth herein or appointed to him or her.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.006 DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR’S OR SUPERVISOR’S RESPONSIBILITIES.
   It is the responsibility of the department directors or supervisors to:
   (A)   Identify the purchases to be made by his or her department in a fiscal
year, thereby constituting the annual departmental budget, pursuant to this
policy and the Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Counties (UCA § 17-36);
   (B)   Determine whether it is advantageous to the county to bid any contract
less than what is stated in this policy;
   (C)   Be responsible for compliance with this policy and procedure by
employees within the department and delegate tasks pursuant to purchasing
procedures;
   (D)   Submit annual “conflicts disclosure statements” to the county’s Clerk/
Auditor;
   (E)   Ensure that the county does not incur sales tax charges on exempt
purchases by providing vendors documentation of tax exempt status, a TC721G
Exemption Certificate for Governments and Schools;
   (F)   Maintain oversight to ensure that contracted vendors perform in
accordance with the terms, conditions and specifications of their contracts or
purchase orders and inform the Purchasing Agent of any material breach of such;
   (G)   Contact the Purchasing Agent to initiate a purchase of capital items
after the annual adopted budget has passed by resolution of the County Board of
Commissioners;
   (H)   Ensure expenditures are appropriately budgeted and submit budget
amendment form when necessary;
   (I)   Determine the amount of a blanket purchase order and the length of
time it will remain in effect (all purchase orders expire at the end of the
calendar year);
   (J)   Order from vendors pre-approved by the Purchasing Agent or submit a
request to add new vendor to County Polaris system with appropriate back-up
documentation including a copy of vendors insurance and a current and valid W-
9); and
   (K)   Approve or deny all designated invoices for payment, with the
exception of self-reimbursement, which must be approved by another authorized
individual in the department.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.007 AUTHORITY TO ENTER INTO AND EXECUTE CONTRACTS.
   (A)   All contracts are to be approved by the County Board of Commissioners
unless otherwise as indicated here within.
   (B)   No department, office, advisory or policy board or other organization
of the county, nor any officer or employee thereof, shall be empowered to
execute any purchase order or contract, except as specifically authorized in
this chapter or by other applicable law.
   (C)   All contracts in violation of this provision are considered void and
may result in the personal obligation and liability of persons at fault for
such violations.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.008 COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT.
   Unless exempted by this policy, all purchases and contracts shall be awarded
on a competitive basis, as required by this chapter and applicable state and
federal law.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.009 PARTICIPATION IN STATE PROCUREMENT UNIT AGREEMENT, CONTRACTS.
   Pursuant to UCA § 63G-6a-2105, the county may make purchases from or
participate in state public procurement unit agreements and contracts, pursuant
to the terms of said agreements and contracts without soliciting additional
procurement options.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.010 SALES TAX.
   (A)   The county purchases are not subject to sales tax.
   (B)   For vendors requiring documentation of tax-exempt status, a TC-712G
Exemption Certificate for Governments may be obtained from the chief
administrative officer.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.011 EXPENDITURE OF STATE OR FEDERAL FUNDS.
   When procurement involves the expenditure of state or federal funds, the
county shall comply with the applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
PURCHASES; AUTHORIZATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 34.025 PURCHASES OF SPECIFIC AMOUNTS.
   (A)   Purchases up to $1,000. All procurements of services and goods in an
amount less than $1,000 may be approved by the department director; provided,
such procurements have been budgeted for within the department and are in line
with the budgeted purposes and responsibilities of said department. A
department or division may not spend a maximum of $50,000 in a fiscal year with
an individual vendor using the small purchase limit. This rule cannot be used
for ongoing services. Contracts at this limit, if required, can be executed by
the Purchasing Agent. No quotes are required at this limit.
   (B)   Purchases over $1,000 and up to $5,000. 
      (1)   All procurements of services and goods in an amount over $1,000 and
up to $5,000 must have a purchase order approved by the department director and
the Purchasing Agent prior to initiating the purchase.
      (2)   Descriptions of items or services will use sufficient and
descriptive terminology to allow the reviewer to understand what is being
purchased and why, part numbers by themselves are not sufficient. When the
individual procurement item cost is more than $1,000 for one or more items and
the total procurement is less than $5,000, the department or division must
obtain competitive quotes.
      (3)   All purchases between this limit shall be made after obtaining a
minimum of two bids. The agency must purchase the item/service from the
supplier offering the lowest quote meeting specifications unless one is of a
higher and better quality. Contracts at this limit can be executed by the
Purchasing Agent.
   (C)   Purchases over $5,000 and up to $15,000.
      (1)   All goods, services and equipment over $5,000, but less than
$15,000, require (at a minimum) three written quotes from three different
vendors. Quotes may be provided by fax, mail, e-mail or by printing listed
prices from vendor websites. The Purchasing Agent may require the department to
conduct an RFP to ensure pricing is competitive. A waiver of the required
minimum number of quotes will be granted by the Purchasing Agent or designee
upon a showing that a diligent effort was made to obtain the quotes or a sole
source justification has been provided and approved. All quotes (and wavier, if
applicable) shall be submitted electronically with the requisition or
contracted award as part of the formal purchasing record. The department
director must sign the quote selected for the procurement.
      (2)   Once quotes have been obtained, the method of procurement is
determined by type of expenditure and total cost, as follows:
         (a)   Goods/equipment under $10,000: county purchase order;
         (b)   Goods/equipment between $10,000 and $15,000: may constitute a
capital purchase and requires assistance from the Purchasing Agent and requires
a county purchase order with appropriate terms and conditions; and
         (c)   Services between $5,000 and $15,000: county-approved contract is
required executed by the County Board of Commissioners unless delegated to the
Purchasing Agent.
      (3)   Documentation of the solicitation of three quotes or reference to
the exemption of those requirements must be attached. Purchases within this
range will need a county-approved contract.
   (D)   Purchases over $15,000 and up to $50,000. Purchases over $15,000
require a written contract to be approved in an open meeting. Purchases between
$15,000 which are ongoing services must be put out for competitive bid with a
public notice. All procurements of services and goods in an amount over $50,000
must be put out for competitive bid with a public notice and to be prepared and
approved by the Department Director, Supervisor, Purchasing Agent and the
County Board of Commissioners. (See §§
34.040 through
34.062 of this chapter for requirements.)
   (E)   Purchases over $50,000. Acquisitions of goods, equipment or services
over $50,000 are subject to the following requirements, depending on type of
expenditure and total cost:
      (1)   Goods/equipment/services over $50,000: RFP and county-approved
contract;
      (2)   Building improvements over $50,000: RFP and county-approved
contract;
      (3)   Road Department and public works projects under $150,000: three
written quotes from three different vendors (see details in division (D) above)
and county-approved contract; and
      (4)   Road Department and public works projects over $150,000: RFP and
county-approved contract.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.026 AVOIDANCE OF APPROVAL AND WRITTEN CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.
   Purchases shall not be divided into smaller purchases for the purpose of
evading the approval process required by this policy, or for the purpose of
avoiding the need to obtain a written contract.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.027 SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Sole source procurement shall be used only if a requirement is
reasonably available from a single supplier.
      (2)   A requirement for a particular proprietary item does not justify
sole source procurement if there is more than one potential bidder or offeror
for that item.
   (B)   Examples of circumstances which could necessitate sole source
procurement are:
      (1)   Where the compatibility of equipment, accessories, replacement
parts or service is the paramount consideration;
      (2)   Where a sole supplier’s item is needed for trial use or testing;
      (3)   Procurement of items for resale; and
      (4)   Procurement of public utility services.
   (C)   (1)   The determination as to whether a procurement shall be made as a
sole source shall be made by the Purchasing Agent.
      (2)   Each request shall be submitted in writing by the using agency.
Such officer may specify the application of such determination and its
duration.
      (3)   In cases of reasonable doubt, competition should be solicited.
      (4)   Any request by a using agency that a procurement be restricted to
one potential contractor shall be accompanied by an explanation as to why no
other will be suitable or acceptable to meet the need.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDS
§ 34.040 REQUIREMENT.
   All procurements of goods which are reasonably anticipated to exceed $50,000
shall be obtained by competitive sealed bidding. The County Board of
Commissioners may also require competitive sealed bidding for the procurement
of goods and services for any amount.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.041 NEGOTIATION OF ADJUSTMENTS.
   In the event that bids exceed available funds and the lowest responsive and
responsible bid does not exceed funds available by more than 5%, the Board may,
where time or economic considerations preclude re-solicitation of work of a
reduced scope, negotiate an adjustment of the bid price, including changes in
the bid requirements, with the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, in
order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.042 CONTENT OF INVITATION FOR BIDS.
   (A)   Use. The invitation for bids is used to initiate competitive sealed
bid procurement.
   (B)   Content. The invitation for bids include the following:
      (1)   Instructions and information to bidders concerning the bid
submission requirements, including the time and closing date for submission of
bids, the address of the office to which bids are to be delivered and any other
special information;
      (2)   The purchase description, evaluation factors, delivery or
performance schedule and inspection and acceptance requirements not included in
the purchase description; and
      (3)   The contract terms and conditions, including warranty and bonding
or other security requirements, as applicable.
   (C)   Incorporation by reference. The invitation for bids may incorporate
documents by reference; provided that, the invitation for bids specifies where
such documents can be obtained.
   (D)   Acknowledgment of amendments. The invitation for bids shall require
the acknowledgment of the receipt of all amendments issued.
   (E)   Bidding time. Bidding time is the period of time between the date of
distribution of the invitation for bids and the date set for opening of bids.
In each case, bidding time will be set to provide bidders a reasonable time to
prepare their bids. A minimum of ten calendar days shall be provided unless a
shorter time is deemed necessary for a particular procurement as determined in
writing by the Purchasing Agent.
   (F)   Bidder submissions.
      (1)   Bid form. The invitation for bids shall provide a form which shall
include space in which the bid price shall be inserted and which the bidder
shall sign and submit along with all other necessary submissions.
      (2)   Facsimile bids. The invitation for bids may state that facsimile
bids will be considered whenever they are received in hand at the designated
office by the time specified for bid opening. Such facsimile or electronic mail
bids shall contain specific reference to the invitation for bids, the time and
place of delivery and a statement that the bidder agrees to all the terms,
conditions and provisions of the invitation for bids. Bidders submitting
facsimile bids shall submit a formal bid on the invitation for bids form within
three days of the bid opening date or a time designated by the Purchasing
Agent.
      (3)   Bid samples and descriptive literature.
         (a)   Descriptive literature means information available in the
ordinary course of business which shows the characteristics, construction or
operation of an item and assists the purchasing agency in considering whether
the item meets requirements or criteria set forth in the invitation.
         (b)   Bid sample means a sample to be furnished by a bidder to show
the characteristics of the item offered in the bid.
         (c)   Bid samples or descriptive literature may be required when it is
necessary to evaluate required characteristics of the items bid.
      (4)   Sample of items. Samples of items, when called for in the
invitation for bids, must be furnished free of expense and, if not destroyed by
testing, will upon request, be returned at the bidder’s expense. Samples
submitted by the successful bidder may be held for comparison with merchandise
furnished and will not necessarily be returned. Samples must be labeled or
otherwise identified as called for by the purchasing agency.
      (5)   Bid security. Bid bonds and performance bonds or other security may
be required for supply contracts or service contracts as the Purchasing Agent
deems advisable to protect the interests of the purchasing agency. Any such
requirements must be set forth in the solicitation. Bid or performance bonds
should not be used as a substitute for a determination of a bidder or offeror
responsibility.
      (6)   Bid price. Bid prices submitted in response to an invitation for
bids must stand alone and may not be dependent upon a bid submitted by any
other bidder. A bid reliant upon the submission of another bidder will not be
considered for award.
   (G)   Public notice.
      (1)   Distribution. Invitation for bids or notices of the availability of
invitation for bids shall be mailed or otherwise furnished to a sufficient
number of bidders for the purpose of securing reasonable competition. Notices
of availability shall indicate where, when and for how long.
      (2)   Invitation. Invitation for bids may be obtained; generally describe
the supply, service or construction desired; and may contain other appropriate
information. (See also division (H) below.)
      (3)   Fee or deposit. Where appropriate, the Purchasing Agent may require
payment of a fee or a deposit for the supplying of the invitation for bids.
      (4)   Publication. Every procurement in excess of $50,000 shall be
publicized in any or all of the following:
         (a)   In a newspaper of general circulation;
         (b)   In a newspaper of local circulation in the area pertinent to the
procurement;
         (c)   In industry media; or
         (d)   In a government publication designed for giving public notice,
such as Sciquest.
      (5)   Public availability. A copy of the invitation for bids shall be
made available for public inspection at the Purchasing Agent’s office.
   (H)   Bidder list.
      (1)   Purpose. Lists of qualified prospective bidders by commodity shall
be electronically compiled and maintained by the Purchasing Agent or obtained
by local searches on the internet or news media.
      (2)   Public availability. Subject to procedures established by the
Purchasing Agent, names and addresses on bidder lists shall be available for
public inspection.
   (I)   Pre-bid conferences. Pre-bid conferences may be conducted to explain
the procurement requirements. They shall be announced to all prospective
bidders known to have received an invitation for bids. The conference should be
held long enough after the invitation for bids has been issued to allow bidders
to become familiar with it, but sufficiently before bid opening to allow
consideration of the conference results in preparing their bids. Nothing stated
at the pre-bid conference shall change the invitation for bids unless a change
is made by written amendment as provided in §
34.043 of this chapter and the invitation for bids and the notice of the pre-
bid conference shall so provide. If a written summary of the conference is
deemed advisable by the Purchasing Agent, a copy shall be supplied to all those
prospective bidders known to have received an invitation for bids and shall be
available as public record.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.043 AMENDMENTS TO INVITATION FOR BIDS.
   (A)   Application. Amendments should be used to:
      (1)   Make any changes in the invitation for bids such as changes in
quantity, purchase descriptions, delivery schedules and opening dates;
      (2)   Defects or ambiguities; or
      (3)   Furnish to other bidder’s information given to one bidder if such
information will assist the other bidders in submitting bids or if the lack of
such information would be equitable to other bidders.
   (B)   Form. Amendments to invitation for bids shall be identified as such
and shall require that the bidder acknowledge receipt of all amendments issued.
   (C)   Distribution. Amendments shall be sent to all prospective bidders
known to have received an invitation for bids.
   (D)   Timeliness. Amendments shall be distributed within a reasonable time
to allow prospective bidders to consider them in preparing their bids. If the
time set for bid opening will not permit such preparation, to the extent
possible such time shall be increased in the amendment or, if necessary, by
telegram or telephone and confirmed in the amendment.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.044 PRE-OPENING MODIFICATION OF WITHDRAWAL OF BIDS.
   (A)   Procedure. 
      (1)   Bids may be modified or withdrawn by written, electronic mail or
telegraphic notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bid
prior to the time set for bid opening.
      (2)   A telegraphic modification or withdrawal received by telephone
prior to bid opening from the receiving telegraph company will be effective if
the telegraph company confirms the message by sending a copy of the written
telegram showing that the message was received at such office prior to bid
opening.
   (B)   Disposition of bid security. Bid security, if any, shall be returned
to the bidder when withdrawal of the bid is permitted.
   (C)   Records. All documents relating to the modification or withdrawal of
bids shall be made a part of the appropriate procurement file.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.045 LATE BIDS, LATE WITHDRAWAL AND LATE MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Any bid, withdrawal or modification received at the address designated
in the invitation for bids after the time and date set for receipt of bids at
the place designated for receipt is late.
   (B)   No late bid, late withdrawal or late modification will be considered
unless received before contract award, and the bid, withdrawal or modification
would have been timely, but for the action or inaction of personnel directly
serving the procurement activity or lateness in the delivery of the bid
otherwise not attributable to the bidder’s fault or negligence.
   (C)   The Purchasing Agent, in consultation with the County Attorney’s
office, shall determine whether to accept a late bid, late withdrawal or late
modification. All documents relating to the late bid, late withdrawal or late
modification shall be made a part of the appropriate procurement file.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.046 RECEIPT, OPENING AND RECORDING OF BIDS.
   (A)   Receipt. Upon receipt, all bids and modifications will be time
stamped, but not opened. They shall be stored in a secure place until bid
opening time.
   (B)   Opening and recording. Bids and modifications shall be opened
publicly, in the presence of one or more witnesses, at the time and place
designated in the invitation for bids. The names of the bidders, the bid price,
and such other information as is deemed appropriate by the Purchasing Agent,
shall be read aloud or otherwise be made available. The opened bids shall be
available for public inspection, except to the extent the’ bidder designates
trade secrets or other proprietary data to be confidential as set forth in
division (C) below. Material so designated shall accompany the bid and shall be
readily separable from the bid in order to facilitate public inspection of the
non-confidential portion of the bid. Make and model, and model or catalogue
numbers of the items offered, deliveries and terms of payment shall be publicly
available at the time of bid opening regardless of any designation to the
contrary.
   (C)   Confidential data. The Purchasing Agent shall examine the bids to
determine the validity of any requests for non-disclosure of trade secrets and
other proprietary data identified in writing. If the parties do not agree as to
the disclosure of data, the Purchasing Agent shall inform the bidders in
writing what portions of the bids will be disclosed.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.047 MISTAKES IN BIDS.
   (A)   No correction. If a mistake is attributable to an error judgment, the
bid may not be corrected. Bid correction or withdrawal by reason of an
inadvertent, non-judgmental mistake is permissible, but at the discretion of
the Purchasing Agent and to the extent it is not contrary to the interest of
the purchasing agency or the fair treatment of the other bidders.
   (B)   Mistakes discovered before opening. A bidder may correct mistakes
discovered before bid opening by withdrawing or correcting the bid as provided
in §
34.044 of this chapter.
   (C)   Confirmation of bid. When it appears from a review of the bid that a
mistake has been made, the bidder should be requested to confirm the bid.
Situations in which confirmation should be requested include obvious, apparent
errors on the face of the bid or a bid unreasonably lower than the other bids
submitted. If the bidder alleges mistake, the bid may be corrected or withdrawn
if the conditions set forth in divisions (A) above and (D) and (F) below are
met.
   (D)   Mistakes discovered after opening, but before award. This division (D)
sets forth procedures to be applied in three situations described in divisions
(D)(1), (D)(2) and (D)(3) below in which mistakes in bids are discovered after
opening, but before award.
   (E)   Minor informalities. Minor informalities are matters of form rather
than substance evident from the bid document, or insignificant mistakes that
can be waived or corrected without prejudice to other bidders; that is, the
effect on price, quantity, quality, delivery or contractual conditions is not
significant. The Purchasing Agent may waive such informalities. Examples
include the failure of a bidder to:
      (1)   Return the number of signed bids required by the invitation for
bids;
      (2)   Sign the bid, but only if the unsigned bid is accompanied by other
material indicating the bidder’s intent to be bound;
      (3)   Acknowledge receipt of an amendment to the invitation for bids, but
only if:
         (a)   It is clear from the bid that the bidder received the amendment
and intended to be bound by its terms; or
         (b)   The amendment involved had a negligible effect on price,
quantity, quality or delivery.
   (F)   Mistakes where intended bid is evident. If the mistake and the
intended bid are clearly evident on the face of the bid document, the bid shall
be corrected to the intended bid and may not be withdrawn. Examples of mistakes
that may be clearly evident on the face of the bid document are typographical
errors, errors in extending unit prices, transposition errors and arithmetical
errors.
   (G)   Mistakes where intended bid is not evident. A bidder may be permitted
to withdraw a low bid if:
      (1)   A mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document, but
the intended bid is not similarly evident; or
      (2)   The bidder submits proof of evidentiary value which clearly and
convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made.
   (H)   Mistakes discovered after award. Mistakes shall not be corrected after
award of the contract.
   (I)   Written approval or denial required. The Purchasing Agent shall
approve or deny, in writing, a bidder’s request to correct or withdraw a bid.
Such approval or denial may be so indicated on the bidder’s written request for
correction or withdrawal.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.048 BID EVALUATION AND AWARD.
   (A)   General. The contract is to be awarded to the lowest responsible and
responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in
the invitation for bids. The invitation for bids shall set forth the
requirements and criteria which will be used to determine the lowest responsive
and responsible bidder. No bid shall be evaluated for any requirements or
criteria that are not disclosed in the invitation for bids. An invitation for
bids, a request for proposals or other solicitation may be canceled, or any or
all bids or proposals may be rejected, in whole or in part, when it is in the
best interest of the purchasing agency, as determined by the purchasing agency.
In the event of cancellation of the solicitation or rejection of all bids or
proposals received in response to a solicitation, the reasons for cancellation
or rejection shall be made a part of the bid file and shall be available for
public inspection and the purchasing agency shall:
      (1)   Re-solicit new bids using the same or revised specifications; or
      (2)   Withdraw the requisition for supplies or services.
   (B)   Responsibility and responsiveness. Responsibility of prospective
contractors is covered by responsibility and pre-qualification of these
regulations.
   (C)   Product acceptability. The invitation for bids shall set forth the
evaluation criteria to be used in determining product acceptability. It may
require the submission of bid samples, descriptive literature, technical data
or other material. It may also provide for:
      (1)   Inspection or testing of a product prior to award for such
characteristics as quality or workmanship;
      (2)   Examination of such elements as appearance, finish, taste or feel;
or
      (3)   Other examinations to determine whether it conforms with any other
purchase description requirements. The acceptability evaluation is not
conducted for the purpose of determining whether one bidder’s item is superior
to another, but only to determine that a bidder’s offering is acceptable as set
forth in the invitation for bids. Any bidder’s offering which does not meet the
acceptability requirements shall be rejected.
   (D)   Determination of lowest bidder. Bids will be evaluated to determine
overall economy for the intended use, in accordance with the evaluation
criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. Examples of such criteria
include, but are not limited to, transportation cost, energy cost, ownership
and other identifiable costs or life-cycle cost formula. Evaluation factors
need not be precise predictors of actual future costs, but to the extent
possible such evaluation factors shall:
      (1)   Be reasonable estimates based on upon information the purchasing
agency has available concerning future use; and
      (2)   Treat all bids equitably.
   (E)   Extension of time for bid or proposal acceptance. After opening bids
or proposals, the Purchasing Agent may request bidders or offerors to extend
the time during which their bids or proposals may be accepted; provided that,
with regard to bids, no other change is permitted. The reasons for requesting
such extension shall be documented.
   (F)   Only one bid or proposal received. If only one responsive bid is
received in response to an invitation for bids (including multi-step bidding),
an award may be made to the single bidder if the Purchasing Agent finds that
the price submitted is fair and reasonable, and that either other prospective
bidders had reasonable opportunity to respond, or there is not adequate time
for re-solicitation. Otherwise, the bid may be rejected and:
      (1)   New bids or offers may be solicited;
      (2)   The proposed procurement may be canceled; or
      (3)   If the Purchasing Agent determines in writing that the need for the
supply of service continues, but that the price of the one bid is not fair and
reasonable and there is no time for re-solicitation or re-solicitation would
likely be futile, the procurement may then be conducted under a sole source
procurement or an emergency procurement as appropriate.
   (G)   Multiple or alternate bids or proposals. Unless multiple or alternate
bids or offers are specifically provided for, the solicitation shall state they
will not be accepted. When prohibited, the multiple or alternate bids or offers
shall be rejected although a clearly indicated base bid shall be considered for
award as though it were the only bid or offer submitted by the bidder or
offeror. The provisions of this division (G) shall be set forth in the
solicitation, and if multiple or alternate bids are allowed, it shall specify
their treatment.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.049 TIE BIDS.
   (A)   Definition. Tie bids are low responsive bids from responsible bidders
that are identical in price.
   (B)   Award. Award shall not be made by drawing lots, except as set forth
below, or by dividing business among identical bidders. In the discretion of
the Purchasing Agent, award shall be made in any permissible manner that will
discourage tie bids. Procedures which may be used to discourage tie bids
include:
      (1)   Where identical low bids include the cost of delivery, award the
contract to the bidder farthest from the point of delivery;
      (2)   Award the contract to the identical bidder who received the
previous award and continue to award succeeding contracts to the same bidder so
long as all low bids are identical;
      (3)   Award to the identical bidder with the earliest delivery date;
      (4)   Award to a Utah resident bidder or for a Utah-produced product
where other tie bid(s) are from out of state;
      (5)   If price is considered excessive or for other reason such bids are
unsatisfactory, reject all bids and negotiate a more favorable contract in the
open market; or
      (6)   If no permissible method will be effective in discouraging tie bids
and a written determination is made so stating, award may be made by drawing
lots.
   (C)   Record. Records shall be made of all invitations for bids on which tie
bids are received showing at least the following information:
      (1)   The invitation for bids;
      (2)   The supply, service or construction item;
      (3)   All the bidders and the prices submitted; and
      (4)   Procedure for resolving tie bids.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.050 MULTI-STEP SEALED BIDDING.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      MULTI-STEP SEALED BIDDING. A two-phase process consisting of a technical
first phase composed of one or more steps in which bidders submit unpriced
technical offers to be evaluated by the purchasing agency, and a second phase
in which those bidders whose technical offers are determined to be acceptable
during the first phase have their price bids considered. It is designed to
obtain the benefits of competitive sealed bidding by award of a contract to the
lowest responsive, responsible bidder and at the same time obtain the benefits
of the competitive sealed proposals procedure through the solicitation of
technical offers and the conduct of discussions to arrive at technical offers
and terms acceptable to the purchasing agency and suitable for competitive
pricing.
   (B)   Use. The multi-step sealed bidding method will be used when the
Purchasing Agent deems it to the advantage of the purchasing agency. Multi-step
sealed bidding will thus be used when it is considered desirable.
      (1)   To invite and evaluate technical offers to determine their
acceptability to fulfill the purchase description requirements;
      (2)   To conduct discussions for the purposes of facilitating
understanding of the technical offer and purchase description requirements and,
where appropriate, obtain supplemental information, permit amendments of
technical offers or amend the purchase description;
      (3)   To accomplish divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above prior to soliciting
priced bids; and
      (4)   To award the contract to the lowest responsive and responsible
bidder in accordance with the competitive sealed bidding procedures.
   (C)   Pre-bid conferences in multi-step sealed bidding. Prior to the
submission of unpriced technical offers, a pre-bid conference as contemplated
by pre-bid conferences may be conducted by the Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing
Agent may also hold a conference of all bidders at any time during the
evaluation of the unpriced technical offers.
   (D)   Procedure for phase one of multi-step sealed bidding.
      (1)   Form. Multi-step sealed bidding shall be initiated by the issuance
of an invitation for bids in the form required by the content of the invitation
for bids, except as hereinafter provided. In addition to the requirements set
forth above, the multi-step invitation for bids shall state:
         (a)   Unpriced technical offers are requested;
         (b)   Whether price bids are to be submitted at the same time as
unpriced technical offers; if they are, such price bids shall be submitted in a
separate sealed envelope;
         (c)   It is a multi-step sealed bid procurement, and priced bids will
be considered only in the second phase and only from those bidders whose
unpriced technical offers are found acceptable in the first phase;
         (d)   The criteria to be used in the evaluation of the unpriced
technical offers;
         (e)   The purchasing agency, to the extent the Purchasing Agent finds
necessary, may conduct oral or written discussions of the unpriced technical
offers;
         (f)   Bidders may designate those portions of the unpriced technical
offers which contain trade secrets or other proprietary data which are to
remain confidential; and
         (g)   The item being procured shall be furnished generally in
accordance with the bidder’s technical offer as found to be finally acceptable
and shall meet the requirements of the invitation for bids.
      (2)   Amendments to the invitation for bids. After receipt of unpriced
technical offers, amendments to the invitation for bids shall be distributed
only to bidders who submitted unpriced technical offers and they shall be
allowed to submit new unpriced technical offers or to amend those submitted.
If, in the opinion of the Purchasing Agent, a contemplated amendment will
significantly change the nature of the procurement, the invitation for bids
shall be canceled in accordance with the cancellation of solicitations of these
regulations and a new invitation for bid issued.
      (3)   Receipt and handling of unpriced technical offers. Unpriced
technical offers shall not be opened publicly nor be disclosed to unauthorized
persons. Bidders may request non-disclosure of trade secrets and other
proprietary data identified in writing.
      (4)   Evaluation of unpriced technical offers. The unpriced technical
offers submitted by bidders shall be evaluated solely in accordance with the
criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. The unpriced technical offers
shall be categorized as:
         (a)   Acceptable;
         (b)   Potentially acceptable, that is, reasonably susceptible of being
made acceptable; or
         (c)   Unacceptable. The Purchasing Agent shall record in writing the
basis for finding an offer unacceptable and make it part of the procurement
file.
         (d)   The Purchasing Agent may initiate phase two of the procedure if,
in the Purchasing Agent’s opinion, there are sufficient acceptable unpriced
technical offers to assure effective price competition in the second phase
without modification or alteration of the offers. If the Purchasing Agent finds
that such is not the case, the Purchasing Agent shall issue an amendment to the
invitation for bids or engage in technical discussions as set forth in division
(D)(5) below.
      (5)   Discussion of unpriced technical offers. Discussion of its
technical offer may be conducted by the Purchasing Agent with any bidder who
submits an acceptable or potentially acceptable technical offer. During the
course of such discussions the Purchasing Agent shall not disclose any
information derived from one unpriced technical offer to any other bidder. Once
discussions are begun, any bidder who has not been notified that its offer has
been finally found unacceptable may submit supplemental information modifying
or otherwise amending its technical offer at any time until the closing date
established by the Purchasing Agent. Such submissions may be made at the
request of the Purchasing Agent or upon the bidder’s own initiative.
      (6)   Notice of unacceptable unpriced technical offer. When the
Purchasing Agent determines a bidder’s unpriced technical offer to be
unacceptable, such officer shall notify the bidder. Such bidders shall not be
afforded an additional opportunity to supplement technical offers.
   (E)   Mistakes during multi-step sealed bidding.
      (1)   Mistakes may be corrected or bids may be withdrawn during phase
one;
      (2)   Before unpriced technical offers are considered;
      (3)   After any discussions have commenced under the procedure for phase
one of multi-step sealed bidding, discussion of unpriced technical offers; or
      (4)   When responding to any amendment of the invitation for bids.
Otherwise, mistakes may be corrected or withdrawal permitted in accordance with
the mistakes in bids.
   (F)   Carrying out phase two.
      (1)   Initiation. Upon the completion of phase one, the Purchasing Agent
shall either:
         (a)   Open price bids submitted in phase one (if price bids were
required to be submitted) from bidders whose unpriced technical offers were
found to be acceptable; provided, however, that, the offers have remained
unchanged and the invitation for bids has not been amended; or
         (b)   Invite each acceptable bidder to submit a price bid.
      (2)   Conduct. Phase two is to be conducted as any other competitive
sealed bid procurement, except:
         (a)   As specifically set forth herein; and
         (b)   No public notice need be given of this invitation to submit.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.051 PURCHASE OF ITEMS SEPARATELY FROM CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT.
   The Purchasing Agent is authorized to determine whether a supply item or
group of supply items shall be included as a part of, or procured separately
from, any contract for construction.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.052 EXCEPTIONS TO PROCESS.
   (A)   The Purchasing Agent, head of a purchasing agency or designee may
utilize alternative procurement methods (i.e., auctions, repossession sales,
negotiation based upon industry indexes) to purchase items such as the
following when determined to be more practicable or advantageous to the county.
   (B)   Documentation of the alternative procurement method utilized shall be
part of the contract file.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.053 PROPOSAL PREPARATION TIME.
   (A)   Proposal preparation time shall be set to provide offerors a
reasonable time to prepare their proposals.
   (B)   A minimum of ten working days shall be provided unless a shorter time
is deemed necessary for a particular procurement as determined in writing by
the Purchasing Agent.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.054 FORM OF PROPOSAL.
   The manner in which proposals are to be submitted, including any forms for
that purpose, may be designated as a part of the request for proposals.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.055 PUBLIC NOTICE.
   Public notice shall be given by distributing the request for proposals in
the same manner provided for distributing an invitation for bids under public
notice.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.056 PRE-PROPOSAL CONFERENCES.
   Pre-proposal conferences may be conducted in accordance with pre-bid
conferences. Any such conference should be held prior to submission of initial
proposals.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.057 EVALUATION OF PROPOSALS.
   (A)   The request for proposals shall state all of the evaluation factors
and their relative importance, including price.
   (B)   The evaluation shall be based on the evaluation factors set forth in
the request for proposal. Numerical rating systems may be used, but are not
required. Factors not specified in the request for proposals shall not be
considered in determining award of contract.
   (C)   The Purchasing Agent shall establish a selection committee which shall
review the proposals and shall make award recommendations. The requesting
organization may submit a list of potential evaluation committee members to the
Purchasing Agent for consideration by the Purchasing Agent in establishing the
evaluation committee. The committee members should be knowledgeable and have
good judgment in the field to which the proposal applies or the need that the
procurement item is intended to address. All selection committee members will
impartially review the submitted proposals to insure a well-founded, fair award
recommendation and the possibility of a successful contract. No selection
committee member shall have a conflict of interest with any offeror. The
Purchasing Agent may designate an expert, consultant or other individual to
assist the selection committee; provided that, such expert, consultant or
individual shall not be a member of the selection committee and shall not
participate in the evaluation scoring.
   (D)   Once selection committee members are appointed to the selection
committee, they will not confer with any prospective offerors. If information
or clarification is needed as to the RFPs, the prospective offerors are to
contact the Purchasing Agent.
   (E)   All proposals received shall be evaluated and scored independently by
each member of the selection committee on the scoring sheets provided by the
Purchasing Agent. The evaluation criteria will be based on the information
described in the request for proposal.
   (F)   Final evaluation will take into consideration both written proposals
and oral presentation, if any, and must be consistent with the evaluation
criteria defined in the request for proposal. The award recommendation will be
based on the best evaluated proposal and shall constitute only a recommendation
to the Board of County Commissioners.
   (G)   Committee members may discuss the proposals together, but, each
committee member will privately score and/or rank their selection. The score
sheets and/or ranking will be turned into the Purchasing Agent for tabulation
and disclosure to the full committee.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.058 ORAL PRESENTATIONS.
   (A)   Oral presentations should be scheduled if clarifications or additional
information is necessary. The selection committee may decide if they wish to
invite the complete list of offerors for oral presentations or only a “short
list” of the top proposal scorers.
   (B)   Oral presentations will be conducted with the following directions.
      (1)   All members or their representative of the selection committee
should be present during the presentations at the committee meetings. Interview
meetings are to be directed by the committee chair.
      (2)   All offerors must be afforded equal opportunity to respond in an
oral interview. Time limits for oral presentations will be equal in length.
      (3)   No offeror will be given information pertaining to another
offeror’s proposal, or their present standing in the evaluation process, during
the presentation.
      (4)   The offeror’s original proposal cannot be changed in any aspect at
the oral presentation. The oral presentation is only to allow offerors to
clarify portions of their proposal and is an extension of their written
proposal.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.059 AWARD.
   (A)   Award of contract. After taking into consideration the selection
committee’s recommendations, tabulations and rankings, the Board of County
Commissioners shall award the contract to the top ranked offerors or may elect
to reject all proposals.
   (B)   Recommendation. In making its decision, the selection committee will
make a recommendation to the Board of County Commissioners who will issue a
“notice to award” in which offeror’s proposal is in the best interest of the
county, after considering all applicable factors.
   (C)   Award documentation. A written determination in the form of a notice
to award shall be made showing the basis on which the award was found to be
most advantageous to the purchasing agency based on the factors set forth in
the request for proposals.
   (D)   One proposal received. If only one proposal is received in response to
a request for proposals, the Purchasing Agent may, as such agent deems
appropriate, either make an award or, if time permits, re-solicit for the
purpose of obtaining additional competitive sealed proposals.
   (E)   Publicizing awards. After a notice to award is issued, a contract is
entered into which shall be available in the Clerk/Auditor’s office.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.060 EXCEPTIONS TO COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSAL PROCESS.
   (A)   The Purchasing Agent or designee may determine that for a given
request it is either not practicable or not advantageous for the county to
procure a commodity or service referenced in the above by soliciting
competitive sealed proposals. When making this determination, the Purchasing
Agent or designee may take into consideration whether the potential cost of
preparing, soliciting and evaluating competitive sealed proposals is expected
to exceed the benefits normally associated with such solicitations. In the
event of such a determination, the Purchasing Agent or designee may elect to
utilize an alternative, more cost effective procurement method, which may
include, but shall not be limited to, direct negotiations with a qualified
vendor or contractor.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of above, the Board of County
Commissioners may make the awarding of a contract subject to further
negotiations and modifications deemed to be in the best interest of the county,
without a substantial change to the scope of the request for proposals, and the
award of contract shall be subject to the county and the offeror entering into
a contract acceptable to the county.
   (C)   Documentation of the alternative procurement method selected shall
state the reasons for selection and shall be made a part of the contract file.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.061 EMERGENCY EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Exemptions from competitive bid requirements may include the
following: sole source providers; service contracts with professionals or
specialists; emergency purchases.
   (B)   The Purchasing Agent shall sufficiently document the reason for not
competitively bidding the procurement and have it approved by the County Board
of Commissioners.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 34.062 PROTESTS.
   Protests to the bidding process shall be submitted to the chief
administrative officer in writing within five business days. The chief
administrative officer will respond to the protest within five business days of
receiving the complaint. The Chief Administrative Officer’s decision may be
appealed to the Administrative Law Judge in writing within ten business days.
The Administrative Law Judge shall review and hear the bid protest pursuant to
Chapter 11 of this code.
(Ord. 2020-04, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
CHAPTER 35: CONSTITUTIONAL TAKINGS
Section
   
35.001   Purpose
   
35.002   Definition
   
35.003   Guidelines
   
35.004   Analysis
   
35.005   Appeals
   
35.006   Limitations
   
35.007   Legal action
§ 35.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide advisory guidelines for the county
to assist the county in identifying actions that involve the unconstitutional
taking, damaging or exaction of private real property without the payment of
just compensation as required by the Constitution of the United States and of
the state.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 35.002 DEFINITION.
   CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING ISSUES are actions involving the physical or
regulatory taking of private real property by the county that might require
compensation to a private real property owner under:
   (A)   The Fifth or Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution of the United
States;
   (B)   Article I, § 22, of the Utah Constitution; or
   (C)   Any recent court rulings governing the physical or regulatory taking
of private real property by a governmental entity.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 35.003 GUIDELINES.
   (A)   The following guidelines shall be considered by the county when taking
any action that might result in the physical or regulatory taking of private
real property. The county should review the following to determine and identify
whether a proposed governmental action raises constitutional taking issues. It
is the policy of the county that no individual bear burdens which, in all
fairness and justice, should be borne by the community as a whole.
   (B)   A “Yes” answer to any of the following questions could raise the
implication of a taking or damaging of private property for which compensation
may be required:
      (1)   Does the action result in a permanent or inevitably recurring
physical occupation of private property?
      (2)   Does the action require a property owner to dedicate property or
grant an easement to the county without the payment of just compensation?
      (3)   Does the action create or otherwise impose a permanent ongoing
nuisance, originating on county property, that impacts neighboring lands so
that their owners or occupants sustain a special and unreasonable interference
with the quiet enjoyment of the property?
      (4)   Does the action interfere with a fundamental attribute of ownership
such as the right to reasonable access, the right to light, air and view within
the right-of-way of an abutting public street or the right to exclude others
from private property?
      (5)   Does the action unreasonably interfere with a separately protected
and vested right, such as the right to continue a nonconforming use; the right
to have an application reviewed under the law that was in effect when a
complete application was submitted; legally issued subdivision play approvals,
building permits or licenses; or other protected property interests?
      (6)   Does the action impose a severe economic burden that is
inappropriately unfair when considered in light of: the burden placed on the
property owner; the nature of the government action and benefit; and the
property owner’s investment-backed expectations?
      (7)   Does the action deprive the property owner of all economically
viable use of the property in a situation where the proposed use does not
constitute a nuisance or a severe threat to health and safety?
      (8)   Does the action limit the use of private property without
substantially advancing a legitimate public interest?
      (9)   Has the county failed to demonstrate by an individualized
determination that any conditions, dedications, exactions imposed as a
condition of approval of development applications place only fair and roughly
proportionate burdens on development, offsetting the burdens that the proposed
development places on public utilities, streets and other services but not
imposing additional burdens on development that the community as a whole should
bear?
      (10)   Does the action discriminate against property owners, imposing
restrictions or burdens on one property owner that other similarly situated
property owners do not bear?
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 35.004 ANALYSIS.
   (A)   If the county determines that a government action involves
constitutional taking issues, the proposed action should be reviewed by the
county to analyze the possible taking and to determine the action to be taken.
   (B)   In reviewing the proposed action, the following factors may be
analyzed:
      (1)   The affect the potential taking would have on the use or value of
the private property;
      (2)   The likelihood that the action may result in a constitutional
taking;
      (3)   Any alternatives to the proposed action that would fulfill the
county’s lawful objectives and reduce the risk of a constitutional taking;
      (4)   The cost to the county for payment of compensation if a taking is
determined;
      (5)   The governmental interest involved and its nexus to the potential
taking; and
      (6)   If the action is roughly proportionate or reasonably related to the
impact of any proposed development.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 35.005 APPEALS.
   Any owner of private property whose interest in the property is subject to a
physical or regulatory taking by the county, pursuant to a final and
authoritative decision or action by the county, may appeal the county’s
decision or action by filing a written notice of appeal and statement of the
grounds for the appeal in the County Clerk/Auditor’s office within 30 days from
the date of the county’s final decision or action. The appeal shall be reviewed
and heard by the Administrative Law Judge pursuant to
Chapter 11 of this code.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-28-2004; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 35.006 LIMITATIONS.
   The guidelines set forth herein are advisory only and shall not be construed
to expand, nor limit, the scope of the county’s liability for a constitutional
taking. The county shall have no legal liability to any person, firm or entity
of any nature whatsoever and a court may not impose liability upon the county
for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-28-2004)
§ 35.007 LEGAL ACTION.
   A property owner’s failure to appeal the action of the county does not
constitute, and may not be interpreted as constituting, a failure to exhaust
available administrative remedies or as a bar to bringing legal action.
(Ord. 2004-02, passed 6-28-2004)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
[Reserved]
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRANSPORTATION PLAN
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: TRANSPORTATION PLAN
Section
   
70.001   Plan adopted by reference
§ 70.001 PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   In accordance with UCA § 17-50-309 (1953, as amended), the
Transportation Plan for the county is adopted herewith. The plan and roadways
subject to it, as shown on the maps which are specifically listed below, have
been placed on file with the Planning Office, the County Administration Office
and the office of the County Clerk/Auditor and are made by this reference a
part of this traffic code as if fully described and detailed herein:
      (1)   The current County “B” Road Map;
      (2)   The current County Off-Highway Vehicle Road Map; and
      (3)   The current County Transportation System Map.
   (B)   The county’s Transportation Plan and related maps shall be filed in
the custody of the County Clerk/Auditor and may be examined by the public
subject to reasonable regulations established by the County Clerk/Auditor.
(Ord. 2006-01, passed 2-21-2006)
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Off-Highway Vehicles
   
71.001   Map adopted
   
71.002   Definitions
   
71.003   Compliance with all traffic laws
   
71.004   Operation on streets and highways
   
71.005   Registration
   
71.006   Equipment required
   
71.007   Prohibited uses
   
71.008   Private property and roads; reservation lands
 
   
71.999   Penalty
OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES
§ 71.001 MAP ADOPTED.
   The county does hereby designate which County Class B and Class D roads are
open for public travel for OHV use on a map maintained by the County Board of
Commissioners and the County Information Technology Department, entitled “Off-
Highway Vehicle Road Map”. Such designated roads and corresponding map may be
changed, modified or amended from time to time by the county.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 71.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE (OHV).
      (1)   Any snowmobile, all-terrain Type I vehicle, all-terrain Type II
vehicle or motorcycle.
         (a)   ALL-TERRAIN TYPE I VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle 52 inches or less
in width, having an unladen dry weight of 1,500 pounds or less, traveling on
three or more low-pressure tires, having a seat designed to be straddled by the
operator, and designed for or capable of travel over unimproved terrain.
         (b)   ALL-TERRAIN TYPE II VEHICLE. Any other motor vehicle, not
defined as an all-terrain Type I vehicle, motorcycle or snowmobile, designed
for or capable of travel over unimproved terrain. This term includes Class A
side-by-side vehicles, but does not include golf carts, any vehicle designed to
carry a disabled person, any vehicle not specifically designed for recreational
use or farm tractors, as defined under UCA § 41-1a-102.
         (c)   CLASS A SIDE-BY-SIDE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle 65 inches or
less in width, having an unladen dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less, traveling
on four or more non-highway tires and designed for or capable of travel over
unimproved terrain.
         (d)   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of
the operator and designed to travel on not more than two tires.
      (2)   OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE means any snowmobile, all-terrain Type I
vehicle, all-terrain Type II vehicle or motorcycle.
   PUBLIC LAND. Land-owned or administered by any federal or state agency or
any political subdivision of the state.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any motor vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice and steered
and supported in whole or in part by skis, belts, runners or low pressure
tires.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between boundary lines of every way or
place of whatever nature, when any part of it is open to the use of the public
for vehicular travel.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 71.003 COMPLIANCE WITH ALL TRAFFIC LAWS.
   Any person operating an off-highway vehicle is subject to all the provisions
of UCA Title 41, Ch. 6A, as amended, which includes, but is not limited to:
   (A)   No person under eight years of age will be allowed to operate an OHV
on the county’s Off-Highway Vehicle Road System;
   (B)   No person between the age of eight and 13 may operate an OHV on the
street or highway that has a paved surface and is designated as open for
limited off-highway use to allow off-highway vehicle operators to gain direct
access to or from a private or public area open for off-highway vehicle use on
the county’s Off-Highway Vehicle Road System;
   (C)   Any person 14 years of age or older may operate an OHV on the street
or highway that has a paved surface and is designated as open for limited off-
highway use to allow off-highway vehicle operators to gain direct access to or
from a private or public area open for off-highway vehicle use on the county’s
Off-Highway Vehicle Road System;
   (D)   (1)   Any person between the age of eight through the age of 15 must
possess an OHV education certificate issued by the state’s Division of Parks
and Recreation before he or she may operate an all-terrain Type I vehicle,
motorcycle or snowmobile on the county’s Off-Highway Vehicle Road System.
      (2)   This provision does not apply to non-Utah residents;
   (E)   All operators 16 years of age or older must possess a valid Utah
driver’s license before the may operate an all-terrain Type II vehicle or an
OHV education certificate before they may operate an all-terrain Type I
vehicle, motorcycle or snowmobile on the county’s Off-Highway Vehicle Road
System;
   (F)   All riders under 18 years of age must wear a properly fitting, safety
regulated helmet when operating an all-terrain Type I vehicle, motorcycle or
snowmobile on the county’s Off-Highway Vehicle Road System; and
   (G)   No person under 14 years of age may operate an all-terrain Type I
vehicle, motorcycle or snowmobile on any County Class B road as part of the
system unless he or she is accompanied by someone at least 16 years of age that
holds a valid driver’s license or possesses a OHV education certificate, and
must be no further away from that person than communicating distance at any
time.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 8-6-2012) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.004 OPERATION ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.
   No person may operate an OHV upon any street or highway not designated as
open to OHV use, except:
   (A)   When crossing a street or highway and the operator comes to a complete
stop before crossing and proceeds only after yielding the right-of-way to
oncoming traffic and crosses at a right angle;
   (B)   When loading or unloading any OHV from a vehicle or trailer which
shall be done with due regard for safety and at the nearest practical point of
operation; and
   (C)   When an emergency exists during any period of time and at those
locations where the operation of conventional motor vehicles is impractical or
when the operation is directed by a peace officer or other public authority.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 8-6-2012) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.005 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All vehicles operated on the OHV road system must be either safety
inspected and licensed by the state’s Division of Motor Vehicles, or registered
as an OHV by the state’s Division of Motor Vehicles, or be duly registered by
the appropriate agency in the state in which the owner of the OHV is a
resident.
   (B)   Owners of ATVs, off-highway motorcycles or snowmobiles brought into
Utah by non-residents must obtain and display a non-resident off-highway
vehicle permit on the machine.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 8-6-2012) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.006 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   An OHV shall be equipped with:
   (A)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the
vehicle under normal operating conditions;
   (B)   Headlights and taillights when operated between sunrise and sunset;
and
   (C)   A noise-control device.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 8-6-2012) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.007 PROHIBITED USES.
   (A)   All traffic and other safety laws and rules apply to operation of
OHVs, including the prohibition from use of said vehicles while under the
influence of alcohol or drugs, per UCA § 41-6a-502.
   (B)   (1)   No person may operate an OHV in connection with acts of
vandalism, harassment of wildlife or domestic animals, burglaries or other
crimes, or damage to the environment which includes excessive pollution of air,
water or land.
      (2)   Abuse of the watershed, impairment of plant or animal life or
excessive mechanical noise is strictly prohibited
   (C)   No person shall operate or accompany a person operating an OHV upon
privately-owned property of any other person, firm or corporation without
permission from the owner or person in charge of that property.
      (1)   It is unlawful for a person to remain on private property upon the
request of the owner or person in charge to leave.
      (2)   This section does not apply to prescriptive easements.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to tear down, mutilate or destroy any
sign, sign boards or other notice which regulates direction, speed or
trespassing for purposes of operating an OHV; or to tear down, deface or
destroy any fence or other enclosure or any gate or bars belonging to such
fence or enclosure.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 8-6-2012) Penalty, see §
71.999
§ 71.008 PRIVATE PROPERTY AND ROADS; RESERVATION LANDS.
   (A)   This designation is not intended to include roads on private property,
unless those roads are deemed “public” or are part of the county road system.
   (B)   The use of county roads across lands controlled and administered by
the Navajo or Ute Tribes are subject to the rules and regulations promulgated
by the respective tribe. This provision may be modified by interlocal
agreements as may be entered into from time to time by the county and the
tribes.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 71.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violators of use of OHVs in violation of registration, requirements or
traffic codes shall be penalized according to the violation in the traffic code
as found in state code. Unless another penalty is provided for in §§
71.001 through
71.008 of this chapter, or elsewhere in the laws of the state, any person who
violates any provision of §§
71.001 through
71.008 of this chapter or the rules promulgated from §§
71.001 through
71.008 of this chapter, upon conviction, is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2012-1, passed 8-6-2012)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
91.   ANIMAL CONTROL
      
92.   LARGE PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
94.   SOUND POLLUTION
CHAPTER 90: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
Noxious Weeds
   
90.001   Definitions
   
90.002   Violation
   
90.003   Enforcement; abatement; notice of complaint
   
90.004   Right to a hearing
   
90.005   Weed Control Board; authority
NOXIOUS WEEDS
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATEMENT. The removal and stoppage of the spread of such noxious weeds, as
defined under the state’s Noxious Weed Act, UCA Title 4, Ch. 17, as amended,
the administrative rules promulgated under that code, or any noxious weed as
defined by the county’s Weed Control Board, consistent with UCA Title 4, Ch.
17, § 107.
   NOXIOUS WEED. Any such noxious weed, as defined under the state’s Noxious
Weed Act, UCA Title 4, Ch. 17, as amended, the administrative rules promulgated
under that code, or any noxious weed as defined by the county’s Weed Control
Board, consistent with UCA Title 4, Ch. 17, § 107.
   NUISANCE. The presence of any such noxious weed, as defined under the
state’s Noxious Weed Act, UCA Title 4, Ch. 17, as amended, the administrative
rules promulgated under that code, or any noxious weed as defined by the
county’s Weed Control Board, consistent with UCA Title 4, Ch. 17, § 107.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who has, or has a right to, the physical occupancy or
use of property.
   OWNER. The person, firm or corporation in whose name property is listed in
the records of the County Recorder’s office.
   PERSON. An individual, trust, firm, estate, company, corporation,
partnership, association, state, state or federal agency or entity,
municipality, commission or political subdivision of a state.
   PROPERTY. Any real property, premises or location on which noxious weeds are
alleged to exist.
(Ord. 07, passed 4-7-2020)
§ 90.002 VIOLATION.
   Any person, whether as owner or occupant, who creates, maintains, allows or
aids in creating, maintaining or allowing, or otherwise contributes to, the
nuisance of the presence of any noxious weed, is in violation of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 07, passed 4-7-2020) Penalty, see §
10.999
§ 90.003 ENFORCEMENT; ABATEMENT; NOTICE OF COMPLAINT.
   (A)   (1)   Upon the receipt of any complaint received by the Weed Control
Board regarding the existence of a nuisance caused by presence of any noxious
weed upon a property in the county, through the Weed Control Board, will
provide notice to the owner and occupant and inspect the property for the
presence of a noxious weed.
      (2)   If the presence of a noxious weed is confirmed in accordance with
UCA Title 4, Ch. 17, § 108, the county, through the Weed Control Board, will
provide written notice to the owner and occupant that, within five days, the
nuisance shall be removed from the property by the owner or occupant.
   (B)   If the nuisance is not removed within five days, consistent with UCA
Title 4, Ch. 17, § 110, the county will provide reasonable notice that the
county will remove the noxious weed(s) from the property, at the owner or
occupant’s expense, and that the county will provide a bill for reimbursement
within 30 days of the removal of the nuisance. Any such bill shall be paid by
the owner or occupant within 90 days.
   (C)   If payment is not received within 90 days, a lien for payment against
the property, on behalf of the county, will be attached to the property and the
outstanding amount owed will be collected through property taxation.
(Ord. 07, passed 4-7-2020)
§ 90.004 RIGHT TO A HEARING.
   Consistent with UCA Title 4, Ch. 17, § 111, any person receiving notice of a
complaint may request a hearing to the Weed Control Board (or to the
Administrative Law Judge, if there is not a standing Weed Control Board) by
filing a request, in writing, with the County Administrator within ten days of
receiving notice of the complaint from the county. Appeals from a decision from
the Weed Control Board shall be consistent with UCA Title 4, Ch. 17, § 111.
(Ord. 07, passed 4-7-2020; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 90.005 WEED CONTROL BOARD; AUTHORITY.
   In accordance with UCA Title 4, Ch. 17, § 107, the county authorizes the
Weed Control Board to administer the Weed Control Program for the county,
consistent with the duties, powers and limitation of UCA Title 4, Ch. 17.
(Ord. 07, passed 4-7-2020)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
Dogs
   
91.001   Definitions
   
91.002   License and registration required
   
91.003   Tag and collar required
   
91.004   Running at large prohibited
   
91.005   Female in heat
   
91.006   Strays
   
91.007   Rabies vaccinations
   
91.008   Dogs which disturb neighborhood
   
91.009   Vicious dogs; special provisions
   
91.010   Defecating of animal prohibited
   
91.011   Appeals
 
   
91.999   Penalty
DOGS
§ 91.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. Any dog off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor or
keeper thereof and not under the control of such owner, possessor or keeper, or
his or her agent or servant, or a member of his or her immediate family. A dog
shall be deemed to be under the control of such owner or family member if it is
on a leash, cord or chain, or it is contained within a vehicle of the owner or
immediate family member. Where an animal is not chained, penned or restrained
on the keeper’s property, the animal’s presence off the property is knowing,
intentional or negligent.
   DOG. Any male, female or spayed female dog of any age.
   IMPOUNDED. Having been received into the custody of the authorized agent or
representative of the county.
   OWNER. When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, means any person or
persons, firm association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
   UNLICENSED DOG. A dog for which the license for the current year has not
been paid, or to which the tag provided for in this article is not attached.
   VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS DOG. Any dog that attacks, bites or physically injures
human beings, domestic animals or livestock without adequate provocation, or
which, because of temperament or training, has a known propensity to attack,
bite or physically injure human beings, domestic animals or livestock. Any wild
dog or any dog that, without provocation, has bitten or attacked a human being
or other animal shall be prima facie presumed VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-12-2008)
§ 91.002 LICENSE AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any person or other entity to
own, keep, maintain or have permanent or temporary custody of a dog within the
limits of the county, exclusive of the incorporated areas, unless such dog has
been registered and licensed in the manner herein provided.
   (B)   Application. Application for registration and licensing shall be made
to the Clerk/Auditor, or such other person as tire county commission may
authorize to receive such applications.
   (C)   Issuance of license. A dog license shall be issued by the Clerk/
Auditor or such other person as the County Board of Commissioners may
authorize.
   (D)   Exception. Dogs shall not be subject to registration and licensing
until they obtain the age of four months.
   (E)   Fee. No dog license shall be issued by the county until the fee
required herein is paid. The fee shall be set by the County Board of
Commissioners, which may be charged at any time. Should a dog not be neutered
or spayed at the time the dog is required to be licensed, the fee charged shall
be at the unneutered or unspayed rate. Upon presentation to the licensing agent
of proof of neutering or spaying within 60 days of the licensing, such portion
of the license fee paid for an unneutered or unspayed dog shall be returned to
the owner, and the county records shall be changed to reflect the dog is
licensed as either spayed or neutered.
   (F)   Due and payable. The fee due and payable pursuant to this section
shall be due January 1 and shall be delinquent after February 15 of each year.
A penalty of 25% shall be added to delinquent payments.
   (G)   Newly acquired dogs or dogs attaining licensing age. The owner of any
newly acquired dog of licensing age or any dog which attains licensing age
after February 15 of any year shall make an application for registration and
license within ten days after such acquisition or after the dog attains the
above stated age; provided, that the license fee shall be one-half of the
required fee for a new application received after July 1 of any year.
   (H)   Content of application. The owner shall state at the time application
is made for such license, his or her name and address and the sex, breed and
color of each dog owned or kept by him or her. The license fee shall cover the
calendar year in which the license was issued, expiring on December 31 of the
year of issuance, regardless of the date when issued.
   (I)   Exception to fee requirement. Dogs used as guides for blind persons
and commonly known as seeing eye dogs shall be licensed and registered as other
dogs as provided in this section; except that the owner or keeper of such dog
shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.003 TAG AND COLLAR REQUIRED.
   (A)   Collar and tag required. It is unlawful for any person or other entity
to own, keep, maintain or have permanent or temporary custody of a dog within
the limits of the county, exclusive on the incorporated areas, without having
affixed to the dog a collar, which shall be worn at all times by the dog, with
a current metallic license tag attached to said collar.
   (B)   Nontransferable. No dog license shall be transferable to another dog.
   (C)   Duplicate tags. Duplicate tags may be issued by the Clerk/Auditor, or
such other person the county commission may authorize, upon presentation of the
receipt showing payment of the license fee and the cost for such duplicate.
   (D)   Removal of tag prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to remove a
license tag from a dog not owned, kept, maintained or in the temporary or
permanent custody of that person.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.004 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Running at large. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any
dog to permit such dog to run at large.
   (B)   Entrance upon private property without permission. It shall be
unlawful for an owner of a dog to permit such dog to go upon or be upon the
private property of any person without the permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession of such private property.
   (C)   Owner violation regardless of precautions. The owner of any dog
running at large shall be deemed in violation of this section regardless of the
precautions taken to prevent the escape of the dog and to prohibit it from
running at large.
   (D)   Violation; impound. Any dog running at large in violation of the
provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a menace to
the public health and safety, and the dog shall be taken up and impounded as
provided herein.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.005 FEMALE IN HEAT.
   The owner of a female dog in heat shall cause such dog to be penned or
enclosed in such a manner as to preclude other dogs from attacking such female
dog or being attracted to such female dog so as to create a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.006 STRAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep within the limits of
the county, exclusive of the incorporated areas, any lost or strayed dog.
Whenever any dog shall be found which appears to be lost or strayed, it shall
be the duty of the finder to notify the County Sheriff’s Office which shall
notify the person/entity who the county has contracted with to impound the dog
for a license tag, or other form of identification, the County Sheriff’s Office
or the poundmaster shall notify the person to whom such license was issued at
the address given in the license, or otherwise identified.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.007 RABIES VACCINATIONS.
   (A)   Rabies vaccination is required for dogs and cats. Every owner of any
dog or cat over the age of four months within the limits of the county,
exclusive of the incorporated areas, shall have the dog or cat vaccinated
against rabies by a duly licensed veterinarian, shall secure from the
veterinarian a certificate thereof, and shall attach to the collar or harness,
which such person is required to place upon the animal, a tag showing that such
vaccination has been done; provided, that the County Board of Commissioners
may, by resolution, provide that the owners of any dog or cat may themselves
purchase serum and vaccinate their own dogs or cats. The resolution shall also
prescribe the conditions with which the owner must comply to obtain the tag
hereinafter required.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to suffer, allow
or permit such animal to be or go upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public
place within the limits of the county, exclusive of the incorporated areas,
without first having had such animal vaccinated against rabies. Every dog shall
be vaccinated every two years against rabies and every cat shall be vaccinated
every 12 months with a modified rabies virus vaccine. It shall also be unlawful
for any such animal to be without a license tag thereon showing that such
animal has been vaccinated.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.008 DOGS WHICH DISTURB NEIGHBORHOOD.
   No person, persons, firm or corporation shall own, keep or harbor any dog
which, by loud, continued or frequent barking, howling, yelping or by noxious
or offensive odors, shall annoy, disturb or endanger the health and welfare of
any person or neighborhood. Each day a violation is permitted to exist or
continue shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not apply to
veterinary hospitals or medical laboratories.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.009 VICIOUS DOGS; SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to own or possess a vicious
dog. Whenever a prosecution for this offense is commenced under this section,
the dog so involved may not be redeemed, pursuant to the provisions of this
section, while awaiting final decision of the court as to the disposition to be
made of such dog.
   (B)   Disposition of dog. Upon the trial of any offense under this section,
the court may, upon conviction and in addition to the usual judgment of
conviction, order the authorized personnel of the county to put the dog to
death or may order such other disposition of the dog as will protect the
inhabitants of the county.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.010 DEFECATING OF ANIMAL PROHIBITED.
   The owner of person charged with responsibility for an animal shall prevent
or control the animal from defecating on any public sidewalk, park or other
area, or on any public or private property without consent of the property
owner, unless the owner or custodian of the animal removes and properly
disposes of all animal waste that may result.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-12-2008) Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.011 APPEALS.
   An impoundment, a notice of violation, a citation, or administrative process
decision issued in accordance with this chapter may be appealed to the
Administrative Law Judge in accordance with
Chapter 11 of this code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 91.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
91.001 though
91.010 shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
subject to penalty as provided in §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 5-12-2008)
CHAPTER 92: LARGE PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
Section
   
92.001   Intent
   
92.002   License required
   
92.003   Definitions
   
92.004   Conditions for issuing license
   
92.005   License application; processing
   
92.006   License revocation
 
   
92.999   Penalty
§ 92.001 INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the assemblage of large
numbers of people, in excess of those normally needing the health, sanitary,
fire, police, transportation and utility services regularly provided in the
county in order that the health, safety and welfare of all persons in the
county, residents and visitors alike, may be protected.
(Ord. 1971-2, passed 9-13-1971)
§ 92.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall permit, maintain, promote, conduct, advertise, act as
entrepreneur, undertake, organize, manage or sell or give tickets to an actual
or reasonably anticipated assembly of 1,000 or more people which continues or
can reasonably be expected to continue for 15 or more consecutive hours,
whether on public or private property unless a license to hold the assembly has
first been issued by the County Commissioners, application for which must be
made at least 30 days in advance of the assembly. A license to hold an assembly
issued to one person shall permit any person to engage in any lawful activity
in connection with the holding of the licensed assembly.
   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each location in which 1,000
or more people assemble or can reasonably be anticipated to assemble; the fee
for each license shall be $100 for each day.
   (C)   A license shall permit the assembly of only the maximum number of
people stated in the license. The licensee shall not sell tickets to nor permit
to assemble at the licensed location more than the maximum permissible number
of people.
   (D)   This chapter shall not apply to any regularly established, permanent
place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium, coliseum or other
similar permanently established place of assembly for assemblies which do not
exceed by more than 250 people the maximum seating capacity of the structure
where the assembly is held.
   (E)   This chapter shall not apply to government sponsored fairs held on
regularly established fairgrounds, nor to assemblies required to be licensed by
other ordinances and regulations of the county.
(Ord. 1971-2, passed 9-13-1971) Penalty, see §
92.999
§ 92.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASSEMBLY. A company of persons gathered together at any location at any
single time for any purpose.
   PERSON. Any individual natural human being, partnership, corporation, firm,
company, association, society or group.
(Ord. 1971-2, passed 9-13-1971)
§ 92.004 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUING LICENSE.
   (A)   Before he or she may be issued a licence, the applicant shall first
determine the maximum number of people which will be assembled or admitted to
the location of the assembly; provided that, the maximum number shall not
exceed the maximum number which can reasonably assemble at the location of the
assembly in consideration of the nature of the assembly; and, provided that,
where the assembly is to continue overnight, the maximum number shall not be
more than is allowed to sleep within the boundaries of the location of the
assembly by the zoning or health ordinances of the county.
   (B)   Before he or she may be issued a license, the applicant shall provide
proof that he or she will furnish, at his or her own expense, before the
assembly commences:
      (1)   A fence completely enclosing the proposed location, of sufficient
height and strength to prevent people in excess of the maximum permissible
number from gaining access to the assembly grounds, which shall have at least
four gates, at least one at or near four opposite points of the compass;
      (2)   Potable water, meeting all federal and state requirements for
purity, sufficient to provide drinking water for the maximum number of people
to be assembled at the rate of at least one gallon per person per day and water
for bathing at the rate of at least ten gallons per person per day;
      (3)   Separate enclosed toilets for males and females, meeting all state
and local specifications conveniently located throughout the grounds,
sufficient to provide facilities for the maximum number of people to be
assembled at the rate of at least one toilet for every 200 females and at least
one toilet for every 300 males together with an efficient, sanitary means of
disposing of waste matter deposited, which is in compliance with all state and
local laws and regulations; a lavatory with running water under pressure and a
continuous supply of soap and paper towels shall be provided with each toilet;
      (4)   A sanitary method of disposing of solid waste, in compliance with
state and local laws and regulations, sufficient to dispose of the solid waste
production of the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at
least two and one-half pounds of solid waste per person per day, together with
a plan for holding and a plan for collecting all such waste at least once each
day of the assembly and sufficient trash cans with tight fitting lids and
personnel to perform the task;
      (5)   Physicians and nurses licensed to practice in the State of Utah
sufficient to provide the average medical care enjoyed by residents of the
state for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least
one physician for every 1,000 people and at least one nurse for every 1,500
people, together with an enclosed covered structure where treatment may be
rendered, containing separately enclosed treatment rooms for each physician,
and at least one emergency ambulance available for use at all times;
      (6)   If the assembly is to continue during hours of darkness,
illumination sufficient to light the entire area of the assembly at the rate of
at least five footcandles, but not to shine unreasonably beyond the boundaries
of the enclosed location of the assembly;
      (7)   A free parking area inside of the assembly grounds sufficient to
provide parking space for a maximum number of people to be assembled at the
rate of at least one parking space for every four persons;
      (8)   Telephones connected to outside lines sufficient to provide service
for the maximum number of people to be assembled at the rate of at least one
separate line and receiver for each 1,000 persons;
      (9)   If the assembly is to continue overnight, camping facilities in
compliance with all federal state and local requirements sufficient to provide
camping accommodations for the maximum number of people to be assembled;
      (10)   Security guards, either regularly employed, duly sworn off-duty
peace officers of the state or private guards, licensed in the county,
sufficient to provide adequate security for the maximum number of people to be
assembled at the rate of at least one security guard for every 250 people;
      (11)   Fire protection, including alarms, extinguishing devices and fire
lanes and escapes, sufficient to meet all federal, state and local standards
for the location of the assembly and sufficient emergency personnel to
efficiently operate the required equipment; and
      (12)   A bond, filed with the Clerk/Auditor of the county, either in cash
or underwritten by a surety company licensed to do business in the state at the
rate of $1 per person for the maximum number of people permitted to assemble,
which shall indemnify and hold harmless the county or any of its agents,
officers, servants and employees from any liability or causes of action which
might arise by reason of granting this license and from any cost incurred in
cleaning up any waste material produced or left by the assembly.
(Ord. 1971-2, passed 9-13-1971)
§ 92.005 LICENSE APPLICATION; PROCESSING.
   (A)   (1)   Application for a license to hold an actual or anticipated
assembly of 1,000 or more persons shall be made in writing to the County Board
of Commissioners at least 30 days in advance of such assembly.
      (2)   The application shall contain a statement made upon oath or
affirmation that the statements contained therein are true and correct to the
best knowledge of the applicant and shall be signed and sworn to or affirmed by
the individual making application in the case of an individual, natural, human
being, by all officers in the case of a corporation, by all partners in the
case of a partnership or by all officers of an unincorporated association,
society or group or, if there be no officers, by all members of such
association, society or group.
      (3)   The application shall contain and disclose:
         (a)   The name, age, residence and mailing address of all persons
required to sign the application by division (A)(2) above and, in the case of a
corporation, a certified copy of the articles of corporation together with the
name, age, residence and mailing address of each person holding 10% or more of
the stock of said corporation;
         (b)   The address and legal description of all property upon which the
assembly is to be held together with the name, residence and mailing address of
the record owner(s) of all such property;
         (c)   Proof of ownership of all property upon which the assembly is to
be held or a statement made upon oath or affirmation by the record owner(s) of
all such property that the applicant has permission to use such property for an
assembly of 1,000 persons or more;
         (d)   The nature or purpose of the assembly;
         (e)   The total number of days and/or hours during which the assembly
is to last;
         (f)   The maximum number of persons which the applicant shall permit
to assemble at any time, not to exceed the maximum number which can reasonably
assemble at the location of the assembly, in consideration of the nature of the
assembly, or the maximum number of persons allowed to sleep within the
boundaries of the location of the assembly by the zoning ordinances of the
county if the assembly is to continue overnight;
         (g)   The maximum number of tickets to be sold, if any;
         (h)   The plans of the applicant to limit the maximum number of people
permitted to assemble;
         (I)   The plans for fencing the location of the assembly and the gates
contained in such fence;
         (j)   The plans for supplying potable water including the source,
amount available and location of outlets;
         (k)   The plans for providing toilet and lavatory facilities including
the source, number and location, type and the means of disposing of waste
deposited;
         (l)   The plans for holding, collecting and disposing of solid waste
material;
         (m)   The plans to provide for medical facilities including the
location and construction of medical structure, the names and addresses and
hours of availability of physicians and nurses and provisions for emergency
ambulance service;
         (n)   The plans, if any, to illuminate the location of the assembly
including the source and amount of power and the location of lamps;
         (o)   The plans for parking vehicles including size and location of
lots, points of highway access and interior roads including routes between
highway access and parking lots;
         (p)   The plans for telephone service including the source, number and
location of telephones;
         (q)   The plans for camping facilities, if any, including facilities
available and their location;
         (r)   The plans for security including the number of guards, their
names, addresses, credentials and hours of availability;
         (s)   The plans for fire protection including the number, type and
location of all protective devices including alarms and extinguishers, and the
number of emergency fire personnel available to operate the equipment; and
         (t)   The plans for food concessions and concessioners who will be
allowed to operate on the grounds, including the names and addresses of all
concessioners and their license or permit numbers.
      (4)   The application shall include the bond required in §
92.004(B)(12) of this chapter and the license fee.
   (B)   The application for a license shall be processed within 20 days of
receipt and shall be issued if all conditions are complied with.
(Ord. 1971-2, passed 9-13-1971)
§ 92.006 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   The license may be revoked by the County Board of Commissioners at any time
if any of the conditions necessary for the issuing of or contained in the
license are not complied with, or if any condition previously met ceases to be
complied with.
(Ord. 1971-2, passed 9-13-1971)
§ 92.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by injunction in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   The holding of any assembly in violation of any provisions or
condition contained in this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and nay
be abated as such.
   (C)   Any person who violates §
92.002(A) of this chapter or who violates any condition upon which he or she is
granted a license may be fined not more than $299 or six months in the County
Jail or both. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 1971-2, passed 9-13-1971)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Construction
   
93.001   Jurisdiction
   
93.002   Responsibility for policy
   
93.003   Applicability
   
93.004   Permits
   
93.005   Abatement
   
93.006   Violation after notice
   
93.007   Appeals
 
   
93.999   Penalty
CONSTRUCTION
§ 93.001 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter is adopted consistent with the authority and responsibility
of counties to abate the public nuisance of wildfire on unincorporated,
privately or county owned, forest, range, watershed and wildland urban
interface pursuant to UCA §§ 11-7, 65A-8, 53-7 and 17-53-223.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-1-2022)
§ 93.002 RESPONSIBILITY FOR POLICY.
   (A)   The County Fire Chief shall prepare, maintain and update as necessary
a fire policy which shall be the governing document, enforced by this
subchapter, for approved construction or development in unincorporated areas of
the county.
   (B)   Due to seasonal and yearly changes of fire risk in the county,
discretion is granted to the County Fire Chief, consistent with the state’s
Fire Code and rules promulgated under that code, to modify the fire policy to
reflect current fire conditions in the county. Fire conditions necessitating
modification may include, but are not limited to, drought, precipitation,
unique or changed geologic conditions such as landslides or bum scars, wind
patterns and intensity, policy changes on public lands, requirements of the
State Fire Marshall, updates to the state’s Wildfire Risk Assessment,
remoteness of certain areas, availability of volunteer fire firefighters and
any other conditions that in the opinion of the Fire Chief requires a
modification of the County Fire Policy.
   (C)   The title of the policy to be enforced by this subchapter is “San Juan
County Fire Policy for Approved Development/Construction” and the most updated
version of the policy will be maintained on the county website. The County Fire
Chief will deposit a copy of the updated policy with the County Clerk/Auditor’s
Office, and publish a notice that the County Fire Policy has been updated in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county. Any modification to the County
Fire Policy by the County Fire Chief becomes effective 15 days following
publication.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-1-2022)
§ 93.003 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The County Fire Policy, enforced by this subchapter, is applicable to
all private and county owned land in the unincorporated areas of the county as
required by state code.
   (B)   All land under the sole jurisdiction of state, federal or tribal
government is not subject to this subchapter. Land owned by any such entity,
but that is not under its sole jurisdiction is subject to this subchapter.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-1-2022)
§ 93.004 PERMITS.
   (A)   No building permit for any structure shall be issued in the
unincorporated areas of the county if the building plan application does not
comply with the County Fire Policy.
   (B)   Any building permit previously issued that fails to be in compliance
with the County Fire Policy after approval is void and no certificate of
occupancy will issue.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-1-2022) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.005 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If, on any property subject to this subchapter, the County Fire Chief
determines the owner to be out of compliance with the County Fire Policy,
notice of the violation will be provided to the property owner.
      (1)   Notice shall be affixed to a structure, fence or other conspicuous
location on the property or at the entrance to the property.
      (2)   A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the property owner’s
address on record with the county certified mail.
   (B)   The notice will contain a description of the violation observed on the
property, and contact information for the County Fire Chief to discuss
abatement.
   (C)   Within 30 days of the notice being mailed and posted, the property
owner shall bring the property into compliance with the County Fire Policy.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-1-2022)
§ 93.006 VIOLATION AFTER NOTICE.
   (A)   If 30 days after the notice was mailed to the property owner the
violation persists, the County Fire Chief may notify the Sheriff’s Office of
the violation.
   (B)   The Sheriff’s Office shall cite the property owner with a violation of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-1-2022) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.007 APPEALS.
   A denial or revocation of a permit a citation, or administrative process
decision issued in accordance with this chapter may be appealed to the
Administrative Law Judge in accordance with
Chapter 11 of this code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Failure to abate a violation of §§
93.001 through
93.006 after notice is an infraction with a fine of up to $750.
      (2)   A new citation may be issued every 30 days the violation remains
unabated by the property owner. Each citation issued after the initial citation
is a Class C misdemeanor.
      (3)   Following a conviction of a Class C misdemeanor under §§
93.001 through
93.006, the county may request the Court authorize the county enter onto the
property, abate the nuisance and order the property owner pay restitution for
the cost of the abatement.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-1-2022)
CHAPTER 94: SOUND POLLUTION
Section
   
94.001   General prohibition of noise
   
94.002   Definitions
   
94.003   General noise disturbance prohibited
   
94.004   Specific noise prohibitions
   
94.005   Noise levels
   
94.006   Motor vehicles
   
94.007   Exemptions; exceptions
   
94.008   Enforcement
§ 94.001 GENERAL PROHIBITION OF NOISE.
   (A)   General prohibition of noise. It is unlawful for any person to
produce, continue, or cause to be produced or continued, any excessive or
unusual noise during any hours or loud noise during restricted hours within the
unincorporated areas of the county that violates this chapter.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Sheriff, County Attorney, Commission
Administrator, and Planning and Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for
the administration of these rules and regulations and any other powers vested
in them by law and shall make inspections of any premises and issue orders as
necessary to effect the purposes of these regulations, and do any and all acts
permitted by law that are necessary for the successful enforcement of these
regulations.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 94.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATV. An all-terrain type I vehicle, all-terrain type II vehicle, or all-
terrain type III vehicle, that is modified to meet the requirements of UCA §
41-6a-1509 to operate on highways in the state in accordance with UCA § 41-6a-
1509.
   COMMERCIAL ZONES. Neighborhood Commercial, General Business, Highway
Commercial, Resort Commercial and Resort Special and associated permissible
overlays established by the San Juan County Land Use Code. COMMERCIAL ZONES
shall not include the Heavy or Light Industrial Zones.
   COUNTY. San Juan County or its designee, and all such references to a county
employee or elected officer shall include their designee.
   dBA. The sound pressure level using the “A” frequency weighting and the fast
response setting on a sound level meter, unless otherwise noted or required by
testing standards established by the county.
   DEVICE. Any mechanism that is intended to produce, or that actually produces
noise when operated or handled.
   DOMESTIC POWER TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT. Any device powered mechanically, by
electricity, by gasoline, by diesel fuel or by any other fuel, which is
intended to be used, or is actually used for residential construction, repair,
and maintenance.
   EMERGENCY. A situation or occurrence which may present an imminent threat to
the health, safety or welfare of any person, place or property.
   EXCESSIVE OR UNUSUAL NOISE. Any sound or noise that exceeds the maximum
sound pressure levels, dBA, during all hours, set forth in § 94.005 when
measured at the distances provided therein as measured on a sound level meter.
   LOUD NOISE. Any sound or noise that annoys or disturbs a reasonable person
(s) with normal sensitivities or that injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, hearing, peace or safety of another person(s), including any sound or
noise that exceeds the maximum sound pressure levels, dBA, during restricted
hours set forth in §
94.005 when measured at the distances provided therein as measured on a sound
level meter.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A self-propelled vehicle intended primarily for use and
operation on the highways, as defined in UCA § 41-1a-102, including ATVs and
motorcycles. MOTOR VEHICLE and VEHICLE may be used interchangeably herein.
   MOTORCYCLE. A motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a saddle for the
use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in
contact with the ground, or an autocycle, including an off-road motorcycle, as
defined in UCA § 41-1a-102(42).
   MUFFLER. An apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates
designed to transmit gases while reducing sound, or as otherwise defined by
state law.
   NOISE. Any sound that is harmful to the health, well-being, or quality of
life of humans or animals.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound in an environment which is:
      (1)   Harmful to the health, well-being, or quality of life of humans or
animals;
      (2)   Unreasonably annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities; or
      (3)   Endangers or injures personal or real property.
      (4)   NOISE DISTURBANCE constitutes noise pollution.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Any motorcycle that is not an on-highway motorcycle.
   OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE. Every all-terrain type I vehicle, all-terrain type II
vehicle, all-terrain type III vehicle, or motorcycle as defined in UCA § 41-22-
2, including street-legal all-terrain vehicles as defined in and regulated by
UCA § 41-6a-1509.
   ON-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Any motorcycle that: (a) is capable of achieving a
maximum speed of at least 25 mph over a level paved surface and is equipped
with features customarily associated with practical street or highway use, such
features including but not limited to any of the following: stoplight, horn,
rear view mirror, turn signals; or (b) has an engine displacement less than 50
cubic centimeters; produces no more than two brake horsepower; and cannot
exceed 30 mph over a level paved surface.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her
unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source under
investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification or
reproduction device, the enforcement officer need not determine the title of a
song, specific words, or the artist performing the song. The detection of the
rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to constitute a PLAINLY
AUDIBLE sound.
   PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line at the ground surface, and its vertical
extension that separates the real property owned by one person from that
property owned by another person.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any property used for living or dwelling by
individuals.
   RESIDENTIAL ZONES. The Small Lot Residential, Large Lot Residential, Rural
Residential and Multi-Family Residential Zones and associated permissible
overlays established by the San Juan County Land Use Code. As used herein,
Residential Zone does not include the Range and Grazing Zone.
   RESTRICTED HOURS. From 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. (and 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. on
Sunday), except during the summer months, defined as May through September,
when the RESTRICTED HOURS are from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   SOUND. A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical
quantity with interval forces that cause compression or rarefaction of the
medium, and that propagates at finite speed to distant points.
   SOUND LEVEL METER or SLM. A sound level meter meeting the ANSI S1.4 Type 1
or Type 2 standard for sound level meters, or the IEC 61672 Class 1 or Class 2
standard for SOUND LEVEL METERS.
   VEHICLE. All motor vehicles and off-highway vehicles as defined by Utah
Code, Title 41, including street-legal all-terrain vehicles as defined in and
regulated by UCA § 41-6a-1509. VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE may be used
interchangeably herein.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 94.003 GENERAL NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise
disturbance.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 94.004 SPECIFIC NOISE PROHIBITIONS.
   Regardless of the maximum sound pressure level, the following noise is
expressly prohibited outdoors during the restricted hours, unless permitted by
the county.
   (A)   Radios, receivers, televisions, stereos, speakers, musical instruments
and similar devices for the production or reproduction of sound if plainly
audible 100 feet from the emitting property boundary or 50 feet from the source
of the sound if on public property;
   (B)   Public loudspeakers or sound amplifying equipment in a fixed or
moveable position or mounted upon any sound vehicle on any public or private
property for the purposes of commercial advertising, giving instructions,
directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or transmission of music to any persons
or assemblages of persons;
   (C)   Animals that make frequent or habitual noise, which prohibition shall
apply to all private and public facilities, including any animal facilities
that hold or treat animals;
   (D)   Loading operations within 500 feet of residential property, except as
necessary for the collection of garbage, waste, refuse or recyclables by an
operator approved by the county;
   (E)   Domestic power tools and equipment;
   (F)   Fireworks, explosives, guns or other explosive devices;
   (G)   Powered model mechanical devices powered by internal combustion
engines, whether tethered or remote-controlled, or a model rocket vehicle,
drone or other similar noise-producing devices; and
   (H)   Bells and alarms including but not limited to, bells, chimes, or
clocks in schools, houses of religious worship or governmental buildings for
longer than five minutes in any hour except in the event of emergency or
natural disaster.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 94.005 NOISE LEVELS.
   Except as expressly provided herein, no person shall make noise which
creates excessive or unusual noise during any hours or loud noise during the
restricted hours, as set forth in Tables 1, 2 and 3 below.
 
Table 1
Motor Vehicles (Stationary/Equipment Test) Maximum Sound Pressure
Levels, dBA Emitted by Source
Measured at a distance of 20 inches from exhaust outlet at an angle of 45 degrees
                                                                                           Maximum
                                                                                Stationary sound
                                                                                test       pressure
Motor vehicle type                                                              (equipment levels
                                                                                test)      during
                                                                                           all
                                                                                           hours
ATVs                                                                            SAE J1287  92 dBA
All other motor vehicles with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of SAE J1492  92 dBA
less than 9,000 pounds
                                                                                           See §
Motorcycles                                                                     N/A        94.006
                                                                                           (C)
 
 
Table 2
Motor Vehicles (Moving/Operational Test) Maximum Sound Pressure Levels,
dBA Emitted by Source
Measured at a distance of 25 feet from centerline of lane of travel on county B roads
                                                                                     Maximum
                                                                            Maximum  sound
                                                                            sound    pressure
Motor vehicle type                                                          pressure level,
                                                                            level,   dBA,
                                                                            dBA      during
                                                                                     restricted
                                                                                     hours
Motorcycles and motor vehicles with a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight 80 dBA   78 dBA
rating of less than 9,000 pounds
Measured at a distance of 50 feet from centerline of lane of travel on county B roads
                                                                                     Maximum
                                                                            Maximum  sound
                                                                            sound    pressure
Motor vehicle type                                                          pressure level,
                                                                            level,   dBA,
                                                                            dBA      during
                                                                                     restricted
                                                                                     hours
Motorcycles and motor vehicles with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight   74 dBA   72 dBA
rating of less than 9,000 pounds
 
 
Table 3 Land Uses
Maximum Sound Pressure Levels, dBA Emitted by Source Measured at Nearest
Property Boundary
                                                                            Maximum
                                                                   Maximum  sound
                                                                   sound    pressure
                                                                  pressure level,
                                                                   level,   dBA,
                                                                   dBA      during
                                                                            restricted
                                                                            hours
All noise impacting residential property, unless prohibited in §  60 dBA   55 dBA
94.004
All noise impacting residential and nonresidential property,
unless prohibited in §                                            65 dBA   60 dBA
94.004
 
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 94.006 MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Motor vehicle regulations. A person shall not:
      (1)   Equip, maintain, or operate a vehicle that creates or causes
excessive or unusual noise;
      (2)   Operate any vehicle, except an electric vehicle without a spark
arrestor device and a muffler or other effective noise suppressing system in
good working order and in constant operation;
      (3)   Use a muffler cut-out, bypass, or similar device on a vehicle; or
      (4)   Use a compression brake system(s) except as necessary for an
emergency stop.
   (B)   Certain noises prohibited on public rights-of-way during all hours.
The following noise is declared to be excessive or unusual noise and expressly
prohibited during all hours on county B roads and related public rights-of-ways
in the unincorporated county.
      (1)   Horns and signaling devices on any vehicle, except as a danger
warning signal as provided by the Utah Vehicle Code;
      (2)   Racing events unless such activity occurs during a permitted
special event in the county;
      (3)   Revving, also known as rapid throttle advance, of an engine; and
      (4)   Any noise-creating device, including a vehicle, operated for the
purpose of drawing attention to the source of the noise.
   (C)   Motorcycles.
      (1)   No person shall operate an on-highway motorcycle manufactured after
December 31, 1985 not equipped with exhaust muffler bearing the federal EPA
required labeling applicable to the motorcycle’s model year, stating that the
exhaust system meets the 80 dBA standard at 50 feet, as set out in the Code of
Federal Regulations Title 40, Volume 24, Part 205, Subpart D and Subpart E.
      (2)   No person shall operate an off-highway motorcycle manufactured
after December 31, 1985 not equipped with exhaust muffler bearing the federal
EPA required labeling applicable to the motorcycle’s model year, stating that
the exhaust system meets the 82 dBA standard at 50 feet, as set out in the Code
of Federal Regulations Title 40, Volume 24, Part 205, Subpart D and Subpart E.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 94.007 EXEMPTIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions. The following noise shall be exempt from §
94.005.
      (1)   Safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief
valves;
      (2)   That resulting from any emergency or natural disaster, including
noise created by authorized private and public emergency and private or public
utilities when restoring service;
      (3)   Activities of a temporary nature during periods permitted by
ordinance, policy, or permit by the County Council, Planning and Zoning
Administrator, or Chair of the Special Events Committee or their official
designees, including sporting and recreational activities;
      (4)   Agricultural and gardening operations where i) all reasonable
efforts have been made to mitigate impact on surrounding properties; ii) any
equipment is used according to the manufacturer's specifications and is in good
working order; and iii) such operations do not occur during the restricted
hours;
      (5)   Construction, fabrication, and property maintenance activities
where i) all reasonable efforts have been made to mitigate impact on
surrounding properties; ii) all equipment is used according to the
manufacturer’s specifications and is in good working order; iii) such activity
does not occur during the restricted hours; and iv) such activity is not of
unusual duration or occurrence;
      (6)   The unamplified human voice, except as limited by UCA § 76-9-102;
and
      (7)   Snow removal.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   On or before July 31, 2021, the owner of any residential,
commercial or industrial source of sound may apply to the Planning and Zoning
Administrator (or designee) for an exception in order to provide time to comply
with the maximum sound pressure levels set forth in Table 3 of §
94.005 above. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall have the authority,
consistent with this section, to grant an exception, not to exceed 365 days
from the date of such application unless extended by the Planning and Zoning
Administrator for good cause.
      (2)   Any person seeking an exception in time to comply shall file an
application with the Planning and Zoning Administrator. The application shall
contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or
activity for which the exception is sought into compliance with this chapter
prior to the date requested in the application would constitute an unreasonable
hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. The applicant
shall mail notice of the application for an exception in time to all neighbors
within 100 feet of the source of the sound and shall file an affidavit of
mailing with the Planning and Zoning Administrator. Any individual who claims
to be adversely affected by allowance of the exception in time to comply may
file a statement with the Planning and Zoning Administrator containing any
information to support their claim. If the Planning and Zoning Administrator
finds that a sufficient controversy exists regarding an application, a public
hearing may be held.
      (3)   In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the
Planning and Zoning Administrator shall balance the hardship to the applicant,
the community, and other persons of not granting the exception in time to
comply, against the adverse impact on health, safety, and welfare of persons
affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse
impacts of granting the exception. Applicants for exceptions in time to comply
and persons contesting exceptions may be required to submit any information the
Planning and Zoning Administrator may reasonably require. In granting or
denying an application, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall place on
public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the
exception in time to comply including a statement that the need for the
extension or modification clearly outweighs any adverse impacts of granting the
extension or modification.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Administrator may grant or deny the
application. If the application is granted, the Planning and Zoning
Administrator may impose conditions, including a schedule for achieving
compliance. Noncompliance with any condition of the exception shall terminate
the exception and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this
chapter for which the exception was granted.
      (5)   Appeals of an adverse decision of the Planning and Zoning
Administrator shall be made to the Planning and Zoning. Review by the Planning
and Zoning shall be limited to whether the decision is supported by substantial
evidence.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 94.008 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation. Any person who is found guilty of violating this chapter,
either by failing to do those acts required herein or by doing a prohibited
act, is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor punishable by a maximum sentence of up
to six months in jail and a maximum fine of $1,000. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation unless
limited by state law.
   (B)   Nuisance. As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any
device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of
normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of
residents in the area shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance
and may be subject to abatement as provided by law.
   (C)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Any peace officer is authorized to enforce the provisions of this
section; provided that the County Commission may by administrative order
authorize other officers or employees of the county to enforce all or part of
the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The County Attorney may initiate legal action, civil or criminal,
to abate any condition that exists in violation of this chapter. In addition to
other penalties imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any person(s)
found guilty of violating this chapter shall be liable for all expenses
incurred by the county in removing or abating the loud or excessive noise.
   (D)   Severability. In case any provision of this chapter shall be declared
invalid, illegal or unenforceable, the validity, legality, and enforceability
of the remaining provisions shall not in any way be affected or impaired
thereby and such provision shall be ineffective only to the extent of such
invalidity, illegality or unenforceability.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 12-5-2023)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING
Section
   
110.001   Authority
   
110.002   License required; approval
   
110.003   Application
   
110.004   Term
   
110.005   Categories and fees
   
110.006   Fees for unlisted categories
   
110.007   Denials of license
   
110.008   Renewals
   
110.009   Double assessments
   
110.010   Examinations and inspections
 
   
110.999   Penalty
§ 110.001 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Licensing and tracking will be supervised within the county’s Economic
Development Office.
   (B)   The Economic Development Office shall have the authority to
investigate and may work with the County Administrator to call upon other
departments of the county for the purpose of determining whether or not any
applicant for a business license has, in fact, qualified for the issuance
thereof.
(Ord. 2020-10-A, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 110.002 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPROVAL.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or any
employee thereof, to commence, engage in, carry on or operate any business in
the unincorporated county without first applying for and obtaining a license
from the county to do so.
      (2)   Subject to exceptions listed below, every person, partnership or
corporation engaged in, carrying on or operating any business, trade or
occupation, including any internet business, in the county shall secure, from
the Economic Development Office, a license for such business or profession.
   (B)   Every such license shall specify by name the person, firm or
corporation to whom it shall be issued and shall designate the particular place
at which the business shall be carried on; provided that, when a license is
issued to a firm or co-partnership, such license in addition to the firm or co-
partnership name, shall specify by name the members of such firm or
partnership.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any licensee to sell, transfer or trade any
business license issued under this chapter, and shall not allow any person,
firm or corporation other than the one therein named or mentioned to do
business as authorized by the business license.
   (D)   All business license applications must be approved for proper zoning
by the county’s Building Inspector or Zoning Administrator.
   (E)   No license fee or any part thereof shall be refunded for any reason
whatsoever once the license has been granted or issued by the county.
   (F)   No license or fee shall be required under the terms of this chapter
for the conducting of home-based businesses, businesses that already have a
current and valid business license issued by a city or municipality within the
county, lectures, entertainment, concerts, fairs, exhibitions, bazaars,
luncheons, dinners or dances conducted, given or made by the residents of the
county residing therein, conducted or given wholly for benevolent or charitable
purposes.
   (G)   Every certificate of license shall be posted by the licensee in a
conspicuous place upon the walls of the building, room or office of the store,
or place in which such licensed business, trade or profession is carried on so
that the same may be easily seen. No certificate of license that is not in
force shall be permitted to remain posted after the term of such certificate
has expired.
   (H)   Economic Development staff shall, as needed, make investigation to
discover status of all businesses or persons who have been issued a license.
   (I)   Seasonal businesses shall pay a full license fee if the business is
operated during the entire season.
   (J)   No business license is required for the sale of agricultural products
which are produced in the county.
(Ord. 2020-10-A, passed 12-15-2020) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.003 APPLICATION.
   (A)   All applications for licenses shall be made in writing and submitted
to the Economic Development Office upon a prepared form which may be obtained
from the Economic Development Office. The amount of such licenses as herein
after provided shall be paid in advance to the Economic Development Office.
   (B)   Business applications shall show the following information, if
applicable, and shall be submitted to the Economic Development Office:
      (1)   The name, physical and mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of
the person(s) and partners) and/or legal agent(s) desiring the license;
      (2)   Other names the business has been or may be known by;
      (3)   The nature of the business to be licensed;
      (4)   The place where business is to be carried on;
      (5)   Applicable sales tax license numbers acquired from the state’s
Sales Tax Commission: sales tax; restaurant tax; and/or transient room tax;
      (6)   Prior 12 months’ state sales tax filing confirmation for applicable
sales tax license numbers: TC-62S; TC-62F; and/or TC-62R;
      (7)   Proof of one year’s remittance of transient room taxes paid to the
state’s Tax Commission; and
      (8)   Any other information required by the Economic Development Office
that may be necessary for the purpose of fixing the amount of the license fee.
   (C)   The Economic Development Office shall, utilizing predetermined fee
schedules set and approved by the Board of County Commissioners, determine
license categories and fees.
   (D)   Each time the ownership of a business changes, a new application for a
license shall be submitted. This shall be done prior to the business opening or
operating under the new owner.
(Ord. 2020-10-A, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 110.004 TERM.
   (A)   No license, unless otherwise provided for, shall be issued for a
shorter period than three months or for a longer period than one year. All
annual licenses shall commence February 1 and shall be effective through the
following January 31. New business licenses issued between February 1 and
January 31 shall pay a pro-rated fee based on a quarterly assessment.
   (B)   Economic Development Office staff shall, on December 30 of every year,
or the next business day immediately following the thirtieth day, mail renewal
notices to all businesses or persons holding an active business license. The
renewal notice shall state the renewal fee amount, the date by which the fee
must be remitted to the Economic Development Office and information regarding
penalties for non-renewal. The renewal notice shall be accompanied by a request
for updated information regarding all particulars of the business or person
holding the license. Updated information must be provided prior to renewal of
the license.
   (C)   The Economic Development Office shall not issue a business license
until all penalties associated with business licensing and legally assessed
against the applicant have been paid in full.
   (D)   Any business commencing operation without a license shall be assessed
the fee as set forth and is subject to all criminal and civil penalties as set
forth herein.
(Ord. 2020-10-A, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 110.005 LICENSE CATEGORIES AND FEES.
   (A)   Fees charged for business licenses and classification of various
classes of businesses shall be set in accordance with the following fee
schedule: a fee of $50 for a standard business license and $15 for a home-based
business license. Home-based business licenses are not required, however, if a
business would like to obtain a license there is a fee in place to cover
administrative costs. Any changes in classification or fee as applicable to a
currently licensed business shall not be in force until the current license
expires.
   (B)   Every person, firm or corporation before engaging in any business, or
profession hereinafter listed in this section shall obtain a license therefore
and make payment to the County Clerk/Auditor in advance as follows:
      (1)   Large scale wholesale and retail sales. Any person, firm or
corporation dealing directly or indirectly in any manner in motor vehicles,
petroleum, mining machinery and equipment and all other types of machinery and
equipment, steel distribution or supply, appliances of any kind, hardware,
chemicals, milk, food, permanent fruit and vegetables sales, restaurants, fast
food sales, coffee houses, bakery products, groceries, meat, fish, poultry, dry
goods, clothing, sporting goods, notions, drugs, jewelry, soft drinks,
nurseries, flowers, furniture and real estate or any other goods, wares or
merchandise of any kind or description, and any other type of heavy industrial
or commercial sales of any type or description and not otherwise specifically
licensed by this chapter for each place of business operated;
      (2)   Small scale wholesale and retail sales. Any person, firm or
corporation dealing directly or indirectly in any manner in appliances of any
kind, hardware, chemicals, milk, food, permanent fruit and vegetables sales,
restaurants, fast food sales, coffee houses, bakery products, groceries, meat,
fish, poultry, dry goods, clothing, sporting goods, notions, drugs, jewelry,
soft drinks, nurseries, flowers, furniture and real estate or any other goods,
wares or merchandise of any kind or description and not otherwise specifically
licensed by this chapter, for each place of business operated;
      (3)   Large scale industrial business. All businesses dealing with the
manufacturing, processing, fabrication of goods, electrical generating plants,
coal loading and washing and storage facilities, refineries and other similar
industries;
      (4)   Small scale industrial business. All rendering and packing plants,
wrecking and salvage, and other smaller scale industrial businesses;
      (5)   Professional businesses. All attorneys, auctioneers, insurance
brokers, physicians, dentists, veterinarians, accountants, engineers,
surveyors, morticians and all other professions not herein stated;
      (6)   Hospitals and medical clinics. All hospitals and medical clinics
offering medical services;
      (7)   Recreational businesses. All billiard halls, bowling alleys, dance
halls and studios, resorts, skating rinks, swimming pools, theaters, amusement
centers, recreation centers, spas, hunting lodges, fishing camps and all other
recreational businesses not herein stated;
      (8)   Rental storage business. All rental storage businesses including
warehouses, storage buildings and cold storage units. The fee shall include a
base fee, plus an assessment for each separate rental unit;
      (9)   Motels, hotels, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle courts.
All motels, hotels, mobile home parks and recreational vehicle courts. The fee
shall include a base fee plus an assessment for each separate rental unit;
      (10)   Apartment and board houses. All apartment houses (three apartments
or more) and office buildings which rent or lease space;
      (11)   Equipment rental. All equipment rental businesses;
      (12)   Financial businesses. All banks, savings and loan, credit unions
and the like and all other financial businesses not herein stated;
      (13)   Service related businesses and trades. All repair and service
facilities, dry cleaning, delivery, dog kennels, printing, junk collecting,
laundry supply, barbers, beauty parlors, taxis, welding, upholstery,
vulcanizing, garbage collection and all other services;
      (14)   Contractors. All general contractors and contractors for plumbing,
heating and air conditioning, electrical, carpentry, painting, cement, road
surfacing, grading and all other contractors not herein stated;
      (15)   Trucking businesses. All trucking businesses related to oil
hauling, motor freight and other trucking not herein listed. The fee shall
include a base fee, plus an assessment for each separate transport vehicle;
      (16)   Mining and oil and gas. All mining, oil and gas exploration,
drilling projects and other mines not herein stated;
      (17)   Small scale mining operations. Small scale sand and gravel
operations;
      (18)   Home businesses. All businesses conducted solely within the
confines of the home of the operator. Home businesses shall consist of craft
assembly, seamstress and alterations, book-keeping, word processing,
proofreading, scrap booking, genealogical research, pet grooming, custom cake
decoration, dance instruction, gift baskets, medical transcription and all
other similar services not herein stated; and
      (19)   Itinerant merchant. An itinerant merchant shall be identified as
any person, whether a resident of the county or not, who engages in a temporary
business activity located within the unincorporated limits of the county
selling and/or delivering goods, wares or services or who conducts meetings
open to the general public where franchises, distributorships, contracts or
business opportunities, goods, wares or services are offered to the public
during the course of, or any time within, six months after a lecture or public
meeting pertaining to such items. Each person obtaining a license shall first
show proof of landowner permission for the use of the site on which the
temporary use will be undertaken.
   (C)   Whenever more than one business, trade, profession, calling or
occupation is being carried on by one licensee under one roof, the licensee is
required to apply for a business license for each business, trade, profession,
calling or occupation. Multiple business activities will be defined and
delineated by the entity numbers issued by the state’s Department of Commerce.
   (D)   Any person whose only business activity in the county is the delivery
in the county of a service or merchandise sold or provided by him or her and
whose regular place of business is maintained by him or her outside of the
unincorporated county limits shall procure a business license based upon the
category corresponding to his or her principle business activity.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of an
itinerant merchant without first having procured a license from the county’s
Licensing Department. All itinerant merchant licenses shall expire 120 days
after the date of issuance thereof.
   (F)   No license fee shall be required by the county for any business that
already has a current and valid license issued by a city or municipality within
the county.
(Ord. 2020-10-A, passed 12-15-2020) Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.006 CATEGORIES NOT LISTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business not hereinbefore
listed without paying the license fee as assessed by the county. It shall be
the duty of the Economic Development Office by and with the approval of the
Board of County Commissioners to determine the applicable category in which a
business falls by comparing the nature of business to those listed and
determining which category is most appropriate. If the business is of a nature
that it cannot be compared to any category then the appropriate category and
fee shall be established by the Economic Development Office and the Board of
County Commissioners.
(Ord. 2020-10-A, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 110.007 DENIALS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   In the event the Economic Development Office shall deny any
application for a business license or shall revoke a business license, the
applicant or business owner may appeal the denial or revocation to the
Administrative Law Judge pursuant to
Chapter 11 of this code.
   (B)   The Economic Development Office may deny or revoke any license upon
finding that any person, firm or corporation or any employee of said firm or
corporation licensed under this chapter has been convicted of a felony, or that
false information has been given in the license application or that the
business is being operated in a manner detrimental to the public good, may
revoke that business license. The business license fee shall not be refunded.
(Ord. 2020-10-A, passed 12-15-2020; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 110.008 RENEWALS.
   Annual license renewals not paid by March 15 shall be subject to a penalty
of $100, plus the license fee. Any license renewal not made before April 15
shall be subject to an additional penalty of $250, plus the license fee and
previous penalty. Any license renewal not made after April 15 may be collected
by civil action in any court of the state having jurisdiction, or subject to
criminal action set forth below.
(Ord. 2020-10-A, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 110.009 DOUBLE ASSESSMENTS.
   Any person, firm or corporation who has commenced or carried on any
business, trade or occupation specified in this chapter prior to obtaining a
business license shall be assessed a double license fee, which double
assessment shall be paid before a license shall be issued.
(Ord. 2020-10-A, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 110.010 EXAMINATIONS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Economic Development Office shall work with the County
Administrator in an effort to call upon other departments of the county for the
purpose of examining all places of business or persons required to obtain or
maintain business licenses.
   (B)   The Economic Development Office shall monitor business activity within
the county by locating existing or new businesses or persons that have either
not applied for a new license or renewed an existing license. The Economic
Development Office shall then, in writing, notify said businesses or persons of
business license requirements and penalties. The Economic Development Office
shall make reasonable attempts to encourage compliance.
   (C)   At least once a year, the Economic Development Office shall report to
the County Attorney all businesses or persons that have failed to obtain or
renew business licenses. It shall be the duty of the County Attorney to cause
complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-10-A, passed 12-15-2020)
§ 110.999 PENALTY.
   Any person who operates a business in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000. Each month that person
shall violate or continue to violate this chapter after written notice of such
violation by county or its officers or agents, shall be considered to be
separate violation, and shall be punished as such. Any violation of this
chapter may be appealed subject to the same procedures indicated in §
110.007 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-10-A, passed 12-15-2020)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.001   Definitions
Licenses
   
111.015   License to sell beer at retail
   
111.016   Licenses classified
   
111.017   License fees
   
111.018   Unlawful to allow consumption without license
   
111.019   Consumption prohibited in unlicensed premises
   
111.020   License application
   
111.021   Referral to Sheriff
   
111.022   Referral to Health Department
   
111.023   Filing date for holders of old licenses
   
111.024   Transfer of license to new location
   
111.025   Issuance of new license upon business purchased
   
111.026   License expiration
   
111.027   License suspension and revocation
Beer and Alcohol Regulations
   
111.040   Unlawful to sell beer without license
   
111.041   Sales to intoxicated persons prohibited
   
111.042   Wholesaler and retailer not to have common interests
   
111.043   Sale to and presence of minors
   
111.044   Unlawful to permit intoxicated person on licensed premises
   
111.045   Sale or disposition of beer on specified days and between certain
hours unlawful
   
111.046   Periodic inspection of premises by Sheriff
   
111.047   Display of license
   
111.048   Storage prohibited on licensed premises
   
111.049   Alcoholic beverages restricted at County Fairgrounds
 
   
111.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes “beer” and “liquor”, as they are defined
herein.
   BEER. Any beverage containing not less than 0.5% of alcohol by weight and
obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of any
malted grain, or similar products, and which contains not more than 3.2% of
alcohol by weight and may or may not contain hops or other vegetable products
and includes ale, stout or porter.
   LICENSEE. Any persons holding any beer, liquor, private club or liquor
consumption license in connection with the operation of a place of business.
This term shall also include any agent or employee of the LICENSEE.
   LICENSED PREMISES. Any room, house, building, structure or place occupied by
any person licensed to sell beer or to allow the consumption of liquor on such
premises under this chapter; provided that in any multi-roomed establishment an
applicant for a liquor consumption license or for a Class “B”, Class “C”, Class
“D”, club or seasonal retail beer licenses shall designate a room or portion of
a building of such business for consumption of liquor or the sale of beer,
which portion so specifically designated in the application and in the license
issued pursuant thereto shall be the licensed premises. Multiple dining
facilities located in one building and owned or leased by one licensed
applicant shall be deemed to be only one LICENSED PREMISES.
   LIQUOR. Includes alcohol or any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented,
malt or other liquid or combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous,
vinous or fermented, and all other drinks or drinkable liquids, containing more
than 0.5% of alcohol by weight; and all mixtures, compounds or preparations,
whether liquid or not, which contain more than 0.5% of alcohol by weight, and
which are capable of human consumption; except that, the term LIQUOR shall not
include “beer”, as herein defined.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association,
corporation or any group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as
well as the singular number, unless the intent to give a more limited meaning
is disclosed by the context.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any room, house, building, structure or place used in
conducting any lawful business and shall be deemed to include cafés,
restaurants, public dining rooms, cafeterias, taverns, cabarets and any other
place where the general public is invited or admitted for business purposes,
and shall also be deemed to include private clubs, corporations and
associations operating under the charter or otherwise wherein only the members
and their guests are invited. Occupied hotel and motel rooms that are not open
to the public shall not be deemed to be PLACES OF BUSINESS, as herein defined.
   RETAILER. Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages to the consumer.
   SELL or TO SELL. To solicit, or to receive any order for, to keep or expose
for sale, to deliver for value, to peddle, to possess with intent to sell, to
traffic in for any consideration promised or obtained directly or indirectly or
under any pretext or by any means whatsoever to procure or allow to be procured
for any other person, and “sale” when so used shall include every act of
selling as above defined.
   WHOLESALER. Any person other than a brewer or retailer engaged in
importation for sale, or in the sale of beer in wholesale or jobbing
quantities.
   CABARET. Any room, house, building or structure or place occupied by any
person having a Class “B”, “C” or “D” beer license, or liquor consumption
license, wherein a dance floor is provided for patrons.
   RESTAURANT. A place of business where a variety of hot food is prepared and
cooked and complete meals are served to the general public in connection with
indoor dining accommodations and where a majority of the operators revenues are
generated from food sales.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
LICENSES
§ 111.015 LICENSE TO SELL BEER AT RETAIL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer at retail within the
unincorporated limits of the county without first procuring a license therefor,
as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each place of business.
   (C)   The license shall identify the specific premises covered thereby and
shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in the place at which it shall
refers or for which it shall be issued.
   (D)   All licensees shall comply with the provisions of the Liquor Control
Act of the state and the regulations of the Liquor Control Commission and this
chapter, and, every license shall recite that it is granted subject to
revocation as is provided in §
111.026.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
§ 111.016 LICENSES CLASSIFIED.
   (A)   Retail licenses generally.
      (1)   Retail beer licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall be classified into the following types which shall carry the privileges
and responsibilities hereinafter set forth.
         (a)   Class “A”;
         (b)   Class “B”;
         (c)   Class “C”;
         (d)   Class “D”;
         (e)   Seasonal; and
         (f)   Club.
      (2)   All licenses of each class shall be numbered numerically commencing
with one.
   (B)   Class “A” license. A Class “A” retail license shall entitle the
licensee to sell beer, on the premises described therein, in original
containers of a size not to exceed one quart capacity, for consumption off the
premises, in accordance with the Liquor Control Act of the state, and the
ordinances of the county.
   (C)   Class “B” license. A Class “B” license shall be required for all
premises where the primary or main business is that of selling beer for
consumption on the licensed premises. A Class “B” license shall entitle the
licensee to sell beer for consumption on or off the licensed premises in
original containers, of a size not to exceed one quart capacity, and shall
entitle the holder thereof to all the privileges granted to the holders of
Class “A” retail licenses in accordance with the Liquor Control Act of the
state. No person under the age of 21 years shall sell or serve beer under this
license.
   (D)   Class “C” license. A Class “C” retail license shall entitle the
licensee to sell draft beer for consumption on the licensed premises, and shall
entitle the holder thereof to all the privileges granted to the holders of
Class “A” and “B” retail licenses herein and in accordance with the Liquor
Control Act of the state. No person under the age of 21 years shall sell or
serve beer under this license.
   (E)   Class “D” license. A Class “D” License shall entitle the licensee to
sell beer in the original containers of a size not to exceed one-quart capacity
for consumption on the premises only. Only bona fide restaurants shall be
entitled to Class “D” licenses. No person under the age of 21 years shall sell
or serve beer under this license.
   (F)   Seasonal license. A seasonal license shall carry the privilege of a
Class “C” retail license and shall be for a period of less than one year to be
determined by the Board of County Commissioners. No person under the age of 21
years shall sell or serve beer under this license.
   (G)   Club license. A club license shall carry the privileges of a Class “C”
retail license; provided that, the sale of beer shall be to club members and
guests only and each license shall be issued io bona fide clubs which are
incorporated, bonded, regulated and operated in compliance with the provisions
of UCA Title 16, Ch. 6a, as amended.
   (H)   Cabarets. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a cabaret
without first obtaining a cabaret license. The annual license fee for a cabaret
shall be $200 in addition to any general business license fee required under
ordinances of the county and is in addition to the fees charged for a retail
license to sell beer in the unincorporated limits of the county.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
§ 111.017 LICENSE FEES.
   Applications for licenses under this chapter shall be accompanied by the
following fees, which are in addition to any general business license fees
required by any other ordinance of the county.
License Type Fee
License Type                  Fee
Class “A” retail beer lice$500 per annum
Class “B” retail beer lice$750 per annum
Class “C” retail beer lice$800 per annum
Class “D” retail beer lice$300 per annum
Club-beer licenses            $750 per annum
                              $200 per annum or any part thereof, which shall
Liquor consumption license    be deposited in the County Treasury, if the
                              license is granted, and returned to the applicant
                              if the license is denied
Seasonal retail beer license  $100 per month or part thereof
 
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
§ 111.018 UNLAWFUL TO ALLOW CONSUMPTION WITHOUT LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or lessee or any
agent, partner, associate or employee of such owner, operator, manager or
lessee of any place of business, to knowingly permit or allow customers, guests
or any other person to consume liquor at a place of business without first
obtaining a liquor consumption license under this chapter.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.019 CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED IN UNLICENSED PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume liquor in an unlicensed place
of business as provided herein.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.020 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   All applications for licenses, for renewal or reissuance of licenses
and for transfer of licenses authorized by this chapter shall be verified and
filed with the County Clerk/Auditor addressed to the Board of County
Commissioners and shall state the applicant’s name in full and indicate that he
or she has complied with the requirements and possesses the qualifications
specified in the state’s Liquor Control Act. If the applicant is a partnership,
association or corporation the names of all partners, officers and/or directors
must be stated. The application must be subscribed by the applicant who shall
under oath state that the facts therein contained are true.
   (B)   All applications shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Two letters of reference attesting to the personal characteristics
of the applicant or the operators and owners in the case of a partnership or
the operators and owners in the case of a partnership or corporation; and
      (2)   A corporate surety bond in the sum of $2,500, conditioned upon the
applicants faithful compliance with the laws of the state and all ordinances of
the county.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
§ 111.021 REFERRAL TO SHERIFF.
   (A)   All applications and attachments filed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be referred to the Sheriff for inspection and
report.
   (B)   The Sheriff shall within ten days after receiving such application
make report to the Board of County Commissioners of the general reputation and
character of the applicant, operators, agents and/or owners, together with
persons who habitually frequent such place; the nature and kind of business
conducted at such place by the applicant or by any other person or by the
applicant at any other place; and the proximity of such premises to any school
or church.
   (C)   The Sheriff shall also add to such report his or her recommendation as
to whether or not the application should be granted.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
§ 111.022 REFERRAL TO HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
   All applications filed in accordance with this chapter shall be referred to
the Health Department which shall inspect all premises to be licensed to assure
sanitary compliance with the laws of the state, the ordinances of the county
and the rules and regulations in the preparation, storage, distribution or sale
of beer and food and, if the premises fulfill all such sanitary requirements,
the Health Department shall issue a permit to the licensee, a copy of which
shall be attached to the application for license.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
§ 111.023 FILING DATE FOR HOLDERS OF OLD LICENSES.
   All applications for renewal licenses filed by the holders of existing
licenses shall be filed with the County Clerk/Auditor at least 30 days prior to
the expiration date of the then issued license. Any person who fails to file
such application within the time limit shall close his or her licensed premises
on the expiration date of the then issued license and shall keep the premises
closed for any and all business permitted by said licensees) until the date his
or her new license is issued by order of the Board of Commissioners of the
county.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
§ 111.024 TRANSFER OF LICENSE TO NEW LOCATION.
   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred to a new proper
location upon application to the Board of County Commissioners filed with the
County Clerk/Auditor and upon the payment of a $25 transfer fee which shall be
refunded if the application is denied.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
§ 111.025 ISSUANCE OF NEW LICENSE UPON BUSINESS PURCHASED.
   (A)   If any licensee sells his or her place of business, the purchaser
thereof may be granted a license to operate the same business, providing he or
she has complied with the requirements and possesses the qualifications
specified by the Board of County Commissioners. Any prospective purchasers of a
business licensed pursuant to this chapter may petition the Commission for a
determination of his or her fitness and eligibility to be granted a license as
herein provided; and, when such a determination is favorable to the petitioner,
he or she shall thereafter be granted such a license upon making application
therefor and submitting proper proof of his or her purchase of said business to
the Board of County Commissioners within 60 days after filing his or her
original petition; except that, no such license shall be issued to any
applicant whose eligibility therefor shall have been terminated by the
discovery of grounds for his or her disqualification subsequent to this
original petition.
   (B)   The current license fee to be paid by such purchaser shall be payable
in advance in the following amounts:
      (1)   All of the required annual license fee if such license is issued on
or before March 31 of the license year hereinabove set forth;
      (2)   Three-fourths of the required annual license fee if such license is
issued after March 31 and on or before June ;30;
      (3)   One-half of the required annual license fee if such license is
issued after June 30 and on or before September 30; and
      (4)   One-fourth of the required annual license fee if such license is
issued after September 30 and on or before December 31.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
§ 111.026 LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire
on December 31 of each year and shall be issued for one year, except seasonal
licenses, which shall be issued for a period of less than a year as may be
determined by the Board of County Commissioners. In the event the application
is made after January 1 of any year, the license fee accompanying same shall be
prorated as provided in §
111.025(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
§ 111.027 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Licenses may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Commissioners for
the violation on the licensed premises of any provision of this chapter, or of
any other applicable ordinance or law relating to alcoholic beverages, or if
the person to whom the license was issued no longer possesses the
qualifications required by this chapter and the statutes of the state. Any
license suspension or revocation by the Board of Commissioners may be appealed
to the Administrative Law Judge pursuant to
Chapter 11 of this code.
   (B)   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended and the
premises closed by the Sheriff without prior hearing. At the time of a
suspension, notice shall be given to the licensee of his or her right to appeal
the suspension to the Administrative Law Judge pursuant to
Chapter 11 of this code.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer at the licensed
premises during the period of suspension or after the revocation of his or her
beer license.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)  Penalty, see §
111.999
BEER AND ALCOHOL REGULATIONS
§ 111.040 UNLAWFUL TO SELL BEER WITHOUT LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer or to permit the
consumption of alcoholic beverages at any place of business unless such place
of business is licensed for such sale or consumption.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to violate the terms of his or
her license and it shall be unlawful for any person, unless he or she shall be
so licensed, to sell beer for consumption on or off the premises or to permit
any alcoholic beverage to be consumed on the premises.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.041 SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer to any intoxicated person
or to any person ,under the influence of an intoxicating beverage.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.042 WHOLESALER AND RETAILER NOT TO HAVE COMMON INTERESTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any dealer, brewer or wholesaler to either directly
or indirectly supply, give or pay for any furniture, furnishings or fixtures of
a retailer, and it shall be unlawful for any wholesaler, dealer or brewer to
advance funds, money or pay for any license of a retailer or to be financially
interested either directly or indirectly in the conduct or operation of the
business of any retailer.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.043 SALE TO AND PRESENCE OF MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic beverages to any person under
the age of 21 years.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and punishable, as herein provided, for any
person to sell an alcoholic beverage in any form to, or purchase such beverage
for, or give such beverage to a person under the age of 21 years.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to enter
or to be in or about any premises licensed as a Class “B” or “C” establishment,
for the sale of beer, or to drink beer or any alcoholic beverage in such
licensed premises.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee of Class “B” or “C”
establishments for the sale of beer, or any operator, agent or employee of such
licensee, to permit any person under the age of 21 years to remain in or about
such licensed premises.
      (2)   The licensee may require every patron to present a valid driver’s
license or other form of identification containing a picture of the patron, his
or her date of birth, weight and color of hair and eyes, before entering the
licensed premises. If the licensee questions the validity of any identification
presented, the licensee shall retain the identification at the door, available
for inspection by the Sheriff, and return the same to the patron when he or she
leaves the licensed premises.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to be in
or around any lounge or bar area in premises licensed with a “club” or
“seasonal” license for the sale of beer or in or around any lounge or bar area
in premises licensed with a liquor consumption license.
   (F)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee of a “club” or “seasonal”
license for the sale of beer or holder of a liquor consumption license, or any
operator, agent or employee of such licensee, to permit any person under the
age of 21 years to remain in or about the lounge or bar area on such licensed
premises.
      (2)   The licensee may require every patron of the lounge or bar area to
present a valid drivers license or other form of identification containing a
picture of the patron, his or her date of birth, height, weight and color of
hair and eyes, before permitting him or her to remain in or about the lounge or
bar area. If the licensee questions the validity of any identification
presented, the licensee shall retain the identification at the bar, available
for inspection by the Sheriff, and return the same to the patron when he or she
leaves the lounge or bar area.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
purchase, accept or have in his or her possession, any alcoholic beverage,
including beer or liquor; provided, however, that, this division (G) shall not
apply to the acceptance of alcoholic beverages by such person for medicinal
purposes supplied only by the parent or guardian of such person or to the
administering of such alcoholic beverage by a physician in accordance with the
law; provided further that, the provisions of this division (G) shall not apply
to persons under the age of 21 years who are bona fide employees in Class “A”
licensed premises while in discharge of their employment therein or
thereabouts.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.044 UNLAWFUL TO PERMIT INTOXICATED PERSON ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to sell beer or any of his or
her agents or employees to allow an intoxicated person to remain in or about
any licensed premises.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.045 SALE OR DISPOSITION OF BEER ON SPECIFIED DAYS AND BETWEEN CERTAIN
HOURS UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any licensee, operator or any employee thereof to sell,
dispose of, give away or deliver any beer or to permit the consumption of any
alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises on the first day of the week,
commonly known as Sunday, from 12:01 a.m. of said day, and between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any day; except that, during the calendar period of
May 1 through October 31 of any year, both dates inclusive, the hours of
unlawful operation shall be between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any
day; and, except further that, on any New Year’s Day the hours of unlawful
operation shall be between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of said day.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.046 PERIODIC INSPECTION OF PREMISES BY SHERIFF.
   The Sheriff shall be permitted to have access to all premises licensed or
applying for any license under this chapter and shall make periodic inspections
of said premises and report his or her findings to the Board of County
Commissioners.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983)
§ 111.047 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be displayed at all times
on the licensed premises in a place readily visible to the public.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.048 STORAGE PROHIBITED ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to store any “liquor” in or on places of
business licensed by this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any
operator or employee of a licensee while acting in said capacity, to hold,
store or possess “liquor” on premises licensed by this chapter.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.049 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES RESTRICTED AT COUNTY FAIRGROUNDS.
   (A)   No user of, or visitor to, the County Fairgrounds (“Fairgrounds”) may
bring or cause to be brought any alcoholic beverage, as defined by UCA §§ 32B-
101 et seq., onto the Fairgrounds, with the exception of lessees whose contract
authorizes sale or dispensing of such beverages. Such lessees shall be subject
to all state, county and local regulations as are applicable.
   (B)   (1)   It is the authority of the County Sheriff’s Department to
enforce the provisions of this section.
      (2)   Sworn law enforcement officers at all levels within the county
shall have authority to issue citations or complaints for violations of this
section.
(Ord. 2004-01, passed 6-28-2004) Penalty, see §
111.999
§ 111.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating this chapter or any provision contained herein is
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished, upon conviction thereof, by a
fine in the sum not to exceed $299 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a
term not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
111.049 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
forfeiture of not less than $50, nor more than $1,000, plus court costs.
(Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-22-1983; Ord. 2004-01, passed 6-28-2004)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.001   Night hunting
 
   
130.999   Penalty
§ 130.001 NIGHT HUNTING.
   No person shall do night hunting during the period of one-half hour after
sundown and one-half hour prior to sun-up of any calender day, except as
hereinafter provided.
   (A)   A land owner or any person to whom he or she has given written consent
may do night hunting on his or her privately-owned land any night without
having to obtain a night hunting permit from the Sheriff.
   (B)   No night hunting shall be done on private property on which a “Private
Property” sign is posted on each road entering into such private property;
except, the owner of such property or any person to whom he or she has given
written consent may do night hunting on said premises.
   (C)   A person may do night hunting during periods of June 1 to March 1 upon
obtaining from the Sheriff an annual night hunting permit, without fee.
   (D)   No night hunting shall be done by a person under 18 years of age
unless accompanied by a person 18 years of age or more and each of such
individuals shall have first obtained a night hunting permit from the Sheriff.
   (E)   Any firearm used in night hunting must use center-fire cartridges and
have an attached telescopic sight of at least four power and the person hunting
must have a spotlight of at least 50 candlepower.
(Ord. 1975-2, passed 8-11-1975; Ord. 1976-1, passed 2-2-1976) Penalty, see §
130.999
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating §
130.001 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor punishable by
a fine not exceeding $299 and a jail sentence not exceeding six months.
(Ord. 1975-2, passed 8-11-1975)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
153.   ZONING
      
154.   PLANNING COMMISSION
      
155.   ADDRESSING POLICY
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Code Adoption
   
150.001   Adoption of uniform codes
   
150.002   Code availability
   
150.003   Appeals
 
   
150.999   Penalty
CODE ADOPTION
§ 150.001 ADOPTION OF UNIFORM CODES.
   Those certain provisions establishing rules and regulations and control of
design, construction, quality of materials, use and regulated, location and
maintenance of buildings, structure, regulated by the International Conference
of Building Officials, and the International Association of Plumbing and
Mechanical Officials in those codes more particularly described in the 2000
International Codes for Residential, Plumbing, Mechanical, Fuel Gas and Fire;
International Building Code with reference to the 1997 Uniform Building Code
and the 1999 National Electric Code; all amendments and addendums made to these
codes as adopted by the International Conference of Building Officials.
Adoption of these codes as the building standards of the county and by this
reference made a part of this section to the same extent and effect as though
said code were copied herein in full.
(Ord. 2002-01, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 150.002 CODE AVAILABILITY.
   One copy of each said code is filed for use and examination by the public in
the office of the Building Inspector of the county.
(Ord. 2002-01, passed 11-18-2002)
§ 150.003 APPEALS.
   An administrative process decision or administrative enforcement action
issued in accordance with this chapter may be appealed to the Administrative
Law Judge in accordance with
Chapter 11 of this code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.999 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other sections of the uniform codes to the
contrary and in addition to each such code, the county shall adopt as a penalty
provisions the following.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, remove, move, improve, convert, demolish, equip, occupy,
use or maintain any building or structure in the county or cause the same to be
done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of §
150.001 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
§
150.001 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and
each said person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
that the violation of §
150.001 of this chapter is continued, is committed or permitted to be
continued.
(Ord. 2002-01, passed 11-18-2002)
CHAPTER 151: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
   
151.001   Participation in the National Flood Insurance Program
§ 151.001 PARTICIPATION IN THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM.
   The Board hereby:
   (A)   Assures the Federal Insurance Administration that it will enact as
necessary, and maintain in force for those areas having flood or mudslide
hazards, adequate land use and control measures with effective enforcement
provisions consistent with the criteria set forth in § 1910 of the National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations; and
   (B)   Vests the Emergency Service Office of the county with the
responsibility, authority and means to:
      (1)   Delineate or assist the Administrator, at his or her request, in
delineating the limits of the areas having special flood and/or mudslide
hazards on available local maps of sufficient scale to identify the location of
building sites;
      (2)   Provide such information as the Administrator may request
concerning present uses and occupancy of the floodplain and/or mudslide area;
      (3)   Cooperate with federal, state and local agencies and private firms
which undertake to study, survey, map and identify floodplain or mudslide
areas, and cooperate with neighboring communities with respect to management of
adjoining floodplain and/or mudslide, areas in order to prevent aggravation of
existing hazards; and
      (4)   Submit on the anniversary date of the community’s initial
eligibility an annual report to the Administrator on the progress made during
the past year within the community in the development and implementation of
floodplain and/or mudslide area management measures.
   (C)   (1)   Appoints the Emergency Service Office of the county to maintain
for public inspection and to furnish upon request a record of evaluations (in
relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures located in the special flood hazard areas.
      (2)   If the lowest floor is below grade on one or more sides, the
elevation of the floor immediately above must also be recorded.
   (D)   Agrees to take such other official action as may be reasonably
necessary to carry out the objectives of the program.
(Ord. 1974-4, passed 12-23-1974)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Purpose
   
152.003   Jurisdiction
   
152.004   Prohibited acts
   
152.005   Amendments
   
152.006   Severability
   
152.007   Effective date
   
152.008   Definitions
   
152.009   Appeals
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.020   Amendments and vacations
   
152.021   Exemptions, waivers, variances and appeals
Platting Requirements
   
152.035   General procedures
   
152.036   Preliminary plat
   
152.037   Final plat
   
152.038   Minor subdivisions; issuance of building permits
   
152.039   Subdivision improvement agreements
Design Standards
   
152.050   Compliance
   
152.051   Lots
   
152.052   Public streets
   
152.053   Private roads
   
152.054   Sidewalks and pedestrian walkways
   
152.055   Sanitary sewage
   
152.056   Water supply
   
152.057   Storm drainage
   
152.058   Perimeter fencing
   
152.059   Fire protection
   
152.060   Utilities
   
152.061   Easements and rights-of-way
   
152.062   Impact fees
   
152.063   Resubdivisions
   
152.064   Administrative resubdivisions
   
152.065   Zoning regulations
 
   
152.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   (A)   This is an ordinance establishing the rules and standards for the
regulation of the subdivision of land in the unincorporated area of San Juan
County, Utah and setting of the procedures to be followed by the Board of
County Commissioners, county staff, the County Planning Commission and other
elected officials in the county.
   (B)   This chapter shall be known and referred to as the “Subdivision
Ordinance of San Juan County, Utah”, was adopted 9-13-1993 and amended July
1995, October 2002, August 2005 and July 2015.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Provide for the health, safety and welfare, and promote the
prosperity, improve the morals, peace and good order, comfort, convenience and
aesthetics of the county and its present and future inhabitants and businesses,
to protect the tax base, to secure economy in governmental expenditures, to
foster the state’s agricultural and other industries, to protect both urban and
non-urban development, to protect and ensure access to sunlight for solar
energy devices, to protect and ensure access to other alternative energy
sources, to provide fundamental fairness in land use regulation and to protect
the rights of bona fide property owners and the values of their property;
   (B)   Promote the efficient and orderly growth of the county;
   (C)   Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision; and
   (D)   Provide for adequate, safe and efficient public utilities and
improvements, and to provide for other general community facilities and land
for public places.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.003 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   As provided by state law, this chapter shall apply to all land in the
unincorporated portion of the county, except for lands that are owned or under
the legal jurisdiction of the United States, State of Utah or the Navajo or Ute
Nations.
   (B)   The county is enabled by state law to control all of the land within
the unincorporated portion of the county by virtue of the County Land Use
Development Act (LUDMA), UCA §§ 17-27a-101 et seq., excepting those lands
exempted in division (A) above.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.004 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   An owner of any land located in a subdivision who transfers or sells
any land in a subdivision before a plat of the subdivision has been approved
and recorded violates this chapter for each lot or parcel transferred or sold.
   (B)   The description by metes and bounds in an instrument of transfer or
other documents used in the process of selling or transferring does not exempt
the transaction from being a violation of division (A) above or from the
penalties or remedies provided in this chapter.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the recording of
an instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring real property that violates this section:
      (1)   Does not affect the validity of the instrument or other document;
and
      (2)   Does not affect whether the property that is the subject of the
instrument or other document complies with applicable county ordinances on land
use and development.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.005 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Amendments to this chapter may be requested by any person or agent of
any person by filing a written request with the Subdivision Administrator of
the county. The written request for an amendment to this chapter shall include
a “statement of request to amend” and payment of such fees that may be
established.
   (B)   Amendments to this chapter may also be initiated by the County
Planning Commission or the Board of County Commissioners by resolution.
   (C)   No amendments to this chapter shall be considered or adopted by the
Board of County Commissioners until the amendment(s) have been reviewed by the
Planning Commission for recommendation and a public hearing has been held. The
Board of County Commissioners shall convene a public hearing for the purpose of
amending this chapter only after:
      (1)   Copies of the “request to amend the Subdivision Ordinance” or a
copy of the Board of County Commissioner’s resolution initiating the amendment
process have been made available to the public by placing the copies in the
office of the County Clerk/Auditor for a period of not less than 20 calendar
days prior to the public hearing; and
      (2)   A “notice of public hearing to consider an amendment to the
Subdivision Ordinance” has been published in a county newspaper of general
circulation at least ten calendar days prior the date of the public hearing.
   (D)   Amendments to this chapter shall become effective 20 calendar days
after approval and adoption by the Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.006 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is held
to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.007 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in effect 20 calendar days from the date of adoption
by the Board of County Commissioners, pursuant to legal provisions and
procedures required by state law.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.008 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFECTED ENTITY. A county, municipality, local district, special service
district created under state law, school district, interlocal cooperation
entity established under state law, specified property owner, property owners
association, public utility or the Department of Transportation.
   AGRICULTURAL. The tilling of the soil, raising of crops, horticulture,
including the grazing and pasturing of domestic animals, but not including any
agricultural business such as fruit packing plants, fur farms, animal hospitals
or similar uses.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND. Land devoted to the raising of useful plants and animals
with a reasonable expectation of profit, including: forages and sod crops,
grains and feed crops, livestock, trees and fruits, or vegetables, nursery,
floral and ornamental stock; or land devoted to and meeting the requirements
and qualifications for payments or other compensation under a crop-land
retirement program with an agency of the state or federal government.
   AGRICULTURAL ZONE DISTRICT. Those areas designated in the Zoning Ordinance
of the county as A-1 and where the primary permitted land use is agriculture.
   ANGLE. The rotation required to superimpose either of two lines on the
other.
   APPEAL AUTHORITY. The person, board, commission, agency or other body
designated by ordinance to decide an appeal of a decision of a land use
application or a variance.
   ARC. A segment of a (surveyed) curve.
   BEARING. The angular direction of a line on a survey.
   BLOCK. A segment of a platted subdivision usually containing one or more
lots.
   BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. The Board of San Juan County Commissioners.
   CERTIFICATION. The confirmation of an official document or a copy thereof by
an authorized official.
   COLLATERAL. Funds or some other valuable pledged as security against a
promise to repay or perform certain actions.
   CONFIGURATION. The shape of a boundary or perimeter line, the shape of a
lot, block or subdivision.
   COUNTY. San Juan County, Utah.
   CULINARY. Water intended for human consumption, usually required to meet
certain health standards.
   DEDICATION. The conveyance of land or an easement thereon through a final
plat or other instrument to a public agency or to one or more persons for a
specific purpose.
   DELINEATE. To draw or trace the outline of.
   DIVIDED LAND. Land that is described as the land to be divided in a notice
as required by this chapter and has been divided by a minor subdivision.
   DWELLING UNIT. A structure or portion thereof designed to provide permanent
living accommodations for an individual or family.
   EASEMENT. A right, such as a right-of-way, afforded a person to make limited
use of another’s real property.
   ESCROW DEPOSIT. The placement of cash in a special account held by a bank or
other financial institution to be released upon completion of specific tasks
such as construction of a road.
   FIRST LIEN AND RESTRICTION OF SALE. A form of collateral wherein the county
places a lien on one or more lots in a subdivision and prohibits the sale of
those lots until specified public improvements have been satisfactorily
completed.
   FLOODPLAIN. Land that is within the 100-year flood plain designated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or has not been studied or designated by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, but presents a likelihood of
experiencing chronic flooding or a catastrophic flood event because the land
has characteristics that are similar to those of a 100-year floodplain
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOODPLAIN DATA. Information that defines the boundary of a floodplain,
either mapped or given in elevations.
   HIGH DENSITY SUBDIVISION. When a subdivision has ten or more lots within a
concentrated area.
   IMPACT FEES. Fees that may be required to provide required infrastructure
improvements and/or services.
   LAND TO BE DIVIDED. Land that is proposed to be divided by a platted or
minor subdivision.
   LAND USE APPLICATION. An application required by a county’s land use
ordinance.
   LAND USE AUTHORITY. A person, board, commission, agency or other body
designated by the local legislative body to act upon a land use application.
   LETTER OF CREDIT. A document issued by a bank or other financial institution
which guarantees a subdivider or developer a specific amount of credit and
which can be called by the county for failure to perform specified
improvements.
   LOT. A parcel or unit of ground described by metes and bounds or as a
numbered lot or parcel in a recorded subdivision and held or intended to be
held in a separate lease or ownership.
   LOT CORNER. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection or upon
two parts of the same street when such streets or parts of the same street form
an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
   LOT FRONTAGE. That part of a front lot line that abuts a street.
   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT. The relocation of the property boundary line in a
subdivision between two adjoining lots with the consent of the owners of record
pursuant to state law.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side yard lines.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. A division of land into no more than ten lots or a
division of land that is compliant with state law as follows:
      (1)   The parent parcel shall be at least 100 contiguous acres of
agricultural land;
      (2)   One new lot, of at least one acre in size and after division is
separate from the remainder of the original 100 or more contiguous acres of
agricultural land, may be created; and
      (3)   May not be within 1,000 feet of another minor subdivision created
through this definition.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION LOT. A lot created by a minor subdivision.
   MYLAR.
      (1)   A thin polyester material that when drawn upon can be reproduced on
a blue or black line print; and
      (2)   The official copy of a subdivision plat.
   OFFICIAL. Any elected official or their designated deputy of the county or
the appointed Administrative Assistant, Building Inspector, Surveyor,
Subdivision Administrator or Zoning Administrator of the county.
   OWNER OF RECORD. The individual named on a deed that has been recorded at
the County Recorder’s office.
   PARCEL OF RECORD. Any lot, tract, parcel or other piece of land that was
recorded at the County Recorder’s office.
   PERFORMANCE BOND. A form of collateral, issued by a bonding company which
guarantees a specified amount of money to be paid in the event of failure to
perform by a subdivider or other person.
   PERIMETER BOUNDARY. A line around any piece of property such as a lot, block
or subdivision which encloses and separates that piece from adjacent pieces.
   PERSON. Any individual or agent of an individual, a family entity, a
corporation, a public entity or any other organization or association that has
the legal right to own, lease or use property.
   PLANNING COMMISSION, SAN JUAN COUNTY. A seven-member board appointed by the
Board of County Commissioners. The PLANNING COMMISSION serves the community by
healing and making a variety of decisions on county planning and zoning issues
that impact the county and its residents. For the purposes of this chapter, the
PLANNING COMMISSION may be the land use authority.
   PLAT. A map or other graphical representation of lands being laid out and
prepared in accordance with state law and this chapter which serves as an
instrument for approval by the Board of County Commissioners of the county.
   PLAT, FINAL. The official signed plat which is recorded with the County
Recorder.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. The map or maps of a proposed subdivision, and specified
supporting materials prepared in sufficient detail to permit the evaluation of
the subdivision prior to final engineering design and survey.
   PUBLIC HEARING. A hearing at which members of the public are provided a
reasonable opportunity to comment on the subject of the hearing.
   PUBLIC MEETING. A meeting that is required to be open to the public under
the Open and Public Meetings Act of the state.
   RADII. (Plural of RADIUS.) A line segment between the center of a circle and
any point on its circumference.
   RECORDER. The County Recorder of San Juan County, Utah.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A legal right of passage over another person’s ground.
   ROAD. See STREET, PUBLIC.
   ROAD, COUNTY. A road or highway designated as a county road and maintained
by the county.
   ROAD, PRIVATE. A road or driveway on privately-owned property, limited to
the use of the owner or a group of owners who share the use and maintain the
road without assistance from the county. A PRIVATE ROAD has not been given to
or accepted by the county for public use and maintenance.
   SEAL. The official seal of a licensed professional land surveyor.
   SECTION LINE. The line delineating the boundary of a section of land in the
United States Geological Survey.
   SEWER SYSTEM, PRIVATE. A system for treatment and disposal of household
sewage that is owned by an individual or several individuals and designed to
serve the owners property only (e.g., septic tank and leach field systems).
   SEWER SYSTEM, PUBLIC. An approved sanitary sewer system containing
transmission lines and treatment facilities owned and operated by a public
entity such as a municipality or special district.
   SIGHT DISTANCE TRIANGLE. The area at the intersection of two streets or
roads or where a driveway enters a street or road, which is intended to allow a
clear line of sight of oncoming vehicles.
   STOCK-PROOF FENCE. A fence designed to contain or prevent cattle, horses,
sheep or other domestic animals from entering or leaving the fenced area.
   STREET, PUBLIC. A public right-of-way, including a highway, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, road, lane, walk, alley, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge,
public easement or other way.
   SUBDIVIDE. Any division of an existing parcel of land in accordance with
this chapter.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person or agent of a person who causes land to be
subdivided.
   SUBDIVISION. The division, re-subdivision or proposal to divide any land
into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or other division of land
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease,
development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms or conditions. SUBDIVISION does not include:
      (1)   A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for
agricultural purposes;
      (2)   A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining properties
adjusting their mutual boundary if:
         (a)   No new lot is created; and
         (b)   The adjustment does not violate applicable land use ordinances.
      (3)   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record:
         (a)   Revising the legal description of more than one contiguous
unsubdivided parcel of property into one legal description encompassing all
such parcels of property; or
         (b)   Joining a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided, if the joinder does not violate
applicable land use ordinances.
      (4)   A bona fide division or partition of land for the purpose of siting
on one or more of the resulting separate parcels:
         (a)   An electrical transmission line or a substation;
         (b)   A natural gas pipeline or a regulation station;
         (c)   An unmanned telecommunications, microwave, fiber optic,
electrical or other utility service regeneration, transformation,
retransmission or amplification facility; or
         (d)   A data gathering tower or turbine for the generation of
electricity.
      (5)   A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining subdivided
properties adjusting their mutual boundary if:
         (a)   No new dwelling lot or housing unit will result from the
adjustment; and
         (b)   The adjustment will not violate any applicable land use
ordinance.
      (6)   A bona fide division or partition of land by deed or other
instrument where the land use authority expressly approves in writing the
division in anticipation of further land use approvals on the parcel or
parcels; and
      (7)   The joining of a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided does not constitute a SUBDIVISION under
this definition as to the unsubdivided parcel of property or subject the
unsubdivided parcel to this chapter.
   SUBDIVISION, PHASE(S). Carrying out a subdivision in gradual stages.
SUBDIVISION PHASE(S) may not be one lot and must be contiguous to other parts
of the subdivision.
   SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR.
      (1)   The official or employee of the county appointed by the Board of
County Commissioners to administer this chapter.
      (2)   For the purposes of this chapter, the SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR may
be the land use authority.
   SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT. A contract between a subdivider or
developer and the county which specifies the required public improvements to be
constructed in or in support of a subdivision including the estimated costs and
the method of guarantee the collateral, to ensure the improvements are
constructed.
   STORM WATER DETENTION. The holding of storm water on a particular site
through the use of swales or structures that are designed to release the water
at a specified rate.
   SURVEY MONUMENT. An object placed or built to identify a survey reference
point, usually a section corner on the land.
   TOPOGRAPHICAL CONTOURS. Horizontal lines on a map indicating an elevation
above a specified point, usually sea level, and containing intermittent lines
in intervals usually of two feet, five feet or other specified distances.
   UNIT COSTS. The cost of a specified segment or part of an improvement
usually expressed as a cost per linear foot.
   UNINCORPORATED. The area outside of the incorporated area of a municipality.
   VACATE.
      (1)   To abandon or relinquish a right to use a specific piece of land
such as a road, right-of-way or easement; or
      (2)   To void a subdivision or portion thereof and return it to unplatted
status.
   VELOCITY (WATER). The rate of flow at a specific point usually stated in
cubic feet per seconds (cfs) or gallons per minute (gpm).
   VICINITY MAP. A small scale map shown as an insert on a larger map that
indicates the location of a subdivision or other pieces of land in relation to
a much larger geographic area.
   WATER SYSTEM, PRIVATE. A source of water and the transmission lines owned by
one or more persons to serve only his, her or their property (i.e., an
individual domestic well).
   WATER SYSTEM, PUBLIC. A source of water, including transmission lines and
treatment facilities owned by a public entity such as a municipality or special
district to provide water to their residents.
   ZONING MAP. A map, adopted as part of a land use ordinance, that depicts
land use zones, overlays or districts.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.009 APPEALS.
   An administrative process decision or administrative enforcement action
issued in accordance with this chapter may be appealed to the Administrative
Law Judge in accordance with
Chapter 11 of this code.
(Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.020 AMENDMENTS AND VACATIONS.
   (A)   Authority. The Board of County Commissioners, acting as the land use
authority, is authorized to amend or vacate any subdivision plat by signing an
amended plat or passing an ordinance describing the subdivision or the portion
being vacated, if the proposal does not violate other land use ordinances
contained herein, there is good cause for approval, and no public street,
right-of-way or easement has been vacated or amended.
   (B)   Procedure for amendment or vacation. The Board of County Commissioners
may consider a proposal for an amendment or vacation after:
      (1)   A written petition to amend or vacate has been submitted to the
Subdivision Administrator. Such a petition shall include:
         (a)   The names and addresses of all owners of record of the land
contained in the entire plat; and
         (b)   The signature of each of the owners who consents to the
petition.
      (2)   After submission, the petition must be reviewed by the Planning
Commission who shall hold a public hearing within 45 days after the day on
which the petition is filed. Prior to the public hearing, all owners of
property within the plat proposed to be amended or vacated and any utilities
must be notified. If satisfied the proposal does not violate the county’s land
use ordinances, there is good cause for approval, and no public street, right-
of-way or easement has been vacated or amended, the Planning Commission shall
forward a favorable recommendation to the Board of County Commissioners. A
hearing is not required if all property owners consent to the amendment or
vacation of the plat.
   (C)   Recording. Upon approval of an amendment or vacation by the Board of
County Commissioners via the signing of the amended or vacated plat or by
ordinance, the Board of County Commissioners shall ensure that the amended plat
showing the vacation or amendment is recorded in the office of the County
Recorder.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.021 EXEMPTIONS, WAIVERS, VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Exemptions from platting requirements.
      (1)   This chapter does not provide any exemptions from the platting
requirements, except as provided below in division (B) below.
      (2)   A lot or parcel resulting from a division of agricultural land is
exempt from the plat requirements if the lot or parcel:
         (a)   Qualifies as land in agricultural use as defined in this
chapter;
         (b)   Is not used and will not be used for any non-agriculrural
purpose;
         (c)   The new owner of record completes, signs and records with the
County Recorder a notice:
            1.   Describing the parcel by legal description; and
            2.   Stating that the lot or parcel is created for agricultural
purposes as defined by state law and will remain so until a future zoning
change permits other uses.
         (d)   If a lot or parcel exempted under division (A)(2)(a) above is
used for a non-agricultural purpose, the county shall require the lot or parcel
to comply with the platting requirements of this chapter and all applicable
land use ordinance requirements; and
         (e)   A document recorded in the County Recorder’s office that divides
property by a metes and bounds description does not create an approved
subdivision allowed by this chapter.
   (B)   Waivers.
      (1)   The Board of County Commissioners may waive certain submittal
requirements for an application for subdivision approval or for all or a
portion of the required processing fees. All waiver requests must be submitted
to the Subdivision Administrator with a letter which explains the reasons for
the waiver. The letter can be presented prior to the submittal of the
preliminary plat or final plat application or as part of the plat submittal.
      (2)   Waivers of submittal requirements may be granted upon
recommendation of the Subdivision Administrator, and a finding by the
Commissioners that the particular requirements are not necessary for
consideration of the subdivision on approval.
      (3)   A waiver of part or all the required processing fees (as found in
the county’s Schedule of Fees) for a subdivision application may be granted by
the Board of County Commissioners only on finding that the particular
application is such that the review time of county officials will be
significantly less than the typical subdivision application.
   (C)   Variances.
      (1)   A variance from specific requirements of this chapter may only
(emphasis added) be granted by the Subdivision Administrator acting as the land
use authority or the Planning Commission acting as the appeal authority upon
finding that:
         (a)   Literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an unreasonable
hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purpose of the land use ordinances;
         (b)   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do
not generally apply to other properties in the same zone;
         (c)   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone;
         (d)   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and
will not be contrary to the public interest; and
         (e)   The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial
justice done.
      (2)   In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship, the land use authority or appeal authority
may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship:
         (a)   Is located on or associated with the property for which the
variance is sought; and
         (b)   Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from
conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
      (3)   In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under division (C)(2)(a) above, land use
authority or appeal authority may not find an unreasonable hardship if the
hardship is self-imposed or economic.
      (4)   In determining whether or not there are special circumstances
attached to the property, land use authority or appeal authority may find that
special circumstances exist only if the special circumstances:
         (a)   Relate to the hardship complained of; and
         (b)   Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties
in the same zone.
      (5)   Pursuant to state law, variances run with the land.
      (6)   (a)   An application for a variance from one or more of the
requirements of this chapter shall be made to the Subdivision Administrator in
the form of a letter. The letter shall include the basis for the variance
request and the nature of the hardship that would result if the variance is not
approved.
         (b)   The Subdivision Administrator shall evaluate the application
using the criteria of division (C)(6)(a) above and shall approve or deny the
request.
         (c)   If the Subdivision Administrator determines that the variance
shall be denied, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Planning
Commission acting as the appeal authority who shall uphold or overturn the
Subdivision Administrator’s decision.
            1.   The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the
conditions justifying a variance have been met.
            2.   The appeal authority may not grant a use variance.
            3.   In granting a variance, the appeal authority may impose
additional requirements on the applicant that will:
               a.   Mitigate any harmful affects of the variance; or
               b.   Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is
waived or modified.
         (d)   The preliminary or final plat application which includes or is
the subject of a variance request shall not be scheduled for consideration by
the Board of County Commissioners until all variance requests have been either
approved or denied by the Subdivision Administrator and/or the Planning
Commission.
   (D)   Appeals. In the event that any person disagrees with the Subdivision
Administrator’s interpretation of the language of this chapter or his or her
decision(s) made when acting as the land use authority, they may appeal the
interpretation or decision(s) to the Planning Commission acting as the appeal
authority.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
PLATTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 152.035 GENERAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   Any person that wishes to subdivide land in the county should
first meet with the Subdivision Administrator.
      (2)   The Subdivision Administrator will explain the county’s
requirements for subdividing, the procedure that must be followed, and the
application fees required to process a subdivision plat and the minimum time
that the process requires. To assist with this process, the Subdivision
Administrator shall provide the potential subdivider with a procedure checklist
and a copy of this chapter.
   (B)   Obtaining approval to create a subdivision in the county is a two-step
process requiring approval of a preliminary plat and a final plat.
      (1)   The preliminary plat shall be submitted and processed in accordance
with provisions of §
152.036 of this chapter.
      (2)   The final plat shall be submitted and processed in accordance with
the provisions of §
152.037 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.036 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Intent. A preliminary plat is the first official document submitted
when owner(s) of property wish to subdivide his, her or their property. The
preliminary plat shall include all the property the owner(s) intend to
subdivide. Approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute approval of the
subdivision. Only approval of the final plat constitutes official approval by
the county.
   (B)   Preliminary plat requirements. An application for preliminary plat
approval shall include an original of the following:
      (1)   An “application for subdivision approval” with all requested
information complete and required signatures obtained;
      (2)   A letter of intent signed by the applicant subdivider which
explains the purpose of the application and includes all requests and
justifications for variances, exceptions or waivers of submittal requirements;
      (3)   Proof of ownership of the property to be subdivided. A subdivider
shall include an affidavit of ownership signed and notarized by all owners of
the property, or if the property is owned by a corporation, an authorized
officer shall sign the affidavit. If the applicant is different from the
property owners, documentation of the applicant’s authority to act for the
owner shall be included;
      (4)   Payment of the processing fee for a preliminary plat approval shall
be included. Such fees will be those approved by the Board of County
Commissioners in a county Fee Schedule which may be revised from time to time;
      (5)   A preliminary plat map with six copies which shall be on a 24-inch
by 36-inch sheet or a legible quality print of a matte Mylar drawn in black ink
or a black line positive Mylar of the same and shall contain the following
information:
         (a)   Project name, distinct from any subdivision on a plat recorded
in the County Recorder’s office, type of proposal (preliminary plat), legal
description of the total land area referenced to township, range, section;
county and state, date of the drawing, scale 1 :100 or larger, and north arrow;
         (b)   Vicinity map with north arrow (scale of one foot to 2,000 feet
preferred) with an emphasis on the major roadway network and any existing
subdivisions within one mile of the proposal;
         (c)   Boundary lines of the proposed subdivision drawn in a heavy
solid line;
         (d)   Existing and/or proposed zoning district boundary lines;
         (e)   Existing topographical contours with intervals of five feet or
less within the tract and at least 100 feet immediately adjacent thereto. In
the absence of available five-foot contour data, the contour intervals must be
deemed acceptable by the County Surveyor;
         (f)   All parcels of land to be dedicated for public use or reserved
for the use of all property owners in the proposed subdivision together with
the purpose and conditions of such reservations. This shall include the names,
locations and widths of proposed right-of-way of streets and alleys, together
with total lineal footage of streets and alleys;
         (g)   Location, width and purpose of all existing and/or proposed
public and/or private easements including existing and/or proposed sanitary
sewers, utility main lines, culverts, storm sewers and storm water detention
areas located within the tract and at least 100 feet immediately adjacent
thereto;
         (h)   Dimensions of proposed lots and blocks calculated to the nearest
foot;
         (i)   Drainage channels, wooded areas and other significant natural
features within the tract and at least 100 feet immediately adjacent thereto;
         (j)   Location, widths and names of all existing and/or platted
rights-of-way for streets or other public ways within the tract and at least
100 feet immediately adjacent thereto, railroad right-of-way, section lines
and/or other such features;
         (k)   The boundary and source of reference of any 100-year floodplain
shall be shown on the preliminary plat. In the absence of reliable floodplain
data, any areas of the plat that are known to be subject to flooding shall be
delineated and noted on the plat map;
         (l)   Perimeter fence line, if required, delineated and a description
of the type and height of the fence; and
         (m)   Site development details:
            1.   Total land area in acres;
            2.   Existing zoning of the property; and
            3.   Total number of proposed dwelling units.
      (6)   Names and addresses of the owner(s), subdivider and surveyor;
      (7)   A letter describing the water and sanitary sewer facilities
proposed for the subdivision;
         (a)   If either the water or sanitary sewer facilities are to be part
of an approved public system, the application shall also include confirmation
from the entity providing the sewer and water services, that such services are,
or will be, available to the subdivision;
         (b)   If either the water or sanitary sewer facilities are to be
individual wells and septic systems for each lot, the letter will include a
statement that the wells and septic systems will be installed in conformance
with the rules and regulations of the state’s Division of Environmental Health;
and
         (c)   If either the water or sewer facilities are to be private
systems designed to serve multiple lots, the letter shall include a statement
that such systems shall be installed in conformance with the rules and
regulations of the state’s Division of Environmental Health.
      (8)   Estimated construction costs for roads and related facilities for
the water supply and distribution systems, for sanitary sewer collection and
treatment systems, storm drainage facilities and other such public facilities
that may be required. The subdivider shall also state the form of collateral
that will be provided to ensure that such improvements will be completed. The
forms of collateral that are acceptable to the county are listed in §
152.039(A) of this chapter;
      (9)   In the event the proposed subdivision is within one and one-half
miles of a municipality or within the boundary of a county service area,
special service district or municipal expansion area, the applicant shall
provide written comments from the affected entity;
      (10)   Other documents and information as may be deemed necessary by the
Subdivision Administrator;
      (11)   A copy of all restrictive covenants proposed for the subdivision;
and
      (12)   A copy of a title insurance policy covering the property to be
included in the proposed subdivision. The title insurance policy must be dated
within 30 days of the application submitted.
   (C)   Conformance with zoning ordinance. No application for a preliminary
plat shall be accepted by the Subdivision Administrator if the proposed
development is not in compliance with Ch. 152 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.037 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   The final plat is the last stage in the subdivision approval
process. At this stage, the subdivider is responsible for delineation and
dedication of all public rights-of-way and easements, dedication of other
public lands, if required, and final lot and block configuration. In addition,
all public improvements associated with the subdivision are identified and
quantified, and the subdivider is required to enter into a subdivision
improvements agreement with the county which guarantees that the appropriate
improvement costs are borne by the subdivider.
      (2)   No request for final plat approval shall be considered by the Board
of County Commissioners until the preliminary plat has been approved by the
Planning Commission and all conditions of approval set forth in the resolution
approving the preliminary plat have been satisfied. The final plat approval
process shall not be used to amend or revise the approved preliminary plat or
the conditions of approval of the preliminary plat. Any revisions or amendments
to the preliminary plat, or to the conditions, must be approved by the Planning
Commission by an amendment to the preliminary plat prior to the Board of County
Commissioners hearing of the final plat.
   (B)   Final plat requirements.
      (1)   The final plat shall conform in all respects to the approved
preliminary plat and with all amendments to the preliminary plat.
      (2)   An application for final plat approval shall include the following:
         (a)   An “application for subdivision approval” with all requested
information completed and required signatures;
         (b)   A certification from the County Treasurer’s office that all
taxes on the property are paid;
         (c)   Title certificate or an abstract of title covering all public
lands required to be dedicated, except county roads and easements;
         (d)   A final plat map which shall be a print of 24-inch by 36-inch
matte Mylar drawn in black ink or a black line positive Mylar of the same,
which shall contain the following information:
            1.   Name of the subdivision, name of the county (San Juan) and
state (Utah), and the location and legal description of the subdivision
referenced to section, township and range;
            2.   North arrow, scale (1:100 or larger), dates of original
drawing and subsequent revisions and sheet number;
            3.   An indication that all subdivision comers have been surveyed.
The monuments representing the comers shown on the plat shall be in place and
easily identifiable on the ground at the time the subdivision was approved by
the county;
            4.   Owners and mortgagee’s certificate of dedication of public
rights-of-way and easements;
            5.   The surveyor’s certificate of survey, his or her seal, and the
date of survey;
            6.   Boundary of the subdivision or subdivision phase in a heavy
solid line with a small circle at each change in direction;
            7.   Board of County Commissioner’s approval signature lines,
certificate of the Board of County Commissioner’s acceptance of public right-
of-way and easements and public land dedications, and the County Clerk/
Auditor’s signature line.
            8.   The location and description of all section corners and
permanent survey monuments in or near the subdivision giving the basis of
bearing and the distance and course to two or more survey monuments (GLO, BLM,
city, townsite);
            9.   The length of subdivision perimeter boundary lines in feet and
decimals thereof and the value of all required bearings and angles dimensioned
in degrees, minutes and seconds for the perimeter boundary. Boundary lengths,
bearings and angles must close within the limits of one in 2,000;
            10.   The ownership of lands abutting the subdivisions, or the name
of any adjacent subdivision;
            11.   The delineation, dimensions and names of all proposed public
roads and access easements to public rights-of-way and adjacent roads and
rights-of-way;
            12.   The dimensions of all proposed lots indicated in feet and
decimal and the value of all required bearings and angles dimensioned in
degrees, minutes and seconds, and the acreage for each lot, shown within the
lot lines and staked on the ground;
            13.   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the subdivision,
and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block, with the areas to be
excluded from the plat marked “reserved” or “not a part”;
            14.   The outline and notification of any property which is offered
for dedication to public use fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings or
angles with the area marked “public”;
            15.   The identification, location and dimensions of all easements
for public services or utilities;
            16.   The radii, arcs, point of tangency and central angles for
curvilinear streets and radii of all property returns;
            17.   The identification and designation of the boundaries of any
100-year floodplain and the source of the designation;
            18.   A note disclosing that there are restrictive covenants on the
property and an acknowledgment that the county has no responsibility for
enforcing the covenants; and
            19.   Other plat notes as may be required by the Board of County
Commissioners.
         (e)   Two sets of preliminary construction plans for the proposed
public improvements prepared in accordance with the requirements contained in
§§
152.050 through
152.065 of this chapter;
         (f)   In the event the proposed subdivision is within one and one-half
miles of a municipality or within the boundary of a county service area or
special service district, or municipal expansion area, the applicant shall
provide written comments from the affected entity; and
         (g)   A copy of all restrictive covenants on the property which shall
be recorded with the County Recorder with the final plat. The covenants shall
indicate that the county has no responsibility for enforcing the covenants, but
will be the responsibility of the subdivider or subsequent lot purchasers to
enforce these covenants.
   (C)   Process.
      (1)   The Subdivision Administrator shall review the application for
final plat approval to determine whether it is consistent with the approved
preliminary plat and with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   If the Subdivision Administrator determines that the final plat
application is not in compliance with the approved preliminary plat, or with
the requirements of this chapter, the Subdivision Administrator will provide
the subdivider a list of the deficiencies and other information to assist in
the correction of the application.
      (3)   Upon a determination that the application for final plat is
complete and consistent with the approved preliminary plat and the requirements
of this chapter, the Subdivision Administrator shall schedule the final plat to
be presented to the Board of County Commissioners for acceptance.
      (4)   The subdivider must be familiar with the minimum county road
standards as outlined in §
152.052(B) of this chapter.
         (a)   If the intent of the subdivider is to build roads within the
subdivision that will be accepted and maintained by the county after
dedication, such roads must be built consistent with the county road standards.
To ensure that this happens, the subdivider must meet with a representative of
the county’s Road Department.
         (b)   Before proceeding on any road work, placement of any underground
utilities and/or acquisition of any road materials, the subdivider must provide
the county’s Road Department with a copy of the preliminary plat and set up an
on-site meeting with the county’s Road Department representative to review all
aspects of the roads within the subdivision. If the subdivider intends that the
roads within the subdivision shall be private roads and thus not required to be
constructed to county standards, the subdivider may be required to obtain the
approval of the county’s Road Department for all subdivision access roads that
originate off of County roads and other safety factors such as placement of
signs and other items. The subdivider may be required, at his or her own
expense, to provide testing for road materials, compaction testing and other
testing procedures will be used to assure compliance with minimum standards.
The subdivider will develop a schedule of work to be accomplished with an
inspection schedule.
         (c)   If the subdivider proceeds with any of the work outlined herein
without the approval and/or inspection of the county’s Road Department
representative, the county will not accept these roads onto the county system
nor be responsible for any type of maintenance duty. This would include, but
not be limited to, the placement of any type of water, sewer, septic,
telephone, cable television, fire hydrant and the like lines that will be
within the right-of-way of any public roads. If such lines are intended to be
placed within the right-of-way of any public roads, substantial compliance will
be required and the subdivider will required to either provide adequate
certification of such compaction or compensate the county for inspecting such
for compliance.
         (d)   After all requirements have been met and inspections completed a
letter will be sent to the subdivider stating the acceptance of the roads by
the county (never been done).
   (D)   Actions required prior to recording the final plat.
      (1)   The surveyor making the plat shall certify that the surveyor:
         (a)   Holds a license in accordance with the state’s Professional
Engineers and Land Surveyors Licensing Act;
         (b)   Has completed a survey of the property described on the plat in
accordance with state law and has verified all measurements;
         (c)   Has resolved any and all boundary issues with adjoining
properties to said subdivision; and
         (d)   Has placed monuments as represented on the plat.
      (2)   No plat shall be recorded until it has been:
         (a)   Approved by the Board of County Commissioners;
         (b)   A signature Mylar has been prepared with all revisions, signed
by the land owner(s) and the surveyor with signatures notarized, surveyors seal
and registration number, signature of the Chair of the Board of County
Commissioners and attested by the County Clerk/Auditor;
         (c)   An approved subdivision improvements agreement has been executed
and filed with the County Clerk/Auditor; and
         (d)   The final plat Mylar has been approved as to form and signed by
all necessary parties such as the County Planning Commission representative,
the County Health Department representative, the County Attorney’s office and
the like.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.038 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS; ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   (A)   A minor subdivision of four or less lots is permitted and is exempted
from the platting process found in this chapter and may be processed and
approved by staff with the presentment of a record of survey to be filed in the
Surveyor’s office by a licensed surveyor and upon providing evidence of legal
and utility access to the lot that complies with the minimum road standards as
outlined in this chapter.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any minor subdivision
lot, the following shall be provided to the county: a site plan showing the
location of the improvement in relation to the lot lines to ensure that the
setbacks and other requirements as outlined in this chapter are met.
(Ord. 2019-04, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 152.039 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   In order to ensure that the required county roads and, if
specified, other public facilities including drainage and water and sanitary
sewer facilities are constructed in accordance with the county road standards,
acceptable drainage facility standards and the standards of the agency
providing public and water and sanitary sewer service and to ensure that the
cost of the required public improvements are borne by the subdivider and not
the public, the subdivider will be required to enter into a subdivision
improvement agreement with the county.
      (2)   The agreement shall be found acceptable to the county and signed by
the applicant prior to the approval of the final plat by the Board of County
Commissioners.
      (3)   No final plat shall be approved by the Board of County
Commissioners until an approved subdivision improvement agreement has been
executed.
   (B)   Form and content.
      (1)   The subdivision improvement agreement shall be structured as
proscribed by the Board of County Commissioners.
      (2)   The subdivision improvement agreement shall, at a minimum, describe
the public improvements to be provided by the subdivider and include unit and
total costs, the form of collateral to be provided for the public improvements
and the basis for forfeiture of the collateral and assumption of responsibility
by the county.
   (C)   Collateral required to guarantee improvements.
      (1)   The Board of County Commissioners shall require that sufficient
collateral be provided by the subdivider to cover the cost of the public
improvements required by the subdivision improvement agreement and insure the
completion of such improvements within the time period specified. The amount of
collateral shall be 125% of the estimated cost of the county roads as prepared
by the county’s Road Department. If requested by the agency responsible for the
provision of public water and/or sanitary sewer service, the Board of County
Commissioners shall also require collateral for water and sanitary sewer
improvements. Collateral may also be required for drainage facilities and other
improvements. The collateral shall be in the form of an escrow deposit,
performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or in special circumstances, a
first lien and restriction on sale of the property to be subdivided. The first
lien and restriction on sale of the property shall only be used when the
appraised market value of the property is equal to, or greater than, the
estimated cost of the public improvements. The Board of County Commissioners
may accept one, or a combination, of the types of collateral listed above.
      (2)   As improvements are completed, the subdivider may apply to the
Board of County Commissioners for release of all or part of the collateral.
Upon certification by the County Road Department that the county road
improvements have been completed and are in conformance with county standards,
the Board of County Commissioners shall authorize the release of part or all of
the collateral; except that, the Board may retain 10% of the collateral for a
specified period of time in order to ensure that the improvement s have been
properly constructed.
      (3)   In the event that the water and sewer facilities have been included
in the subdivision improvement agreement and collateralized, the Board of
County Commissioners shall authorize the release of the water and sewer
collateral upon notification by the providing entity that the improvements have
been completed.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 152.050 COMPLIANCE.
   All subdivisions must comply with the following standards.
   (A)   Insofar as possible, the natural terrain, existing topography and
natural vegetation shall be preserved.
   (B)   Where the property to be subdivided is subject to natural or human-
made hazards such as flooding, rock and mud slides, open quarries or abandoned
mines, or where there exists shallow water table conditions or polluted water
sources, such hazards or conditions shall be identified and the subdivider
shall provide stamped engineered documentation as to how the hazards or
conditions have been eliminated, or will be eliminated, through the design and
construction of the subdivision.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.051 LOTS.
   All lots within the subdivision shall conform to the following standards.
   (A)   Lots shall meet the width, depth, frontage and lot size requirements
for the zoning district in which the subdivision is located, as specified in §
152.065 of this chapter.
   (B)   All lots shall abut a dedicated street or county road, or a street or
road that has become public by right of use, or a private street for which
there is a (recorded) maintenance agreement.
   (C)   No single lot shall be transected by a municipal or county boundary
line or by a special service area or special service district boundary, a
public road or street or a private road or street which can legally be used by
property owners other than the owner of the lot.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.052 PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   (1)   All streets or other right-of-way designated for public
vehicular use and county maintenance shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the adopted road standards of the county, including adequate
and required street or highway signs, cattle guards and other necessary items,
which are incorporated into this chapter as division (B) below. Maps and plats,
when properly made, acknowledged, filed and recorded according to the
procedures specified, operate as a dedication of all streets and other public
places and vest the fee of those parcels of land in the county for the public
for the uses named or intended in those maps or plats. However, mere dedication
of streets does not trigger the county’s duty to maintain such roads until they
have been constructed or improved to the above mentioned county road standards.
      (2)   If, due to the size of a development, a turn lane is required to
access a public street or streets to be used in the development, the county
shall require the subdivider to obtain and produce for county review a letter
from UDOT stating such.
   (B)   (1)   Street types.
         (a)   Residential streets. Streets which primary function is to
provide access to individual lots within the subdivision. This would include
all streets, except the ones designated as collector streets.
         (b)   Collector streets. The main streets in the subdivision. This
would usually be the street that enters or exits the subdivision which serves
as a collector of all the residential streets.
      (2)   Street widths.
         (a)   Unless deemed otherwise by the county’s Road Department,
residential streets shall have a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet. The minimum
surface width for gravel shall be 26 feet. The minimum surface width for
pavement shall be 24 feet. Gravel streets in Spanish Valley are not permitted
and must be paved.
         (b)   Collector streets shall have a minimum right of way of 60 feet.
The minimum width for gravel shall be 32 feet. The minimum surface width for
pavement shall be 30 feet.
      (3)   Street design standards.
         (a)   Width requirement. Before any street is accepted by the county
for maintenance, the street must be constructed to the width requirement. A
minimum of nine-inch compacted depth of base material must be placed on the
street. Of this base material, the surface must consist of a minimum of three
inches of one inch or three-quarter inch crushed gravel. This material must be
accepted by the county’s Road Department and, if deemed necessary, testing of
the material and compaction may be required by the engineer. If such testing is
required, this shall be done at the expense of the subdivider.
         (b)   Asphalt surfaces. If the street is constructed to an asphalt
surface, the surface depth must be a minimum of three inches to be accepted for
maintenance by the county. Asphalt and compaction must be accepted by the
county’s Road Department and, if deemed necessary, testing of the material and
compaction may be required by the engineer. If such testing is required, this
shall be done at the expense of the subdivider. All newly constructed
subdivision roads in Spanish Valley shall have an asphalt surface.
         (c)   Minimum grade. Unless deemed otherwise by the county’s Road
Department, the minimum grade for all streets shall be 0.5%. The maximum grade
allowed for residential streets is 8% and for collector streets is 6%. Where
the observance of this requirement is unfeasible, an exception may be granted.
Streets should be leveled, when possible, to a grade of less than 4% for a
distance of at least 50 feet approaching all intersections.
         (d)   Intersecting right angles. Whenever possible, streets shall
intersect at right angles. When streets meet at acute angles, a reasonable
radius will be required.
         (e)   Dead end streets. Dead end streets will have a turn-around (cul-
de-sac) with a minimum radius of 50 feet. Dead end streets should not exceed
500 feet in length if possible.
         (f)   Intersections. No more than four streets shall enter an
intersection.
         (g)   Vertical curves. Vertical curves shall be used at all changes of
grade exceeding 1%. Horizontal curves shall be required if street lines deflect
more than five degrees. The minimum centerline radius for residential streets
shall be 150 feet. Collector streets shall be 300 feet.
         (h)   Curb and gutter. The minimum widths of streets which have curb
and gutter shall be 40 feet on residential streets and 50 feet for collector
streets. All measurements are from the back of the curb to the back of the
curb.
         (i)   Cattle guards. Any cattle guards required or installed shall be
in compliance with the county’s Cattle Guard Policy and shall be of a width and
construction approved by the county’s Road Department.
         (j)   Signs. The subdivider shall provide and install any required
signs on roads or streets as required by the Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices and by the county’s Road Department.
         (k)   Gates. No gates, whether locked or unlocked, shall be allowed on
any roads or streets accepted by the county.
         (l)   Public streets. All roads or streets accepted by the county are
considered public roads and access by the public cannot be limited by the
subdivider or future owners of any of the lots within the subdivision.
         (m)   Drainage/curb and gutter. In the absence of curb and gutter, the
subdivider shall provide a street drainage plan detailing potential impacts to
county roads and streets. The subdivider shall be required to provide and
install culverts or other drainage structures as required by the county.
         (n)   New streets. When a subdivision is considered to be high
density. The county may require the subdivider to pave the road with a minimum
of a two lift armor coat consisting of one lift using a three-quarter inch
dirty gravel chip and the second lift using a one-half inch clean gravel chip;
or as determined by the county a compacted asphalt mat consisting of a minimum
two-inch depth when fully compacted may be required.
         (o)   Existing streets. The county may consider on a case by case
basis the upgrading of officially accepted roads that meet the county standards
in high density subdivisions with at least ten or more lots, or when conditions
in the subdivision may cause safety or health related issues.
      (4)   Easements.
         (a)   Easements for utilities such as poles, wires, conduits, gas
lines, water lines and the like shall be located at the rear of all lots,
whenever possible. The width shall be a minimum of 15 feet, which can be
divided between adjoining lots.
         (b)   If front line easements are required, a minimum of 15 feet shall
be allocated. All easements shall be designed so as to provide efficient
installation of utilities.
         (c)   If front line easements are required and are within the right-
of-way of any road or street, sufficient and proper compaction of any
underground lines shall be required. Testing of compaction shall be at the
expense of the subdivider.
         (d)   All utilities shall be provided in compliance with all of the
required building codes covering such installation.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.053 PRIVATE ROADS.
   The county does not intend to dictate a specific standard of construction to
a subdivider for a private road; except that, the standard must allow reliable
vehicular access for emergency, delivery of goods and services and the
installation and service of utilities. Again, as previously stated above, a
dedication of a private road does not trigger the county’s duty to maintain
such a road until it has been constructed or improved to the county road
standards.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.054 SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS.
   When, in the opinion of the county’s Road Department, the projected traffic
volumes within the subdivision are such that the separation of vehicular and
pedestrian access is necessary for the safety of the public, the County
Commissioners may require designed sidewalks or pedestrian rights-of-way.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.055 SANITARY SEWAGE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided below, each lot in the subdivision shall
be served with an approved piped sanitary sewer system.
   (B)   Individual septic tank systems, or other private sewage systems, shall
only be permitted when the nearest point of the subdivision boundary is more
than 1,320 feet from an existing approved sanitary sewer system. Septic systems
shall be in conformance with the requirements established by the state’s
Division of Environmental Health and the county’s Health Department.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.056 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided below, each lot in the subdivision shall
be served with an approved public water system.
   (B)   Individual or common wells or other private water systems shall only
be permitted when the subdivision boundary is more than 1,320 feet from the
nearest approved public water system. All private water systems shall be in
compliance with the requirements of the state’s Division of Environmental
Health.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.057 STORM DRAINAGE.
   (A)   If, prior to the submission of the preliminary plat and after
consulting with the County Engineer of record or other qualified person, the
Subdivision Administrator determines that the subdivider needs to provide a
drainage system design which covers the entire subdivision it shall be required
to be completed by the subdivider prior to submission of the preliminary plat.
The design shall accommodate runoff from the entire subdivision and the
historical runoff from areas adjacent to and “upstream” of the subdivision. The
design shall insure that runoff from the developed subdivision shall not exceed
the historical volumes and velocities discharged onto adjacent property.
   (B)   The drainage system plans submitted with the preliminary plat shall
include:
      (1)   All proposed surface drainage structures; and
      (2)   All appropriate design details, dimensions, construction materials
and elevations.
   (C)   At the time of the final plat, the subdivider shall include final
drainage design for the phase of the subdivision included in the final plat.
The final drainage design shall show how the drainage is consistent with the
overall drainage system design.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.058 PERIMETER FENCING.
   (A)   In all zoned districts, the subdivider shall be responsible for the
construction of a stock-proof perimeter fence around the entire subdivision.
The height, fence type and materials shall be as approved by the Board of
County Commissioners after receiving a recommendation from staff and/or the
Planning Commission.
   (B)   A subdivider may request and the Planning Commission may approve an
exemption from the fencing requirement only if one of the following criteria
are met:
      (1)   The proposed subdivision is completely surrounded by developed
land;
      (2)   The proposed subdivision is within the future annexation area of a
nearby municipality and within 100 feet of a municipal boundary; or
      (3)   The proposed subdivision abuts property already enclosed with a
stock-proof fence.
   (C)   If the subdivider obtains an exemption from the fencing requirement,
this exemption must be reflected on the plat so as to place others on notice of
the exemption.
   (D)   If the subdivider fails to obtain an exemption to the fencing
requirement, a stock-proof fencing proposal shall be submitted with the final
plat and the Planning Commission may then make a recommendation to the Board of
County Commissioners for final approval.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.059 FIRE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, the county will not provide any
additional fire protection for approved subdivisions other than from those
current departments established at different locations within the county.
   (B)   When, in the opinion of the Board of County Commissioners and other
county emergency response personnel, the size of the subdivision and the number
of lots proposed along with other factors, determines that the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the subdivision may require that the
subdivider provide substantial improvements to provide fire protection for the
subdivision. Such improvements may include, but not be limited to; fire
hydrants; water storage for fire protection; other water systems; participation
in the acquisition of firefighting equipment; and facilities to house such
equipment.
   (C)   (1)   If such fire protection improvements are required, these shall
be made at the expense of the subdivider and shall meet all fire protection
standards as provided in the National Fire Code, Uniform Building Code and
other standards that are applicable to such.
      (2)   All systems shall be tested and accepted by the county prior to
final approval of the subdivision of the county.
      (3)   In the event that such improvements are not completed or furnished
by the subdivider prior to final approval of the subdivision, the subdivider
shall provide to the county a form of collateral for the improvements as
outlined in §
152.039 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.060 UTILITIES.
   (A)   All utilities that are planned to be provided in a subdivision shall
be presented to the county prior to any construction or placement of utilities.
All utilities and utility corridors shall be shown on the final plat.
   (B)   The subdivider shall provide the county with letters of completion and
certification from building inspectors, utility companies or other assurances
that all utilities were placed within the easements shown on the final plat and
meet proper codes prior to the sale of any lots.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.061 EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The final plat shall show all legally recorded rights of way and/or
easements that are recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
   (B)   The county may require that the subdivider receive written approval
from the owners of such rights-of-way and/or easements that any developments
within the rights-of-way and/or easements meet all public health and safety
requirements.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.062 IMPACT FEES.
   The county may at any time in the future authorize impact fees.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.063 RESUBDIVISIONS
   Substantial changes to a recorded final plat shall be considered a new
subdivision and shall comply with all the regulations, laws and policies
applicable to a new subdivision, and shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions of §
152.037 of this chapter, except where such changes and revisions are determined
of a minor nature and eligible to be considered under the administrative
resubdivision procedure, the requirements of which are contained in §
152.064 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.064 ADMINISTRATIVE RESUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Intent. An administrative resubdivision may only be used for changes
and revisions that have been determined by the Subdivision Administrator to be
minor engineering, planning or administrative changes or revisions. An
administrative resubdivision shall be approved by the Subdivision Administrator
if:
      (1)   The land has already been subdivided and there exists an approved
and recorded final plat;
      (2)   No additional right-of-way dedications or public improvements are
necessary;
      (3)   No perimeter boundary of an existing subdivision plat is affected;
      (4)   The perimeter of boundaries of the administrative plat coincide
with the existing lots and blocks; and
      (5)   The number of lots shall not be substantially increased and all
lots shall be in conformance with
Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances in affect at the time the administrative
subdivision is approved.
   (B)   Procedure. Requests for administrative resubdivisions shall include an
application for subdivision approval and supporting documentation as specified
in the subdivision approval submittal requirements.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.065 ZONING REGULATIONS.
 MU-1 A-1 RR-1
                                                                               MU- A-1 RR-
                                                                               1       1
FRONT YARD REGULATIONS The minimum depth in feet for the front yard for main   25  25  25
buildings shall be: on established street right-of-ways, or an equivalent
depth as determined by the Planning Commission where there is no established
right-of-way. Accessory buildings may have the same minimum front yard depth   A   A   A
as main buildings, if they have the same side yard as required for main
building, otherwise they shall be set back at least 6 feet in the rear of the
main buildings
FRONTAGE REGULATIONS The minimum frontage in feet for any lot in the districts
regulated by this chapter on a public street or a private street approved by   25  25  25
the governing board shall be
HEIGHT REGULATIONS The maximum height for all buildings and structures in
districts regulated by this chapter shall be
   In feet                                                                  35  35  35
   In number of stories                                                     2.5 2.5 2.5
REAR YARD REGULATIONS The minimum side yard in feet for the rear yard in the
districts regulated by this chapter shall be
   For main buildings                                                       25  25  25
   For accessory buildings                                                  5   5   5
SIDE YARD REGULATIONS The minimum side yard in feet for any dwelling
   Other main or accessory buildings in districts regulated by this chapter 5   5   5
shall be
WIDTH REGULATIONS The minimum width in feet for any lot in the districts
regulated by this chapter, except as modified by planned unit developments or  660 330 100
cluster subdivisions, shall be
 
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   The county may bring an action against an owner to require the property to
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   An action under this section may include injunction, abatement, merger
of title or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin or
abate the violation.
   (B)   The county need only establish the violation to obtain the injunction.
   (C)   The county may assess civil penalties for violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is punishable as a
Class C misdemeanor upon conviction either:
      (1)   As a Class C misdemeanor; or
      (2)   By imposing an appropriate civil penalty not to exceed $1,000,
pursuant to state law.
(Ord. passed 4- -2016)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Short title
   
153.002   Purpose
   
153.003   Interpretation
   
153.004   Conflict
   
153.005   Definitions
   
153.006   Building permit required; application and review
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.020   Planning Commission review
   
153.021   Zoning Administrator to enforce; powers and duties
   
153.022   Permits to comply with chapter
   
153.023   Building Inspector; powers and duties
   
153.024   Nuisance abatement
   
153.025   Amendments
   
153.026   Hearing and publication of notice
   
153.027   Licensing
   
153.028   Adoption of buildings codes
Land Use Administration
   
153.040   Planning Commission
   
153.041   Appeals
   
153.042   Variances
Zoning Districts
   
153.055   Establishment of districts
   
153.056   Filing of ordinance and map
   
153.057   Rules for locating boundaries
Multiple-Use, Agricultural, Rural Residential Districts
   
153.070   Purpose
   
153.071   Use regulations
   
153.072   Area regulations
   
153.073   Frontage regulations
   
153.074   Yard regulations
   
153.075   Height regulations
   
153.076   Coverage regulations
Controlled Districts CD
   
153.090   Purpose
   
153.091   Permitted uses
   
153.092   Conditional uses
   
153.093   Special provisions
   
153.094   Signs
   
153.095   Boundaries
Indian Reservation District (IR)
   
153.110   Purpose
   
153.111   Permitted uses
Supplementary and Qualifying Regulations
   
153.125   Effect of chapter
   
153.126   Lots in separate ownership
   
153.127   Yard space for one building only
   
153.128   Every dwelling to be on a lot
   
153.129   Separately owned lots; reduced yards
   
153.130   Private garage with side yard; reduced yards
   
153.131   Sale or lease of required space
   
153.132   Sale of lots below minim space requirements
   
153.133   Yards to be unobstructed; exceptions
   
153.134   Area of accessory building
   
153.135   Height of buildings
   
153.136   Clear view of intersecting streets
   
153.137   Construction subject to geologic, flood or other natural hazard
   
153.138   Spanish Valley development ordinances adopted
Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses
   
153.150   Non-conforming uses
   
153.151   Establishment and changes to non-conforming use
   
153.152   Termination of non-conforming use
Parking and Loading; Motor Vehicle Access
   
153.165   Off-street parking
   
153.166   Size
   
153.167   Parking space for dwellings
   
153.168   Parking space for building or uses other than dwellings
   
153.169   Location of parking spaces
   
153.170   Parking lot regulations
   
153.171   Off-street truck loading space
   
153.172   Access requirements
   
153.173   Location of gasoline pumps
Conditional Uses
   
153.185   Definition
   
153.186   Permit required
   
153.187   No presumption of approval
   
153.188   Application
   
153.189   Determination
   
153.190   Fees
   
153.191   Public hearing
   
153.192   Appeals of decision
   
153.193   Inspection
   
153.194   Substantial action required
   
153.195   Revocation
   
153.196   Temporary permit
Planned Unit Development
   
153.210   Purpose
   
153.211   Definition
   
153.212   Permit
   
153.213   Required conditions
   
153.214   Uses allowed
   
153.215   General site plan
   
153.216   Review by Planning Commission; scope of action
   
153.217   Construction limitations
Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
   
153.230   Purpose
   
153.231   Location and use
   
153.232   Park approval
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be so cited and pleaded as the “Zoning
Ordinance of San Juan County, Utah”.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the
health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the
present and future inhabitants of the county, including, among other things,
the lessening of congestion in the streets or roads, securing safety from fire
and other dangers, providing access to adequate light and air, classification
of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization, protection
of the tax base, securing economy in governmental expenditures, fostering
agricultural and other industries, and the protection of both urban and non-
urban development.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.003 INTERPRETATION.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the
requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for
the purposes set forth.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.004 CONFLICT.
   This chapter shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants,
agreements, other ordinances or laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding such
provisions which are less restrictive.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. (Words
used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number
include the plural and the plural the singular; words not included herein but
defined in the Uniform Building Code shall be construed as defined therein.)
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. Building not used for human occupancy which is secondary
to the main structure on the same piece of property such as a shed or garage.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A building other than the primary dwelling
which is used as a dwelling on a shared lot with the primary dwelling but is
not an internal accessory dwelling unit as defined by state code. It provides
all utilities necessary for human occupation, approved by the county Board of
Health, and satisfies Building and Fire Code requirements. An ADU may not
exceed 50% of the primary dwelling square footage or 1,200 square feet,
whichever is smaller. It is also referred to as mother-in-law dwelling,
caretaker dwelling, and similar terms. Unless specifically permitted, an ADU
may not be used as a short-term rental.
   AFFECTED ENTITY. A county, municipality, local district, special service
district created under state law, school district, interlocal cooperation
entity established under state law, specified property owner, property owners
association, public utility or the Department of Transportation.
   AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY OR BUSINESS. An industry or business involving
agricultural products in packaging, treatment, sales, intensive feeding or
storage, including but not limited to animal feed yards, fur farms, commercial
milk production, food packaging or processing plants, commercial poultry or egg
production and similar uses as determined by the Planning Commission.
   AGRICULTURE. The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and
gardening, including the grazing and pasturing of domestic animals, but not
including any agricultural business or industry, such as fruit-packing plants,
fur farms, animal hospitals or similar uses.
   AIRPORT. A landing area used regularly by aircraft for receiving or
discharging passengers or cargo (FAA definition).
   AIRSTRIP. An airfield without normal airport facilities.
   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare less than 25 feet wide.
   ANEMOMETER. An instrument for measuring wind force and velocity.
   ANIMAL UNIT. One cow, one horse, five sheep or goats, or an equivalent
number of smaller animals or fowl as determined by the Planning Commission.
   APPEAL AUTHORITY. The person, board, commission, agency or other body
designated by this chapter to decide an appeal of a decision of a land use
application or variance.
   BASEMENT. A story partly underground. A BASEMENT shall be counted as a story
for the purposes of height measurement if its height is one-half or more above
grade.
   BED AND BREAKFAST/BOARDING HOUSE. A building with not more than five guest
rooms, where, for compensation, meals are provided for at least five, but not
more than 15 persons.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A detached subordinate building clearly incidental to
and located upon the same lot occupied by the main building.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance from the average finished grade
surface to the highest point of the building roof or coping.
   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line and
established at the point where that lot line is closest to any part of the
building or structure exclusive of the ordinary projections of skylight, sills,
belt courses, cornices, chimneys, flues and ornamental features which do not
project into a yard more than two and one-half feet, and open or lattice
enclosed fire escapes, fire-proof outside stairways and balconies open upon
fire towers which do not project into a yard more than five feet.
   BUILDING, MAIN. The principal building or one of the principal buildings
upon a lot, or the building or one of the principal buildings housing a
principal use upon a lot.
   CAR PORT. A private garage not completely enclosed by walls or doors. For
the purposes of this chapter, a CAR PORT shall be subject to all of the
regulations prescribed for a private garage.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A land use that, because of its unique characteristics or
potential impact on the county, surrounding neighbors or adjacent land uses,
may not be compatible in some areas or may be compatible only if certain
conditions are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts.
   CONDOMINIUM. The ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit project,
together with an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the
property.
   CORRAL. A space, other than a building, less than one acre in area, or less
than 100 feet in width, used for the confinement of animals.
   DWELLING. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed for use for
residential purposes, except hotels, apartment hotels, bed and breakfast/
boarding houses, lodging houses, tourist courts and apartment courts.
   DWELLING, FARM OR RANCH. A building to provide housing for migratory or
temporary farm workers, persons permanently working on a farm or ranch, or for
family members of the main household who are engaged full time in operating the
farm or ranch.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be occupied by
three or more families.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be occupied by
one family, the structure having only one dwelling unit.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be occupied by two
families, the structure having only two dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment hotel or apartment
motel, designed for or occupied by one family for living or sleeping purpose
and having one, but not more than one, kitchen or set of fixed cooking
facilities, other than hot plates or other portable cooking units.
   EVAPORATION POND. Artificial ponds with very large surface areas that are
designed to efficiently evaporate water by sunlight and exposure to the ambient
temperatures.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house,
lodging house or hotel, as herein defined.
   FIRE HAZARD. Any situation, process, material or condition that may cause a
fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel supply to augment the spread or
intensity of the fire or explosion and that poses a threat to life or property.
   FRONTAGE. All the property fronting one side of the street between
intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and a right-of-way,
waterway, end of dead-end street or political subdivision boundary, measured
along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary
of the FRONTAGE on the side of the street which it intercepts.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building designed or used for the storage of
not more than four automobiles owned and used by the occupants of the building
to which it is accessory; provided that, on a lot occupied by a multiple
dwelling, the PRIVATE GARAGE may be designed and used for the storage of one
and one-half times as many automobiles as there are dwelling units in the
multiple dwelling, if the garage and dwelling have a roof or wall in common.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage
designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling or
storing motor-driven vehicles.
   GENERAL PLAN. The document adopted by the county that sets forth general
guidelines for proposed future development of the unincorporated land within
the county.
   GEOLOGIC HAZARD. One of several types of adverse geologic conditions capable
of causing damage or loss of property and life.
   GRAVEL PIT. A pit from which gravel is obtained.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on
by persons residing in the dwelling unit, which use is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change
the character thereof and in connection with which there is not display, nor
stock in trade. The HOME OCCUPATION shall not include the sale of commodities,
except those which are produced on the premises, and shall not involve the use
of any accessory building or yard space or activity, outside of the main
building, not normally associated with residential use. HOME OCCUPATION shall
include the use of the home by a physician, surgeon dentist, lawyer, clergyman,
engineer, or other professional persons for consultation or emergency
treatment, but not for the general practice of his or her profession. In all
cases where a HOME OCCUPATION is engaged in, there shall be no advertising of
said occupation, no window displays or signs, except as hereinafter permitted,
and no employees employed.
   HOTEL. A building designed for or occupied as the temporary abiding place of
16 or more individuals who are, for compensation, lodged.
   HOUSEHOLD PET. Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house, and kept
for company or pleasure such as dogs, cats and small caged birds, but not
including a sufficient number of dogs to constitute a kennel, as defined in
this chapter.
   INDUSTRY. The organized action of making of goods and services for sale.
   JUNK YARD. The use of any lot, portion of a lot or tract of land for the
storage, abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other, or for the
dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles, or
machinery or parts thereof; provided that, this definition shall be deemed not
to include such uses which are clearly accessory and incidental to any
agricultural use permitted in the zone.
   KENNEL. The keeping of three or more dogs, at least four months old.
   LAND USE APPLICATION. An application required by the county’s land use
ordinance.
   LAND USE AUTHORITY. The person, board, commission, agency or other body
designated by the local legislative body in this chapter to act upon a land use
application.
   LAND USE ORDINANCE. A planning, zoning, development or subdivision ordinance
of the county, but does not include the general plan.
   LAND USE PERMIT. A permit issued by the land use authority.
   LEGISLATIVE BODY. The county legislative body.
   LOCAL DISTRICT. Any entity created under state law, local districts and any
other governmental or quasi-governmental entity that is not a county,
municipality, school district or the state.
   LODGING HOUSE. A building where lodging only is provided for compensation to
five or more, but not to exceed 15 persons.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied by a building or group of buildings, together
with such yards, open spaces, lot width and lot area as are required by this
chapter, having frontage upon a street or upon a right-of-way or upon a right-
of-way not less than 16 feet wide. Except for group dwellings and guest houses,
not more than one dwelling structure shall occupy any one LOT.
   LOT AREA. The total gross land area of a parcel of land, not including
street rights-of-way dedicated to the public.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting on two intersecting or intercepting streets,
where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135
degrees.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front yard and the rear lot
lines measured in the main direction of the side lot lines.
   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT. The relocation of the property boundary line in a
subdivision between two adjoining lots with the consent of the owners of
record.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. For an interior lot, the lot line adjoining the street; for
a corner lot or through lot, the lot line adjoining either street, as elected
by the lot owner.
   LOT INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE, REAR. Ordinarily, that line of a lot which is opposite and most
distant from the front line of the lot In the case of a triangular or gore-
shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the parcel, parallel to and at a
maximum distance from the front lot line. In cases where these definitions are
not applicable, the Zoning Administrator shall designate the REAR LOT LINE.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot boundary line not a front or rear lot line. A SIDE
LOT LINE separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot
line; a SIDE LOT LINE separating a lot from a street is a STREET SIDE LOT LINE.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at
the required front yard setback line or rear yard setback line, whichever is
shorter.
   MINING. The extraction of valuable minerals or other geological materials
from the earth usually from an ore body, vein or (coal) seam. Materials
recovered by MINING include base metals, precious metals, iron, uranium, coal,
diamonds, limestone, oil shale, rock salt and potash. Also to include,
drilling, testing, mining-related storage facilities whether they be
underground or above-ground.
   MOBILE HOME. A detached, single-family dwelling unit of not less than 30
feet in length, designed for long-term occupancy and to be transported on its
own wheels or on a flatbed or other trailers or detachable wheels; containing a
flush toilet, sleeping accommodations, a tub or shower bath, kitchen facilities
and plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to appropriate
external systems, made ready for occupancy, except for connections to utilities
and other minor work. Pre-sectionalized, modular or prefabricated houses not
placed on permanent foundations shall be regarded as MOBILE HOMES.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A space designed and approved by the local jurisdiction
for occupancy by mobile homes, to be under a single ownership or management,
and meeting all requirements of this chapter for mobile home parks.
   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A subdivision designed and intended for residential
use where the lots are to be individually owned or leased, and occupied by
mobile homes exclusively.
   MODERATE INCOME HOUSING. Housing occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to or less than 80% of the
median gross income for households of the same size in the county in which the
housing is located.
   MODULAR HOME. A permanent dwelling structure built in prefabricated units,
which are assembled and erected on the site, or at another location and brought
as a unit to the site; said MODULAR HOME is classed as a mobile home until it
is placed on a permanent foundation and complies with all governing Building
Codes.
   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings for the drive-in accommodation of
transient guests, comprising individual sleeping or living units, and designed
and located to serve the motoring public.
   NATURAL WATERWAYS. Those areas, varying in width, along streams, creeks,
gullies, springs or washes which are natural drainage channels as determined by
the Building Inspector, and in which areas no buildings shall be constructed.
   NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A building or structure or portion
thereof, lawfully existing before its current lands use designation and because
of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not conform to the
setback, height restrictions or other regulations, excluding those regulations
that govern the use of land.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A use of land that legally existed before its current
land use designation, has been maintained continuously since the time the land
use ordinance regulation governing the land changed, and because of one or more
subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not conform to the regulations that
now govern the use of the land.
   OIL AND GAS EXPLORATION. Exploration for hydrocarbon (oil and gas) is the
search by petroleum geologists and geophysicists for hydrocarbon deposits
beneath the earth’s surface, such as oil and natural gas. OIL AND GAS
EXPLORATION are grouped under the science of petroleum geology.
   PARKING LOT. An open area, other than a street, used for parking of more
than four automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for
compensation or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
   PARKING SPACE. Space within a building, lot or parking lot for the parking
or storage of one automobile.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). An integrated design for development of
residential, commercial or industrial uses, or limited combinations of such
uses, in which the density and location regulations of the district in which
the development is situated may be varied or waived to allow flexibility and
initiative in site and building design and location, in accordance with an
approved plan and imposed requirements.
   PLAT. A map or other graphical representation of lands being laid out and
prepared in accordance with state law.
   PUBLIC AGENCY. The federal government, the state, a county, municipality,
school district, special service district, or other political subdivision of
the state, or a charter school.
   PUBLIC HEARING. A hearing at which members of the public are provided a
reasonable opportunity to comment on the subject of the hearing.
   PUBLIC MEETING. A meeting that is required to be open to the public under
state law.
   PUBLIC NOTICE. Notice widely disseminated to the public through broadcast
media such as newspaper, radio, television, in a conspicuous public place or
the internet, in conformance with state law.
   RECORD OF SURVEY MAP. A map of a survey of land prepared in accordance with
state law.
   RV/TRAILER CAMP. Any area or tract of land used or designed to accommodate
two or more automobile trailers or camping parties.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A dwelling or a portion of a dwelling that the owner of
record or the lessee of the dwelling or the portion of a dwelling leases to
another for occupancy for fewer than 30 consecutive days.
   STORY. The space within a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the ceiling next above.
   STORY, HALF. A story with at least two of its opposite sides situated in a
sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds of the floor
immediately below it.
   STREET. A public right-of-way, including a highway, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, road, lane, walk, alley, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, public
easement or other way.
   STRUCTURE. Any thing constructed or erected, which requires location on the
ground or attached to something having a location on the ground.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in supporting members of a building or
structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
   SUBDIVISION. Any land that is divided, re-subdivided or proposed to be
divided into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or other division
of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease or
development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions. It also includes the division or development of land by
deed, metes and bounds description, devise and testacy, map, plat or other
recorded instrument, except as provided in state law, divisions of land for
residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be used for
commercial, agricultural and industrial uses. It does not include a bona fide
division or partition of agricultural land for agricultural purposes, a
recorded agreement between owners of adjoining properties adjusting their
mutual boundary if no new lots are created, and the adjustment does not violate
land use ordinances.
   TOURIST COURT. Any building or group of buildings containing sleeping rooms,
with or without fixed cooking facilities designed for temporary use by
automobile tourists or transients, with a garage attached or parking space
conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts, motels or motor
lodges.
   UNINCORPORATED. The area outside of the incorporated areas of a county.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A subordinate use customarily incidental to and located upon
the same lot occupied by a main use.
   USE, MAIN. The principal function or use of the land and/or building or
structure.
   VARIANCE. An authorization by the Planning Commission, acting as the land
use authority pursuant to state law, relative to specific parcel of land for a
modification of a zone’s standard height, bulk, area, width, setback or
separation requirement; as distinguished from a conditional use, the allowing
of a use not listed as permitted in a zone or any other change in zoning
requirements.
   YARD. A space on the lot, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upwards, by buildings, except as otherwise provided herein.
   YARD, FRONT. A space extending across the frill width of a lot, between the
front building line and the front lot line. The depth of the FRONT YARD is the
minimum distance between the front lot line and the front building line.
   YARD, REAR. A space extending across the full width of a lot, between the
rear building line and the rear lot line. The depth of the REAR YARD is the
minimum distance between the side lot and the rear building line.
   YARD, SIDE. A space extending along the full depth of a lot, between the
side building line and the side lot line. The width of the SIDE YARD shall be
the minimum distance between the side lot line and the side building line.
   WIND TURBINE. A turbine that is powered by the wind.
   ZONING MAP. A map, adopted as part of a land use ordinance that depicts land
use zones, overlays or districts.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-16-2024)
§ 153.006 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND REVIEW.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   (a)   The use of land or the construction or alteration, of any
building or structure or any part thereof, as provided or as restricted in this
chapter shall not be commenced, or proceeded with, except after the issuance of
a written permit for the same by the Building Inspector.
         (b)   Farm buildings shall be exempt, except when either electric or
plumbing will be installed in the buildings, from the requirements of a
building permit, except where such structures are intended as dwellings or for
human habitation.
      (2)   All dwellings shall require state’s Board of Health approval prior
to issuance of a building permit.
   (B)   Application and review.
      (1)   All applications for building permits, except for single-family
dwellings and their accessory buildings shall:
         (a)   Be submitted to the Building and Zoning Department. The design
submissions shall include architectural and site development plans to scale,
which shall show building locations, landscaping, prominent existing trees,
ground treatment, fences, off-street parking and circulation, location and size
of the adjacent streets, north arrow and property lines, existing grades and
proposed new grades. All such drawings and sketches shall be reviewed with the
Planning Commission upon notification and request of the Planning Commission to
assure conformity with the intent of the Master Plan and compliance with all
applicable ordinances and regulations; and
         (b)   Then follow the usual process for obtaining a building permit as
required by the county.
      (2)   Design review for buildings and uses covered by conditional use
permits or planned unit development approval shall be incorporated within such
conditional use permit or planned unit development approval and need not be a
separate application; provided, the requirements of this chapter arc met.
      (3)   Agricultural buildings are exempt from design review.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
Cross reference:
   Fire policy for approved development/construction, see
Chapter 93
   Minor subdivisions; issuance of building permits, see
152.038
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.020 PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW.
   (A)   When a question arises whether proposed architectural and site
development plans submitted are consistent with the general objectives of this
chapter, the Planning Commission shall make a determination.
   (B)   A negative or unfavorable determination by the Planning Commission may
be appealed to the Board of County Commissioners, as provided for in this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.021 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR TO ENFORCE; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator is designated and authorized by the Board of
County Commissioners as the officer charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, but from time to time, by resolution or ordinance, the Board of County
Commissioners may entrust such administration, in whole or in part, to any
other officer without amendment to this chapter.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall enforce all of the provisions of this
chapter, entering actions in the courts when necessary and his or her failure
to do so shall not legalize any violations of such provisions. The Zoning
Administrator shall not issue any permit unless the plans of the proposed
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use fully conform to all
zoning regulations then in effect.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.022 PERMITS TO COMPLY WITH CHAPTER.
   From the time of the effective date of this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall not grant a permit for the construction, or alteration of
any building or structure or the moving of a structure onto a lot if such
building or structure will be in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, nor shall any local officer grant any permit or license for the use of
any building or land if such use would be in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.023 BUILDING INSPECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect or cause to be
inspected all buildings in course of construction or repair.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.024 NUISANCE AND ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Any building or structure erected constructed, altered, enlarged,
converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and
any use of land, building or premise established, conducted or maintained
contrary to provisions in this chapter shall be, and the same hereby is,
declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance; and the County Attorney shall,
upon request of the governing body, at once commence action or proceeding for
abatement and removal of enjoyment thereof in a manner provided by law, and
take other steps as will abate and remove such building or structure, and
restrain or enjoin any person, firm or corporation from erecting, building,
maintaining or using said building or structure or property contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.025 AMENDMENTS.
   The number, shape, boundary, area or zone, or any regulation or any other
provision of this chapter may be amended by the Board of County Commissioners
from time to time, but any such amendment shall not be made or become effective
until after 30 days’ notice and public hearing and unless the same shall have
been proposed by or be first submitted to the Planning Commission, for its
recommendation which shall be returned within 30 days to the Board of County
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.026 HEARING AND PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.
   (A)   Before finally adopting any such amendment, the Board of County
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing thereon.
   (B)   Notice of such a hearing shall be disseminated to the public, in
accordance with state law, at least ten days before the scheduled hearing.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.027 LICENSING.
   All departments, officials and public employees of the county which are
vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to
the provisions of this chapter and shall issue no permit or license for uses,
building or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter and any such permit or license, if issued in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.028 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES.
   (A)   Certain documents, copies of which are on file and are open for
inspection of the public in the office of the Building Inspector and designated
as the currently adopted edition of the building codes and any subsequent
amendments under UCA Title 15A of the state’s Construction and Fire Codes Act.
   (B)   The above mentioned are hereby adopted as the “Building Code” of San
Juan County, Utah, for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy,
equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in
the county providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees thereof.
(Ord. 2020-2, passed 2-4-2020)
LAND USE ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.040 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Organization. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members
who shall be appointed by the Board of County Commissioners. In addition to the
regular seven members, the Board of County Commissioners may appoint, one non-
voting, ex-officio staff member to serve as liaison between the Board of County
Commissioners and the Planning Commission and provide administrative support to
the Planning Commission. Board of County Commission members may not serve as
regular members of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Term of office.
      (1)   The term of office for regular Planning Commission members shall be
staggered so that the terms of at least one member and no more than three
members expire each year. As the term of each regular member expires, the
vacancy thus created shall be filled by a majority vote of the Board of County
Commissioners for a term of four years, so as to maintain the succession of
staggered terms of service.
      (2)   Terms of all regular members begin on January 1 and expire on
December 31 of the fourth year following the year of appointment. If the Board
of County Commissioners has not appointed a new member(s) to the Planning
Commission at the expiration of term, the current Planning Commission member(s)
will remain on the Planning Commission until replaced by appointment of the
Board of County Commissioners.
      (3)   The ex officio member shall be appointed by the Board of County
Commissioners and shall continue to serve until replaced by appointment of the
Board of County Commissioners.
      (4)   If a vacancy occurs other than by expiration of term, the Board of
County Commissioners by majority vote shall appoint a new member to fill the
unexpired term.
      (5)   Planning Commission members may be removed for cause from office by
two-thirds’ vote of the Board of County Commissioners prior to the expiration
of the appointed term.
   (C)   Method of appointment. In early November of each year, the County
Administrator shall cause notice of appointment(s) to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county. The Building and Zoning
Department shall be responsible for the costs of such advertisement. Such
notice shall state the nature and term of the appointment(s), the qualification
for such appointment, request written statements of interest and
qualifications, and establish a deadline for submittal of such statements,
which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the date of publication.
   (D)   Qualifications. Each Planning Commission member shall be a legal
county resident for at least two years prior to appointment.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Planning Commission shall have the following
powers and duties pursuant to UCA § 17-27a-302. Each county-wide planning
commission shall, with respect to the unincorporated area of the county, make a
recommendation to the county legislative body for:
      (1)   A general plan and amendments to the general plan;
      (2)   Land use ordinances, zoning maps, official maps and amendments;
      (3)   An appropriate delegation of power to at least one land use
authority to hear and act on a the land use application;
      (4)   An appropriate delegation of power to at least one appeal authority
to hear and act on an appeal from a decision of the land use authority;
      (5)   Application processes that may include a designation of routine
land use matters that, upon application and proper notice, will receive
informal streamlined review and action if the application is uncontested; and
shall protect the rights of each applicant and third party to require formal
consideration of any application by a land use authority; applicant, adversely
affected party, or county officer or employee to appeal a land use authority’s
decision to a separate appeal authority; and participant to be heard in each
public hearing on a contested application.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.041 APPEALS.
   Appeals of land use decisions under this chapter shall be filed, reviewed,
and heard by the Administrative Law Judge under
Chapter 11 of this code.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
§ 153.042 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modifications of the
requirements of a land use ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that he
or she owns, leases, or in which he or she holds some other beneficial interest
may apply to the Administrative Law Judge for a variance from the terms of the
ordinance.
   (B)   Pursuant to state law, the Administrative Law Judge may grant a
variance only if:
      (1)   Literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an unreasonable
hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purpose of the land use ordinances;
      (2)   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do
not generally apply to other properties in the same zone;
      (3)   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone;
      (4)   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and
will not be contrary to the public interest; and
      (5)   The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial
justice done.
   (C)   In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship hereunder, the Appeal Authority may not find
an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship:
      (1)   Is located on or associated with the property for which the
variance is sought; and
      (2)   Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from
conditions that arc general to the neighborhood.
   (D)   In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under division (C) above, the Administrative
Law Judge may not find an unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-imposed
or economic.
   (E)   In determining whether or not there are special circumstances attached
to the property under division (B) above, the Administrative Law Judge may find
that special circumstances exist only if the special circumstances:
      (1)   Relate to the hardship complained of; and
      (2)   Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in
the same zone.
   (F)   The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the
conditions justifying a variance have been met.
   (G)   Variances run with the land.
   (H)   The Administrative Law Judge may not grant a use variance.
   (I)   In granting a variance, the Administrative Law Judge may impose
additional requirements on the applicant that will:
      (1)   Mitigate any harmful affects of the variance; or
      (2)   Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or
modified.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011; Ord. 2023-03, passed 5-16-2023)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 153.055 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the county is divided into the following
listed zoning districts:
 
Agricultural District       A-1
Controlled District         CD
Indian Reservation District IR
Multiple Use District       MU-1
Rural Residential           RR-1
 
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.056 FILING OF ORDINANCE AND MAP.
   This chapter and map shall be filed in the office of the County Clerk/
Auditor and may be examined by the public subject to the reasonable regulations
established by said Clerk/Auditor.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.057 RULES FOR LOCATING BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any district, the following
rules shall apply.
   (A)   Wherever the district boundary is indicated as being approximately
upon the centerline of a street, alley or block, or along a property line,
then, unless otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the center line of such
street, alley, block or such property line, shall be construed to be the
boundary of such district.
   (B)   Whenever such boundary line of such district is indicated as being
approximately at the line of any river, irrigation, canal or other waterway, or
railroad right-of-way, or public park or other public land, or any section
line, then in such case, the center of such stream canal or waterway, or of
such railroad right-of-way, or the boundary line of such public land or such
section line shall be deemed to be the boundary of such district.
   (C)   Where such district boundary lines cannot be determined by the above
rules, their location may be found by the use of the scale appearing upon the
map.
   (D)   Where the application of the above rule does not clarify the district
boundary location, the Planning Commission shall interpret the map.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
MULTIPLE-USE, AGRICULTURAL, RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 153.070 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Multiple use. To establish areas in mountain, hillside, canyon,
mountain valley, desert and other open and generally undeveloped lands where
human habitation would be limited in order to protect land and open space
resources; to reduce unreasonable requirements for public utility and service
expenditures through uneconomic and un-wise dispersal of population; to
encourage use of the land, where appropriate, for forestry, grazing,
agriculture, mining, wildlife habitat and recreation; to avoid excessive damage
to watersheds, water pollution, soil erosion, danger from brush land fires,
damage to grazing, livestock raising and to wildlife values; and, to promote
the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the community.
   (B)   Agricultural. To promote and preserve, in appropriate areas,
conditions favorable to agriculture and to maintain greenbelt open spaces. Such
districts are intended to include activities normally and necessarily related
to the conduct of agricultural production and to provide protection from the
intrusion of uses adverse to the continuance of agricultural activity.
   (C)   rural residential. To promote and preserve, in appropriate areas,
conditions favorable to large-lot family life, the keeping of limited numbers
of animals and fowl, and reduced requirements for public utilities. These
districts are intended to be primarily residential in character and protected
from encroachment by commercial and industrial uses.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.071 USE REGULATIONS.
   No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall be hereafter erected, structurally altered enlarged or maintained, except
as allowed in the districts as shown as “permitted uses” indicated by a “P” in
the appropriate column, or as “conditional uses”, indicated by a “C” in the
appropriate column. If a use is not allowed in the district, it is either not
named in the use list or it is indicated in the appropriate column by a dash,
“-”. If a regulation applies in the district, it is indicated in the
appropriate column by a numeral to show the lineal or square feet, or acres
required, or by the letter “A”. If the regulation does not apply, it is
indicated in the appropriate column by a dash.
 MU-1 A-1 RR-1
                                                                                MU- A- RR-
                                                                                1   1  1
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to permitted areas          P   P  P
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to conditional uses         C   C  C
   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, including
living quarters for a guard or night guard- such buildings must be removed upon C   C  C
completion or abandonment of the construction work
Agriculture and forestry
   Agriculture, except grazing and pasturing of animals                      P   P  P
   Agriculture, including grazing and pasturing of animals                   P   P  P
   Agriculture, business or industry                                         P   P  C
   Animals and fowl for recreation or for family food production for the     P   P  P
primary use of persons residing on the premises
   Nursery or green house, wholesale or retail, fruit/vegetable stand        P   P  P
   The tilling of soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and gardening     P   P  P
   Farms devoted to raising and marketing of chickens, turkeys or other fowl Pr  P  C
poultry, fish or frogs, including wholesale and retail sales
   Forestry, except forest industry                                          P   P  C
   Forest industry, such as a sawmill, wood products plant or others         P   P  C
Apiary                                                                          P   P  P
Airport/airstrip                                                                C   C  C
Aviary                                                                          P   P  C
Cluster subdivision of single-family dwellings
   Provided that, the residential density is not increased by more than 100% -   -  C
for the district based on single-family units
   Provided that, the area, in acres of the parcel, is not less than         -   -  5
Dude ranch; family vacation ranch                                               C   C  C
Dwellings
   Single-family dwellings; provided that, 1 additional dwelling on at least ½
acre per unit for an employee, seasonal worker or a member of the property      P   P  P
owners immediate family may be allowed subject to approval by Planning
Commission and the Board of Health
   Pre-HUD-Code manufactured (mobile) homes. Pre-HUD-Code homes are homes built
prior to the MHCSS, 24 C.F.R. part 3280, which became effective on 6-15-1976.   -   -  -
(see NCCBCS/ANSIA225.1, Annex D)
   Two-family dwellings                                                      C   C  C
   Seasonal home or cabin                                                    P   P  P
Farm or ranch housing (including mobile homes)                                  P   P  P
Home occupation                                                                 P   P  P
Household pets                                                                  P   P  P
Kennel                                                                          P   P  C
Mine, quarry, gravel pit, rock crasher, concrete batching plant, or asphalt     P   P  C
plant, oil wells or steam wells
Evaporation ponds                                                               C   C  C
Power generation                                                                C   C  -
Renewable energy-solar, wind farms                                              C   C  -
Private park or recreational grounds or private recreational camp or resort,
including accessory or supporting dwellings or dwelling complexes and           C   C  C
commercial service uses which are owned by or managed by the recreational
facility to which it is accessory
Motor park                                                                      C   C  C
Public stable, riding academy or riding ring, horse show barns or facilities    C   C  C
Public use, quasi-public use, essential services, including private school,
with a curriculum corresponding to a public school, church; dams and            C   C  C
reservoirs; radio and television transmitting stations or towers, cemetery
Signs
   1 identification sign, not to exceed 32 sq. ft. in total surface area     P   P  P
   1 development sign, not to exceed 32 sq. ft. in total surface area        P   P  P
   1 civic sign, not to exceed 16 sq. ft. in total surface area              P   P  P
   1 real estate sign, not to exceed 8 sq. ft. in total surface area         P   P  P
   1 residential sign, not to exceed 2 sq. ft. in total surface area         P   P  P
Wind turbine(s), anemometer(s)                                                  C   C  C
 
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.072 AREA REGULATIONS.
 
                                                            MU-1 A-1 RR-1
Minimum lot area in acres for any main use in the districts 1    1   1
regulation by this chapter shall be
Unless, the lot has access to municipal water and/or sewer which would
permit development of lots for main use as small as 0.25 acre.
Additionally, the county may also permit smaller lot sizes as small as
0.25 acre in all districts for:
a) lots serviced by a shared water well where the water source and septic
are not on the same parcel and meet minimum separation standards required
by the state;
b) where alternate technologies can be utilized to eliminate the concern
of water and sewer cross-contamination; or
c) when in the professional written opinion of the Environmental
Specialist from the county’s Health Department it is safe to do so.
 
(Ord. passed 9- -2011; Ord. 2019-03, passed 11-19-2019)
§ 153.073 FRONTAGE REGULATIONS.
 
                                                                MU-1 A-1 RR-1
Minimum frontage in feet for any lot in the districts regulated
by this chapter on a public street or a private street approved 25   25  25
by the governing body shall be
 
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.074 FRONT YARD REGULATIONS.
 
                                                                  MU-1 A-1 RR-1
Minimum depth in feet for the front yard for main buildings shall 25   25  25
be property line
Minimum depth in feet for the rear yard in the districts regulated by this
chapter shall be
   For main buildings                                          25   25  25
   For accessory buildings                                     25   25  25
Minimum side yard in feet for any dwelling, other main or
accessory buildings in districts regulated by this chapter shall  15   15  15
be
   Except corner lots which shall have twice the setback of    30   30  30
 
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.075 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
 
                       MU-1 A-1 RR-1
Maximum height for all buildings and structures in districts regulated by
this chapter shall be
   In feet           35   35  35
   In number of stori2.5  2.5 2.5
 
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.076 COVERAGE REGULATIONS.
 
                                                         MU-1 A-1 RR-1
Maximum coverage in percent for any lot in the districts -    -   20
regulated by this chapter shall be
 
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
CONTROLLED DISTRICTS CD
§ 153.090 PURPOSE.
   To provide, in appropriate locations, a district where agriculture,
industrial, commercial and residential uses may exist in harmony, based on
planned development for mutual benefit and flexible location of uses.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.091 PERMITTED USES.
   Agriculture, residential, commercial, highway commercial, and industrial
(industrial subject to approval). In additional to the uses regulated in RR-22
Districts, the following uses may be permitted by variance within each sub-
zone.
   (A)   Community Commercial CD:
      (1)   Grocery store;
      (2)   Drug store;
      (3)   Automobile service station;
      (4)   Bakery;
      (5)   Dry cleaning and laundry pickup;
      (6)   Beauty shop;
      (7)   Barber shop;
      (8)   Child care;
      (9)   Ice cream store;
      (10)   Variety store;
      (11)   Medical and dental offices;
      (12)   Professional office;
      (13)   Public utilities, public and quasi-public;
      (14)   Stores, shops and offices supplying commodities or performing
services such as department stores, specialty shops, banks, business offices
and other financial institutions and personal service enterprises;
      (15)   Restaurants, beer taverns, pool hall lounges, theaters, similar
enterprises; provided that, all uses be conducted within buildings;
      (16)   Business and technical schools, and schools and studios of
photography, art, music and dance;
      (17)   Bowling alley, dance hall, roller skating rink;
      (18)   Carpenter shops, electrical, plumbing, heating and air
conditioning shops, printing and publishing or lithographic shops, mortuaries
and furniture upholstering shops; provided, all uses shall be within and
enclosed building;
      (19)   New car dealers;
      (20)   Garages for minor repairs of automobiles;
      (21)   Garages for storage of automobiles, commercial parking lots;
      (22)   Hotels and motels; and
      (23)   Any other similar retail business or service establishments which
the Planning and Zoning Commission finds to be consistent with the purpose of
this chapter and which will not impair the present or future use of adjacent
properties.
   (B)   Highway Commercial CDh:
      (1)   Restaurant or drive-in café;
      (2)   Motels;
      (3)   New and used automobile agency;
      (4)   Farm machinery and equipment sales;
      (5)   Nurseries and greenhouses;
      (6)   Mobile home sales;
      (7)   Mobile home park;
      (8)   Drive-in theater;
      (9)   Bowling alley, other commercial recreation facilities;
      (10)   Automobile service station;
      (11)   Auto accessories;
      (12)   Accessory buildings and uses; and
      (13)   Other uses approved by the Planning Commission as being in harmony
with the intent of the neighborhood commercial zone and similar in nature to
the above listed uses.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.092 CONDITIONAL USES.
   All other uses than those listed.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.093 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Within the CD District, there may exist three sub-zones: CD -
Community Commercial; CDh - Commercial Highway; and CDi - Industrial.
Designation of such sub-zones shall be the responsibility of the Board of
County Commissioners upon the recommendation of the county’s Planning
Commission.
   (B)   Applications for conditional uses or requests for variances in CD
District must first have appropriate sub-zone designation. Such designation
shall become part of the official county zone plan. Applicants are required to
provide a reproducible Mylar or linen and three copies of detailed site plan
drawings of their proposed use and sub-zone boundary including:
      (1)   Format size not less than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches,
or greater than 24 inches by 36 inches;
      (2)   Precise dimension at a convenient engineering scale;
      (3)   Location of all existing structures and improvements (buildings,
roads, fences, ditches and canals, utility systems), and other information as
required by Planning Commission within 500 feet of the proposed sub-zone
boundary; and
      (4)   Proposed methods of providing utility needs including water, sewer,
electrical and fuel services, access and parking and appropriate methods from
dealing with any special site problems such as storm water drainage.
   (C)   No commercial or industrial building shall be erected within 25 feet
of a residential building or residential district boundary. Commercial or
industrial buildings within 100 feet of a residential district boundary shall
not exceed the height limitations of that district.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall review all pertinent information on the
proposed sub-zone designation and submit their recommendation to the County
Board of Commissioners. Upon receiving the Planning Commission’s recommendation
(s), the Board of County Commissioners shall advertise for and hold a public
hearing to receive public input in order to make an informed decision whether
or not to designate the sub-zone by ordinance.
   (E)   (1)   The following uses require an approval from the Planning and
Zoning Commission prior to any use in Industrial Cdi: manufacture of any of the
following products from raw materials: acids, asphalt, carbide, caustic soda,
carbon or bone black, cellulose, charcoal, chlorine, creosote, fertilizer,
hydrogen, industrial alcohol, nitrates of an explosive nature, plastics,
portland cement, potash, synthetic and resins, fibers.
      (2)   Any of the following processes: distillation of wood or bone;
filtrating of cotton or other materials; reduction, refining, smelting and
alloying of metals or metal ores and radioactive materials; refining of
petroleum and petroleum products; slaughtering and packing of animals larger
than poultry and rabbits; tanning of raw, green or salted hides of skins.
      (3)   Automobile salvage and wrecking operations and industrial metal,
rag, glass or paper salvage operations; provided that, all operations are
conducted within a solid view obscuring wall or fence not less than eight feet
in height.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.094 SIGNS.
   (A)   Business signs shall be allowed after approval of a “request for
business sign permit” and shall be governed by federal and state highway rules
and regulations; provided that, the Planning Commission may require that signs
shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each one linear foot of
street frontage abutting the development portion of the property; provided
that, any one sign for any one business shall not exceed 100 square feet in
total surface area and the number of signs for each business may not exceed
three, the total area of which shall not exceed the total sign area allowance.
   (B)   Non-business signs shall be permitted or provided with no more than
two signs for each use or occupancy. The total allowable square footage for
signage are as follows:
      (1)   Development: maximum 40 square feet;
      (2)   Civic: maximum 14 square feet;
      (3)   Real estate: maximum 32 square feet; and
      (4)   Residential: maximum two square feet.
   (C)   All signs are to be flat wall or freestanding and such signs shall not
be revolving or have moving parts, flashing or intermittent lighting.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.095 BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Boundaries for all Controlled District (CD) Zones shall be established
by the Board of County Commissioners who may amend the number, shape and area
of such districts; provided, it has received a recommendation from the Planning
Commission concerning a proposed amendment and a public hearing has been held
by either body.
   (B)   Description of all Controlled Districts (CD) Zones should be included
as part of this chapter and changes in some shall be written in similar
language and made part of this section.
   (C)   Controlled District (CD) boundaries:
      (1)   An area parallel to all state highways extending outwardly 1,000
feet each direction from the centerline of said highways and terminating at
county boundaries or municipal corporate;
      (2)   All of the area, except that within the corporate limits of
Monticello City, in Township 33 South, Range 23 East, Sections 25 and 36;
Township 33 South, Range 24 East, Sections 30 and 31;
      (3)   All of the area, except that within the corporate limits of
Blanding City, in Township 36 South, Range 22 East, Sections 22, 23, 26, 27, 34
and 35; Township 37 South, Range 22 East, Sections 2, 3, 10, 11, 14 and 15;
      (4)   All of the area in Township 40 South, Range 21 East, Sections 23,
24, 25, 26; and Township 40 South, Range 22 East, Sections 19 and 30;
      (5)   All of the area in Section 14, Township 30 South, Range 20 East;
      (6)   All of the area in the west half of Section 4 and the east half of
Section 5, Township 29 South, Range 23 East;
      (7)   All of the area in Sections 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15, Township 37
South, Range 18 East;
      (8)   All of the area, except that in the boundaries of Natural Bridges
National Monument, in Sections 14, 15, 22 and 23, in Township 37 South, Range
18 East;
      (9)   All of the area in Sections 21 and 28, Township 39 South, Range 16
East;
      (10)   All of the area within the boundaries of the county in Sections
14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26,27, 28, 29 and 30 in Township 38 South,
Range 11 East; and
      (11)   All of the sections and 7 in Township 42 South, Range 19 East.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
INDIAN RESERVATION DISTRICT (IR)
§ 153.110 PURPOSE.
   To provide, in appropriate locations, areas where the various Indian Tribes
may exercise self-determination.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.111 PERMITTED USES.
   All uses and conditions thereof are subject to approval by the authorized
representatives of the Indian Tribal jurisdictions of which they are a part.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
SUPPLEMENTARY AND QUALIFYING REGULATIONS
§ 153.125 EFFECT OF CHAPTER.
   The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement,
as the case may be, the zone regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.126 LOTS IN SEPARATE OWNERSHIP.
   The requirements of this chapter, as to minimum lot area or lot width, shall
not be construed to prevent the use for a single-family dwelling of any lot or
parcel of land in the event that such lot or parcel of land is held in separate
ownership at the time this chapter becomes effective.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.127 YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY.
   No required yard or other open space around an existing building, or which
is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this chapter, shall be considered as providing a yard or open
space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space
on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot
whereon a building is to be erected or established.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.128 EVERY DWELLING TO BE ON A LOT.
   Every dwelling shall be located and maintained on a “lot”, as defined in
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.129 SEPARATELY OWNED LOTS; REDUCED YARDS.
   On any lot under a separate ownership from adjacent lots and of record at
the time of passage of this chapter, and such lot having a smaller width than
required for the zone in which it is located, the width of each of the side
yards for a dwelling may be reduced to a width which is not less than the same
percentage of the width of the lot as the required side yard would be if the
required lot width; provided that, in interior lots the smaller of the two
yards shall be in no case less than five feet and for corner lots the street
side yard shall be in no case less than ten feet or the other side yard be less
than five feet.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.130 PRIVATE GARAGE WITH SIDE YARD; REDUCED YARD.
   On any interior lot where a private garage, containing a sufficient number
of parking spaces to meet the requirements of this chapter, has a side yard
equal to the minimum side yard required for a dwelling in the same zone, the
width of the other side yard for the dwelling may be reduced to equal that of
the minimum required side yard; and on any lot where such garage has such side
yard the rear yard of the dwelling may be reduced to 15 feet; provided, the
garage also has a rear yard of at least 15 feet.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.131 SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE.
   No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other
requirements of this chapter for lot or building may be sold or leased away
from such lot or building.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.132 SALE OF LOTS BELOW MINIMUM SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area requirement
for the zone in which it is located may be cut off from a larger parcel of land
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of building or development as a
lot, except by permit of the land use authority.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.133 YARDS TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED; EXCEPTIONS.
   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed, except
for accessory buildings in a rear yard, the ordinary projections of skylight,
sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, flues and other ornamental features
shall not project into a yard more than two and one-half feet, and open or
lattice enclosed fire escapes, fire-proof outside stairway and balconies open
upon fire towers projecting into a yard not more than five feet.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
Cross reference:
   Fire policy for approved development/construction, see
Chapter 93
§ 153.134 AREA OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   No accessory building nor group of accessory buildings, in any residential
zone shall cover more than 25% of the rear yard.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.135 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Public, semi-public utility buildings, when authorized in a zone may
be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is set back from
each otherwise established building line at least one foot for each additional
foot of building height above the normal height limit required for the zone in
which the building is erected.
   (B)   No dwelling shall be erected to a height less than one story above
grade unless a variance or conditional use is secured from the land use
authority.
   (C)   No building which is accessory to a one-family, two-family, three-
family or four-family dwelling shall be erected to a height greater than two
stories or 35 feet.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.136 CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS.
   In all zones which require a front yard, no obstruction to view in excess of
two feet in height shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area
formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 40
feet from the intersection of the street lines, except a reasonable number of
trees pruned high enough to permit unobstructed vision to automobile drivers;
and pedestal-type identification signs and pumps at gasoline stations.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.137 CONSTRUCTION SUBJECT TO GEOLOGIC, FLOOD OR OTHER NATURAL HAZARD.
   (A)   (1)   When the Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator deems
it necessary, any application for a conditional use permit, a planned unit
development approval or a building or use permit, shall be accompanied by a
geologic and soils survey report for the land, lot or parcel for which
application approval is sought.
      (2)   The report shall be prepared at applicant’s expense by a geologist
or soils engineer and shall show the suitability of soils on the property to
accommodate the proposed construction and any discernable flood or earthquake
hazards.
   (B)   Whenever a geologic and soils survey report indicates a parcel to be
subject to unusual, potential or actual hazards, the applicant shall meet the
special conditions required by the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator,
to reduce or eliminate such hazard, or if such conditions cannot be met, or
will not be met, the application shall be denied.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.138 SPANISH VALLEY DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES ADOPTED.
   The county legislative body hereby amends the County General Plan and this
chapter by adopting the Spanish Valley Development Ordinances and Map as
follows.
   (A)   This chapter is hereby amended to include the attached Spanish Valley
Development Ordinances hereto as Exhibit A. All references in the county code
to this chapter are references to the ordinances attached to the ordinance
codified herein, which shall be held in the County Clerk/Auditor’s office with
the records of the county’s Planning Commission; and
   (B)   The Zoning Map of the county is hereby amended to include the Zoning
Map attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit B. All references in
the county code to a Zoning Map are references to the attached.
(Ord. 2019-02, passed 11-19-2019; Ord. 2024-01, passed 1-16-2024)
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING AND USES
§ 153.150 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   A non-conforming use or a non-complying structure may be continued by
the present or a future property owner.
   (B)   A non-conforming use may be extended through the same building;
provided, no structural alteration of the building is proposed or made for the
purpose of the extension.
   (C)   For purposes of this subchapter, the addition of a solar energy device
to a building is not a structural alteration.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.151 ESTABLISHMENT AND CHANGES TO NON-CONFORMING USE.
   (A)   The county permits the establishment, restoration, reconstruction,
extension, alteration, expansion or substitution of non-conforming uses upon
the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   The county shall not prohibit the reconstruction or restoration of a
non-complying structure or terminate the non-conforming use of a structure that
is involuntarily destroyed in whole or in part due to fire or other calamity
unless the structure or use has been abandoned.
   (C)   The county shall prohibit the reconstruction or restoration of a non-
complying structure or terminate the non-conforming use of a structure if:
      (1)   The structure is allowed to deteriorate to a condition that the
structure is rendered uninhabitable and is not repaired or restored within six
months after written notice to the property owner that the structure is
uninhabitable and that the non-complying structure or non-conforming use will
be lost if the structure is not repaired or restored within six months; or
      (2)   The property owner has voluntarily demolished a majority of the
non-complying structure or the building that houses the non-conforming use.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.152 TERMINATION OF NON-CONFORMING USE.
   (A)   The county shall terminate all non-conforming uses, except billboards,
by providing a formula establishing a reasonable time period during which the
owner can recover or amortize the amount of his or her investment in the non-
conforming use, if any.
   (B)   (1)   The county may terminate a non-conforming use due to its
abandonment.
      (2)   The time period for abandonment is one year of uninterrupted
vacancy as consistent with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
PARKING AND LOADING; MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESS
§ 153.165 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   There shall be provided at the time any building is enlarged or increased in
capacity, minimum off-street parking space with adequate provisions for ingress
and egress by standard-sized automobiles as hereafter provided.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.166 SIZE.
   The dimensions of each off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet
by 20 feet for diagonal or 90-degree spaces; or nine by 22 feet for parallel
spaces, exclusive of access drives or aisles; provided that, in parking lots of
not less than 20 parking spaces, the Building Inspector may approve a design
allowing not more than 20% of such spaces to be not less than seven and one-
half feet by 15 feet to be marked and used for compact automobiles only.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.167 PARKING SPACE FOR DWELLINGS.
   In all residential zones, there shall be provided in a private garage, or in
an area properly located for a future garage, space for the parking of one
automobile for each dwelling unit in a new dwelling, or each dwelling unit
added in the case of the enlargement of an existing building.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.168 PARKING SPACE FOR BUILDING OR USES OTHER THAN DWELLINGS.
   For a new building, or for any enlargement or increase in seating capacity,
floor area or guest rooms of any existing main building, there shall be at
least one permanently maintained parking space of not less than 180 square feet
net area as follows:
   (A)   For church, school, college and university auditoriums and theaters,
general auditoriums, stadiums and other similar places of assembly at least one
parking space for every ten fixed seats provided in said buildings or
structures;
   (B)   (1)   For hospitals, at least one parking space for each two beds
including infants’ cribs and children’s beds.
      (2)   For medical and dental clinics, at least ten parking spaces and
three additional parking spaces for each doctor or dentist having offices in
such clinic in excess of three doctors or dentists;
   (C)   For individual sleeping or living units, hotels and apartment hotels
at least one parking space for each two sleeping rooms, up to and including the
first 20 sleeping rooms, and one parking space for each three sleeping rooms
over 20 sleeping rooms;
   (D)   For boarding houses, lodging houses, dormitories, fraternities or
sororities at least one parking space for every three persons for whose
accommodation the building is designed or used;
   (E)   For restaurants or establishments that serve meals, lunches, or drinks
to patrons either in their cars or in the building, for retail stores selling
directly to the public, and for dance halls and recreational places of assembly
at least one space for each 200 square feet of floor space in the building, or
one space for each two employees working on the highest employment shift, or
five parking spaces, whichever requirement is greater;
   (F)   For mortuaries, at least 30 parking spaces; for liquor stores, at
least 20 parking spaces; and
   (G)   For all business or industrial uses not listed above, one parking
space for each two employees working on the highest employment shift.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.169 LOCATION OF PARKING SPACES.
   Parking spaces as required above shall be on the same lot with the main
building or, in the case of buildings other than dwellings, may be located not
farther than 500 feet therefrom.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.170 PARKING LOT REGULATIONS.
   Any lights used to illuminate the lot shall be so arranged as to reflect the
light away from adjoining premises in any residential zone.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.171 OFF-STREET TRUCK LOADING SPACE.
   (A)   On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof,
erected and occupied or increased in capacity after the effective date of this
chapter for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, department store,
grocery store, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other use
similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or
merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space
for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue
interference with public use of streets or alleys.
   (B)   Such space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall include a
minimum of ten feet by 25 feet loading space with a minimum of 14 feet height
clearance for every 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof in excess of 3,000
square feet of building floor use for above mentioned purposes, or for every
20,000 square feet or fraction thereof in excess of 3,000 square feet of land
use for above mentioned purposes.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.172 ACCESS REQUIREMENTS.
   Service stations, roadside stands, public parking lots and all other
businesses requiring motor vehicle access shall meet the requirements, as
hereinafter provided.
   (A)   Access shall be by not more than two roadways for each 100 feet or
fraction thereof of frontage on any street.
   (B)   No two said roadways shall be closer to each other than 12 feet, and
no roadway shall be closer to a side property line than three feet.
   (C)   Each roadway shall be not more than 35 feet in width, measured at
right angles to the centerline of the driveway, except as increased by
permissible curb return radii. The entire flare of any return radium shall fan
within the right-of-way.
   (D)   No roadway shall be closer than ten feet to the point of intersection
of two property lines at any corner as measured along the property line, and no
roadway shall extend across such extended property line.
   (E)   In all cases where there is an existing curb and gutter or sidewalk on
the street, the applicant for a permit shall provide a safety island along the
entire frontage of the property, except for the permitted roadways. On the two
ends and street side of each such island shall be constructed a concrete curb,
the height, the location and structural specifications of which shall be
approved by the Building Inspector.
   (F)   Where there is no existing curb and gutter or sidewalk, the applicant
may, at his or her option, install such safety island and curb, or in place
thereof, shall construct along the entire length of the property line, except
in front of the permitted roadways, a curb, fence or pipe rail, not exceeding
two feet or less than eight inches in height.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.173 LOCATION OF GASOLINE PUMPS.
   Gasoline pumps shall be set back not less than 18 feet from any street line
to which the pump island is vertical and 12 feet from any street line to which
the pump island is parallel, and not less than ten feet from any residential or
agricultural zone boundary line. If the pump island is set at an angle on the
property, it shall be so located that automobiles stopped for service will not
extend over the property line.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 153.185 DEFINITION.
   A CONDITIONAL USE is a land use that, because of its unique characteristics
or potential impact on the county, surrounding neighbors or adjacent land uses,
may not be compatible in some areas or may be compatible only if certain
conditions are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.186 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A conditional use permit shall be required for all uses listed as
conditional uses in the district regulations where they are, or will be
located, or if the use is specified as conditional use elsewhere in this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.187 NO PRESUMPTION OF APPROVAL.
   The listing of a conditional use in any table of permitted and conditional
uses found in §
153.071 of this chapter for each category of zoning district does not
constitute an assurance or presumption that such conditional use will be
approved. Rather, each proposed conditional use shall be evaluated on an
individual basis, in relation to its compliance with the standards and
conditions set forth in this chapter and with the standards for the district in
which it is located, in order to determine whether the conditional use is
appropriate at the particular location.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.188 APPLICATION.
   A conditional use permit application shall be made to the Zoning
Administrator as provided by this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall
submit the application to the Planning Commission; except that, the Planning
Commission may authorize the Zoning Administrator to giant, attach conditions
or deny conditional use permits, subject to such limitations or qualifications
as are deemed necessary. Applications for a conditional use permit shall be
accompanied by maps, drawings, statements or other documents as required by the
Planning Commission.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.189 DETERMINATION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission, or upon authorization, the Zoning
Administrator, shall approve a conditional use to be located within any
district in which the particular conditional use is permitted by the use
regulations of this chapter. In authorizing any conditional use, the Planning
Commission shall impose such requirements and conditions as are necessary for
the protection of adjacent properties and the public welfare.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall not authorize a conditional use permit
unless the evidence presented is such to establish:
      (1)   Such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case,
be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvements in the
vicinity; and
      (2)   The proposed use will comply with intent, spirit, regulations and
conditions specified in this chapter for such use and the zoning district where
the use is to be located, as well as make the use harmonious with the
neighboring uses in the zoning district.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall itemize, describe or justify the
conditions imposed on the use.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.190 FEES.
   The application for any conditional use permit shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee as determined by the Board of County Commissioners and as
listed in the county’s Fee Schedule Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.191 PUBLIC HEARING.
   A public hearing on a conditional use permit application may be held if the
Planning Commission shall deem a hearing to be necessary and in the public
interest.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.192 APPEALS OF DECISION.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Commission or the
Zoning Administrator regarding the issuance, denial or revocation or amendment
of a conditional use permit may appeal such decision to the Board of County
Commissioners whose decision shall be final. All appeals to the Board of County
Commissioners must be in writing and filed with such within 30 days of the date
of decision appealed from.
   (B)   The decision of the Board of County Commissioners may be appealed to
the District Court; provided, such appeal is filed within 30 days of the
Commission decision. Such appeal shall be filed with the County Administrator’s
office and the Court Clerk/Auditor.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.193 INSPECTION.
   Following the issuance of a conditional use permit by the Zoning
Administrator or the Planning Commission, the Zoning Administrator shall
approve an application for a building permit, and shall ensure that development
is undertaken and completed in compliance with said conditional use and
building permit.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.194 SUBSTANTIAL ACTION REQUIRED.
   Unless there is a substantial action under a conditional use permit with one
year of its issuance, the permit shall expire. The Planning Commission may
grant one extension up to six months, when it is deemed in the public interest.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.195 REVOCATION.
   (A)   A conditional use permit shall be revocable by the Planning Commission
at any time due to failure of the permittee to observe any condition specified
or failure to observe other requirements of this chapter in regard to the
maintenance and improvements or conduct of the use or business as approved. The
county shall also have a right of action to compel offending structures or uses
to be removed at the cost of the violator or owner.
   (B)   No conditional use permit shall be revoked until a hearing is held by
the Planning Commission. The permittee shall be notified in writing of such
hearing. The notification shall state the grounds for complaint or reasons for
revocation, and the time and location of the hearing. At the hearing, the
permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The permittee may call
witnesses and present evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Planning
Commission shall determine whether the permit should be revoked.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.196 TEMPORARY PERMIT.
   A temporary use permit may be issued for any use listed as a conditional use
for that zone for no longer than six months and may be extended for an
equivalent period with a maximum of three extensions.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 153.210 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the planned unit development is to allow diversification, in
the relationship of various uses and structures to their sites, and to permit
more flexibility in the use of such sites. The application of planned unit
concepts is intended to encourage good neighborhood, housing or area design,
thus ensuring substantial compliance with the intent of the district
regulations and other provisions of this chapter relating to the public health,
safety and general welfare, and at the same time securing the advantages of
large-scale site planning for residential, commercial or industrial
developments or combinations thereof.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.211 DEFINITION.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT, for the purposes of this chapter, shall mean an
integrated design for development of residential, commercial or industrial
uses, or combinations of such uses in which one or more of the regulations,
other than use regulations of the district in which the development is to be
situated, is waived or varied to allow flexibility and initiative in site and
building design and location in accordance with an approved plan and imposed
general requirements as specified in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.212 PERMIT.
   (A)   Planned unit developments may be allowed by Planning Commission
approval in any zoning district.
   (B)   No such planned unit development permit shall be granted unless such
development meets the use limitations of the zoning district in which it is
located, including planned unit developments in planned districts, and meet the
density and other limitations of such districts, except as such requirements
may be lawfully modified as provided by this chapter or by district
regulations.
   (C)   Compliance with the regulations of this chapter in no sense excuses
the developer from the applicable requirements of Ch. 152 of this code of
ordinances, except as modifications thereof are specifically authorized in the
approval of the application for the planned unit development.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.213 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No planned unit development shall have an area less than that approved
by the Planning Commission as adequate for the proposed development.
   (B)   A planned unit development which will contain uses not permitted in
the zoning district in which it is to be located will require a change of
zoning; except that, any residential use shall be considered a permitted use in
a planned unit development which allows residential uses and shall be governed
by density, design and other requirements of the planned unit development
permit.
   (C)   The development shall be in single or corporate ownership at the time
of application, or the subject of an application filed jointly by all owners of
the property.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall require such arrangements of structures
and open spaces within the site development plan as necessary to assure that
adjacent properties will not be adversely affected.
      (1)   Density or land use intensity shall in no case be more than 25%
higher than allowed in the zoning district, except not more than 10% higher in
residential districts.
      (2)   Where feasible, least height and intensity of buildings and uses
shall be arranged around the boundaries of the development.
      (3)   Lot area, width, yard, height, density and coverage regulations
shall be determined by approval of the site development plan.
   (E)   Preservation maintenance and ownership of required open spaces within
the development shall be accomplished by:
      (1)   Dedication of the land as a public park or parkway system;
      (2)   Granting to the county a permanent, open space easement on and over
the said private open spaces to guarantee that the open space remain
perpetually in recreational use, with ownership and maintenance being the
responsibility of an owners association established with articles of
association and bylaws which are satisfactory to the governing body; or
      (3)   Complying with the provisions of the Condominium Ownership Act of
1963, UCA Title 57, Ch. 8, as amended, which provides for the payment of common
expenses for the upkeep of the common areas and facilities.
   (F)   Landscaping, fencing and screening related to the several uses within
the site and as a means of integrating the proposed development into its
surroundings shall be planned and presented to the Planning Commission for
approval, together with other required plans for the development.
   (G)   The size, location, design and nature of signs, if any, and the
intensity and direction of area or floodlighting shall be detailed in the
application.
   (H)   A grading and drainage plan shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission with the application.
   (I)   A planting plan showing proposed tree and shrubbery plantings shall be
prepared for the entire site to be developed.
   (J)   The proposed use of the particular location shall be shown as
necessary or desirable, to provide a service or facility which will contribute
to the general well-being of the neighborhood and the community.
   (K)   It shall be shown that under the circumstances of the particular case,
the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, safety or general
welfare of persons residing in the vicinity of the planned unit development.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.214 USES ALLOWED.
   Subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission, uses allowed
in a planned unit development shall be those uses allowed in the planned
district or other zoning district in which the planned unit development is to
be located; provided that, for the purposes of this chapter and ordinance,
multiple-family dwellings may be allowed in a planned unit development approved
in a single-family zoning district; provided, the overall density of the
development does not exceed 10% above the density normally allowed for single-
family dwellings in said district.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.215 GENERAL SITE PLAN.
   Application shall be accompanied by a general site plan showing, where
pertinent:
   (A)   The use or uses, dimensions, sketch elevations and locations of
proposed structures;
   (B)   Dimensions and locations of areas to be reserved and developed for
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking, public uses such as schools and
playgrounds landscaping and other open spaces;
   (C)   Architectural drawings and sketches outlining the general design and
character of the proposed uses and the physical relationship of the uses; and
   (D)   Such other pertinent information, including residential density,
coverage, mud open space characteristics, shall be included as may be necessary
to make a determination that the contemplated arrangement of buildings and uses
makes it desirable to apply regulations and requirements differing from those
ordinarily applicable under this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.216 REVIEW BY PLANNING COMMISSION; SCOPE OF ACTION.
   (A)   In order that it may approve a planned unit development, the Planning
Commission shall have authority to require that the following conditions (among
others it deems appropriate) be met by the applicant:
      (1)   The proponents of the planned unit development have demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that they are financially able to
carry out the proposed project;
      (2)   The proponents intend to start construction within one year of the
approval of the project and any necessary zoning district change, and intend to
complete said construction, or approved stages thereof, within four years from
the date construction begins;
      (3)   Application for planned unit development in planned districts meets
the requirements of such districts, including the requirements of the general
development;
      (4)   The development is planned as one complex land use rather than as
an aggregation of individual and unrelated buildings and uses; and
      (5)   The development as planned will accomplish the purpose outlined in
§
153.210 of this chapter.
   (B)   In carrying out the intent of this chapter, the Planning Commission
shall consider the following principles.
      (1)   (a)   It is the intent of this chapter that site and building plans
for a planned unit development shall be prepared by a designer or team of
designers having professional competence in urban planning as proposed in the
application.
         (b)   The Commission may require the applicant to engage such a
qualified designer or design team.
      (2)   It is not the intent of this section that control of a planned unit
development by the Planning Commission be so rigidly exercised that individual
initiative be stifled and substantial additional expense incurred; rather, it
is the intent of this section that the control exercised be the minimum
necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter.
      (3)   (a)   The Planning Commission may approve or disapprove an
application for a planned unit development.
         (b)   In an approval, the Commission may attach such conditions as it
may deem necessary to secure compliance with the purposes set forth in §
153.210 of this chapter.
         (c)   The denial of an application for a planned unit development by
the Planning Commission may be appealed to the County Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.217 CONSTRUCTION LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Upon approval of a planned unit development, construction shall
proceed only in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the
Planning Commission, and in conformity with any conditions attached by the
Commission to its approval.
   (B)   Amendments to approved plans and specifications for a planned unit
development shall be obtained only by following the procedures here outlined
for first approval.
   (C)   The Building Inspector shall not issue any permit for any proposed
building, structure or use within the project unless such building, structure
or use is in accordance with the approved development plan and with any
conditions imposed in conjunction with its approval.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 153.230 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to require that mobile home developments
will be of such character as to promote the objectives and purposes of this
chapter; to protect the integrity and characteristics of the districts
contiguous to those in which mobile home parks are located; and to protect
other use values contiguous to or near mobile home park uses.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.231 LOCATION AND USE.
   (A)   No occupied mobile home shall be located anywhere within the county
where the total enclosed, usable floor space of the unit is less than 500
square feet, with an adequate foundation and skirting, and located and
maintained on a separate lot having no less than the minimum area width, depth
and frontage setbacks as required by this chapter for the district in which the
dwelling structure is located.
   (B)   San Juan County prohibits the placement or relocation of any pre-HUD-
code manufactured (mobile) homes, built prior to the MHCSS, 24 C.F.R. part
3280, which became effective on 6-15-1976, anywhere within the county. (See
NCCBCS/ANSI A225.1, Annex D.)
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.232 PARK APPROVAL.
   (A)   Mobile home parks may not be constructed unless first approved by the
Planning Commission, after review of plans for said mobile home park which
satisfy the Commission that the said development will:
      (1)   Be in keeping with the general character of the district within
which the development is to be located;
      (2)   Have written approval from the state’s Division of Health;
      (3)   Be limited to nine units per acre, except mobile homes may be
clustered; provided that, the total number of units does not exceed the number
permitted on one acre multiplied by the number of acres in the development; and
      (4)   An overall plan for development of a mobile home park shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for review. The plan shall be drawn to
scale no smaller than one inch to 50 feet. At least six copies of the plan
shall be submitted. The plan shall show:
         (a)   The topography of the site represented by contours shown at not
greater intervals than two feet when required by the Planning Commission;
         (b)   The proposed street and mobile home space layout;
         (c)   Proposed reservations for parks, playground and open space;
         (d)   Tabulations showing per cent of area to be devoted to parks,
playgrounds and open spaces, number of mobile home spaces, and total area to be
developed;
         (e)   Proposed locations of parking spaces;
         (f)   Generalized landscaping and utility plan, including locations of
water, electricity, gas lines, fire hydrants; and
         (g)   Any other data the Planning Commission may require.
   (B)   Applications for approval shall be in writing, submitted to the
Planning Commission at its regular meeting and shall be granted or denied
within 30 days after the meeting date, unless an extension of such time is
approved by the applicant. An application denied by the Planning Commission may
be appealed to the Board of County Commissioners, which appeal must be made in
writing within ten days after the denial is made by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Standards and requirements for mobile home parks shall be as provided.
      (1)   Storm drainage facilities shall be so constructed as to protect
residents of the development, as well as adjacent property owners. Such
facilities shall be of sufficient capacity to insure rapid drainage and prevent
the accumulation of stagnant pools of water in or adjacent to the development.
      (2)   To accommodate anticipated traffic, roadways shall be designed
including the following standards, unless modified by an approved planned unit
development plan:
         (a)   One-way traffic: a minimum of 15 feet in width plus extra width
as necessary for maneuvering mobile homes;
         (b)   Two-way traffic: a minimum of 30 feet in width; and
         (c)   Access: each mobile home park shall have at least two accesses
to public streets.
      (3)   In a mobile home park, no home or add-on shall be located closer
than 20 feet from the nearest portion of any other home or add-on. All such
homes and add-ons shall be set back at least ten feet from road curbs or walks.
If the mobile home tongue remains attached, it shall be set back a minimum of
six feet from road curbs or walks. All mobile homes shall be set back at least
15 feet from any boundary of the mobile home park.
   (D)   Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two parking spaces
per mobile home space and each such parking space shall have a minimum width of
ten feet and the minimum depth of 20 feet. In no case shall the parking space
be located farther than 100 feet from the mobile home space it is designed to
serve.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, violating or causing or permitting the violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall be charged, for each separate, identifiable violation,
with a Class C misdemeanor and punishable upon conviction as a Class C
misdemeanor or by imposing the appropriate civil penalty adopted under the
authority of UCA §§ 17-27a-101 et seq.
(Ord. passed 9- -2011)
CHAPTER 154: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
Rules, Procedures and Bylaws
   
154.001   Familiarity with state statutes, ordinances and other rules
   
154.002   Officers and elections
   
154.003   Members, terms of office and the like
   
154.004   Meetings and organization
   
154.005   Ethical considerations
   
154.006   Resignations and removal of membership
   
154.007   Per diem and travel expenses
   
154.008   Adoption, review and amendment of bylaws
RULES, PROCEDURES AND BYLAWS
§ 154.001 FAMILIARITY WITH STATE STATUTES, ORDINANCES AND OTHER RULES
   Upon taking office, all members of the Commission shall familiarize
themselves with applicable statutes and rules, ordinances and resolutions and,
while in office, shall maintain such knowledge, including knowledge of
amendments and additions, and shall be strictly governed thereby in the conduct
of Commission affairs.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2020-03A, passed 3-15-2022)
§ 154.002 OFFICERS AND ELECTION.
   (A)   Officers. The officers of the Commission shall be a Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson.
   (B)   Election. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be elected at the
first meeting of the year after the Board of County Commissioners appoints
vacant seats. They shall serve for a term of one year or until their successors
are elected. Their term shall start the meeting they are elected. If the office
of the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson becomes vacant, the Commission shall
elect a successor from its membership who shall serve the unexpired term of the
predecessor. Nominations shall be by oral motion. At the close of nominations,
the Commission shall vote by voice vote upon the names nominated for the
office. If requested by the Chair, written ballots may be used for voting
purposes.
   (C)   Chair. The Chairperson has the following duties.
      (1)   The Chairperson presides at all meetings of the Planning Commission
maintaining order and decorum and ensures that the procedures prescribed in
Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances, the Utah State Code and policies stated
herein are followed.
      (2)   The Chairperson may call special meetings at any time and in
accordance with applicable state and county codes.
      (3)   The Chairperson may appoint up to three Commission members to serve
on a committee, as needed.
   (D)   Vice-Chair. The Vice-Chair performs the duties of the Chairperson in
the absence of the Chairperson, or duties as delegated by the Chairperson. In
the event of temporary absence of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, the
remaining members present shall elect an acting Chairperson for that meeting.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2020-03A, passed 3-15-2022)
§ 154.003 MEMBERS, TERM OF OFFICE AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Membership. To guarantee balanced input from across the county in
areas where the county has jurisdiction over land use decisions, and the
impacts of those decisions on adjacent population areas, the Commission shall
consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the Board of County
Commissioners from the following areas of the county: one member from Blanding
area; one member from Monticello area; one member from Bluff area; one member
from La Sal area; one member from Spanish Valley area; one member from a
special service district within the county and one member at-large. In addition
to the seven members, the Board of County Commissioners may appoint one non-
voting, ex-officio staff member to serve as liaison between the Board of County
Commissioners and the Commission and provide administrative support to the
Commission. Board of County Commissioners members may not serve as regular
members of the Commission.
   (B)   Term of office. The term of office for Commission members shall be
staggered so that the terms of at least one member and no more than three
members expire each year. As the term of each regular member expires, the
vacancy thus created shall be filled by a majority vote of the Board of County
Commissioners for a term of four years, so as to maintain the succession of
staggered terms of service.
      (1)   Terms of all Commissioners begin on January 1 and expire on
December 31 of the fourth year following the year of appointment. If the Board
of County Commissioners has not appointed a new member(s) to the Commission at
the expiration of term, the current Commission member(s) will remain on the
Planning Commission until replaced by appointment of the Board of County
Commissioners.
      (2)   Current Commissioners whose term has expired can submit their name
for consideration to renew for an additional four-year term by notifying the
Commission Chair and County Administrator.
   (C)   Vacancies. County staff shall notify the current Commission of those
members whose terms will expire at the end of the calendar year. In cases where
a vacancy is created during the middle of a Board member’s term (mid-term
vacancy), county staff shall notify the Commission as soon as practically
possible. County staff shall post a notice of Board vacancies, including mid-
term vacancies, in a local newspaper of record.
   (D)   Candidate interest. In early November of each year, the County
Administrator shall cause notice of appointment(s) to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county. The Planning and Zoning
Department shall be responsible for the costs of such advertisement. Such
notice shall state the nature and term of the appointment(s), the qualification
for such appointment, request written statements of interest and
qualifications, and establish a deadline for submittal of such statements,
which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the date of publication.
   (E)   Candidate qualifications.
      (1)   Required conditions. Commission candidates shall be a resident and
registered voter of the county.
      (2)   Preferred qualifications. Experience or knowledge in land use,
knowledge of county and local issues, a good listener, ability to communicate
and analytical reasoning are preferred.
      (3)   Training. Trainings through the State Property Ombudsman or other
state-approved trainings are encouraged and will be considered when determining
qualifications.
      (4)   Exception. Preferred qualifications may be waived dependent upon a
lack of preferred qualifications with those candidates applying for vacancies,
and the need for balanced input as outlined in division (A) above may
necessitate.
   (F)   Candidate interviews. Upon availability, a member of the County Board
of Commissioners, a Planning Commission member who is not also a candidate,
county zoning staff, County Attorney and County Administrator may interview
qualified candidates and provide a recommendation to the Board of County
Commissioners. At the start of each interview, candidates will be given three
to five minutes to briefly introduce themselves and to provide relevant
information as to background and experience. During the interview process, the
committee are encouraged to ask questions which verify a candidate’s land use
knowledge, experience, eligibility and availability to meet the requirements of
service. The committee shall ask the same questions of each candidate. After
responding to those questions, Commissioners may ask the applicant additional
clarifying questions if necessary based on the responses the applicant has
given.
   (G)   Voting.
      (1)   The committee shall vote upon the names of candidates in
alphabetical order. Each committee member shall be entitled to one vote for
each vacancy. Committee members shall vote by voice or a raise of hands. If
requested by the Chair, written ballots may be used for voting purposes.
      (2)   Staff will tally the number of votes cast for each candidate and
read this information back to the committee. The committee, by motion will
forward this recommendation, including any findings, to the Board of County
Commissioners for consideration.
   (H)   Recommendations to the Board of County Commissioners.
      (1)   The planning staff or the County Administrator as directed by the
Chairperson, shall present the committee’s recommendation, including any
findings, to the Board of County Commissioners.
      (2)   When presented with a recommendation(s) for election to the
Commission, the County Commissioners may:
         (a)   Accept or reject the recommendation(s) as presented in total or
part; and/or
         (b)   Instruct the County Administrator to continue the process for an
additional 30 days to solicit additional candidates before making a decision.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2020-03A, passed 3-15-2022)
§ 154.004 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Open meetings and notices. All regular meetings, special meetings,
workshops and field trips of the Commission are open to the public and will be
noticed in accordance with the requirements of the state’s Open and Public
Meetings Act.
   (B)   Regular meetings. Regular Commission meetings shall be held the second
Thursday of each month unless there are mitigating circumstances, such as a
lack of a quorum, lack of items to be discussed, holidays or other
circumstances.
   (C)   Annual training. Commission members are required to attend or view by
other means an annual Utah open meetings training, as provided by the county or
an online equivalent training. Commissioners are encouraged to attend the
Citizen Planner Workshop, as conducted by the Utah League of Cities and Towns
or other entity.
   (D)   Special meetings, workshops and fieldtrips. Special meetings,
workshops and field trips for any purpose may be held at the call of the
Chairperson or the Board of County Commissioners.
   (E)   Agendas. Agendas shall be set by staff under the direction of the
Chairperson. Agendas for regular meetings shall be provided by staff to all
members at least three days prior to the meeting.
   (F)   Proposed agenda items and meeting materials. The Planning and Zoning
Department must have proposed agenda items and meeting materials by 12:00 p.m.
the Friday before the Planning Commission meeting date unless extenuating
circumstances exist.
   (G)   Minutes. The recording of minutes of all Commission meetings shall be
the responsibility of Planning Department staff. In the event staff is absent
from any meeting, the Planning Department may send a designee.
   (H)   Voting. Commission members shall make a good faith effort to become
knowledgeable on matters before the Commission. A quorum of the Commission
shall consist of four members and the affirmative vote of at least four members
in attendance shall be necessary to pass any motion.
   (I)   Motion. All decisions of the Commission shall be made in a public
meeting by motion, made and seconded, and by voice vote. Any Commissioner may
make or second a motion. If there is any ambiguity on any vote or if the nature
of the application or petition warrants, the Chairperson may conduct a roll
call vote. Motions should be supported by reason and include findings. The
person making the motion is encouraged to state the reasons and finding(s)
supporting the motion at the time the motion is made. Any conditions for
approval must be stated in the motion. The motion may refer to the staff report
for details of the conditions for approval if the person making the motion
desires to do so.
   (J)   Conduct during public meetings. During all meetings and hearings,
persons providing testimony shall proceed without interruption, except by
members of the Commission at the discretion of the Chairperson. All comments,
arguments and pleadings shall be addressed to the Chairperson and there shall
be no debate or argument between individuals in the audience. There shall be no
debate or argument between individuals. The Chairperson shall maintain order
and decorum, and, to that end may order removal of disorderly or disruptive
persons. Any member of the Commission, counsel to the Commission or the
Commission staff, upon recognition by the Chairperson, may direct any questions
to the applicant, witness or any person speaking from the audience for the
purpose of eliciting relevant facts. The Chairperson or Commission members may
call for relevant facts from staff and make appropriate comments relevant to
the matter.
   (K)   Time control. The Chairperson may control the time for debate on any
issue. Care should be taken to ensure fairness in the hearing process. Those
speaking in support and opposed should have substantially equal time. The
Chairperson may stop debate once he or she believes the issue has been
adequately and fairly heard.
   (L)   Citizen, applicant and other participation by real-time
telecommunication. Participation by citizens, applicants and others may be
allowed by real-time telecommunication at the discretion of the Chairperson.
   (M)   Quorum. The minimum number of persons required to act as a body. A
quorum requires four Commission members who must be present in person at the
meeting. However, absent Commissioners may participate fully by phone or other
real time means and engage in debate, asking questions, making motions, voting
on motions and all other functions of the Commission.
   (N)   Commissioner participation by real-time telecommunication.
Commissioner participation by real-time telecommunication shall allow them to
participate in discussion and may vote on any matter.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2020-03A, passed 3-15-2022)
§ 154.005 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS.
   The following ethical principles shall guide the actions of the Commission
and its members.
   (A)   Serve the public interest. The primary obligation of the Commission
and each member is to serve the public interest.
   (B)   Support citizen participation in planning. The Commission shall ensure
a forum for meaningful citizen participation and expression in the planning
process, and assist in the clarification of community goals, objectives and
policies.
   (C)   Conflict of interest. Planning Commission members shall adhere to
state law regarding conflicts of interest. A member with a conflict of interest
shall be required to disclose such conflict prior to consideration of the
matter by the Planning Commission. A member with a conflict of interest may not
attempt to influence other members or appointed staff outside the meeting. A
member with a conflict of interest shall be required to recuse herself or
himself from participating in, commenting on or voting on the matter in which
such conflict exists.
   (D)   Ex parte communication/ensure full disclosure at public meetings. Each
case shall be decided on the basis of the evidence placed in the record in a
public meeting. Ex parte information on any application received by a
Commissioner, whether by mail, telephone or other communication should be
avoided. When such communication does occur, it must be made part of the public
record by the Commission member. The purpose of disclosing ex parte
communication is to get all information on the record so it can then be
addressed, confirmed or refuted, by evidence presented by the parties during a
meeting.
   (E)   Maintain public impartiality. Commission members may seek information
from other Commission members, the counsel to the Commission, staff serving the
Commission or the staff of other departments or agencies advising the
Commission. Each member of the Commission has an ethical duty to avoid making
public statements for or against the merits of any application before the
Commission hearing is concluded and a decision or recommendation has been
rendered.
   (F)   Faithful attendance and performance. Should circumstances arise where
a Planning Commission member is unable to attend a scheduled meeting, the
member shall be responsible for notifying the Chair or Building and Zoning
Department staff as soon as possible. Planning Commission members shall not
miss more than three consecutive meetings. A Planning Commission member may not
miss more than 25% of the meetings in a year. If circumstances prevent faithful
attendance and performance of Planning Commission member duties, the member
will be removed from the Planning Commission or the member should knowingly
resign from the Planning Commission. Attendance through remote means may only
be approved the Planning Commission Chair and a Commission member must attend
more than 50% of the meetings in person absent extenuating circumstances.
   (G)   Open Meetings Act. Commission members shall be trained annually and
abide by the Open Meetings Act as described in UCA Title 52, Ch. 4, Open and
Public Meetings Act.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2020-03A, passed 3-15-2022)
§ 154.006 RESIGNATIONS AND REMOVAL OF MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Resignations. Any member of the Commission must submit a signed letter
of resignation specifying the effective date on which the member’s service will
cease. The letter of resignation shall be submitted to the County
Administrator.
   (B)   Acceptance of resignation. The Board of County Commissioners shall
accept resignation upon receipt thereof.
   (C)   Removal from Commission. The Commission may request the resignation of
a member for reasons of attendance and/or ethical considerations. The Board of
County Commissioners may remove a Commission member for cause prior to the
expiration of the appointed term.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2020-03A, passed 3-15-2022)
§ 154.007 PER DIEM AND TRAVEL EXPENSES.
   Commission members are to receive a per diem and reimbursement for travel
expenses for meetings actually attended at a rate established by the Board of
County Commissioners.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2020-03A, passed 3-15-2022)
§ 154.008 ADOPTION, REVIEW AND AMENDMENT OF BYLAWS.
   (A)   Annual review and amendment. The bylaws will be reviewed by the
Commission at the beginning of each calendar year. Amendments will be
recommended to the Board of Commissioners for approval.
   (B)   Waiving or suspending rules. A rule of procedure may be suspended or
waived at any meeting by unanimous vote of the Commission members present
unless such a rule is set by state law or county ordinance.
(Ord. 2020-03, passed 2-18-2020; Ord. 2020-03A, passed 3-15-2022)
CHAPTER 155: ADDRESSING POLICY
Section
   
155.001   Purpose
   
155.002   Definitions
   
155.003   Duties of addressing agency and addressing authority
   
155.004   Names of streets designated in the official street and address files
   
155.005   System of numbering
   
155.006   Display of property identification number
   
155.007   Property identification approval is required for final plat approval
   
155.008   Street identification change
   
155.009   Street identification change originated by the County, contract
entity, contract municipality, or addressing authority
   
155.010   Address change originated by the County, contract entity, contract
municipality, or addressing authority
   
155.011   System of street identification signs
   
155.012   Street identification signs
   
155.013   Street signs - compliance
   
155.014   Street signs - requirements
§ 155.001 PURPOSE.
   To be a foundation for a uniform San Juan County property identification
system. Such uniformity will be developed and applied to street names, numbers,
and structures - and establish property identification for providers of public
and emergency services. The procedures listed herein shall apply to all
streets, street identification signs, address numbers, structures, and public/
private property existing within the unincorporated regions of San Juan County
as well as contract entities/municipalities at the time of adoption of the
ordinance codified in this document, as well as those created or constructed at
a later time.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.002 DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter:
   ADDRESS FORMAT. Order of assemblage and structure of the five standardized
components (address number, directional, street name or number, street type,
substructure suffix) used in the legal situs address.
   ADDRESS GRID SYSTEM/REGIONAL ADDRESS GRID. Coordinate system that has
evolved and developed for identifying address and street locations for a
specific municipality or area.
   ADDRESS NUMBER (HOUSE NUMBER). Component of the legal situs address that is
numerically and assigned to a structure or parcel along a street according to
its relative distance perpendicular to the baseline or meridian axis of a
regional address grid.
   ADDRESSING AGENCY. Authoritative division of county government responsible
for regional addressing services. It also serves as a resource for fostering
collaborative relationships between San Juan County, incorporated cities, and
public and emergency services.
   ADDRESSING AUTHORITY. The addressing agency or the entity that the
addressing agency contracts with to provide addressing services to any
municipality or unincorporated region of the county.
   ADDRESSING SERVICES. Services including the naming and numbering of streets,
courts, parks, thoroughfares, and other public places; residential and
commercial structures and buildings and structures of all types; and vacant
lots and other spaces within the unincorporated county or in contracted
municipalities and further includes maintaining the county's official
countywide validated addresses and the county's official street file.
   ADDRESSING STANDARDS AND DEFINITIONS POLICY. Established regulations and
guidelines, as revised from time to time, that define specific procedures for
the design and designation of address numbers on all houses and buildings,
including occupancy units therein, as well as the design of names and numbers
for streets both public and private including standards for street intersection
markers (signs).
   BASELINE STREET. East and west directional street (ex: Center Street in
Monticello) that intersects with the meridian street (ex: Main Street in
Monticello) to benchmark the permanent origin of a regional address grid and
provide a datum point from which the coordinates of all other streets and legal
situs addresses are calculated (see MERIDIAN STREET).
   CONTRACT ENTITY. Governmental entity other than a municipality within San
Juan County that has entered into an agreement with the addressing agency for
addressing services.
   CONTRACT MUNICIPALITY. Municipality within San Juan County that has entered
into an agreement with the addressing agency for addressing services.
   DIRECTIONAL. Compass direction of the legal situs address that references
the regional address grid and the direction in which the address numbers are
measured along the roadway of both public and  private streets. Directional may
be prefixes, coming after the address number and before the street name, or
suffixes, coming after the street type.
   DOCUMENTED DATA. Affidavit, ordinance, resolution, or subdivision plat
recorded in the San Juan County Recorder's Office, assigning an address,
coordinate, or street name provided by an addressing authority.
   INTERSECTION. Point on a regional address grid that identifies the physical
location where two or more streets cross.
   MERIDIAN STREET. North and south directional street (ex: Main Street in
Monticello) that benchmarks the permanent origin of a regional address grid and
provides a datum point from which the coordinates of all other streets and
legal situs addresses are calculated (see BASELINE STREET).
   OFFICIAL STREET AND ADDRESS FILES. Computer files and associated maps
adopted by the county, including the general plans of the county.
   PLAT, FINAL. Map or chart of a subdivision, PUD, condominium, or other
proposed development that has been accurately sited or surveyed and located on
the ground so that streets, alleys, blocks, lots, and other divisions thereof
can be identified - to be recorded with the County Recorder upon approval by
the Board of San Juan County Commissioners.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY, PRIVATE. Streets that are retained and maintained under the
ownership of private individuals intended and may be intended for both private
and public use.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY, PUBLIC. Streets dedicated for perpetual public use and are
administered by the governing entities in which they are located.
   STREET. Any rights-of-way, under public or private ownership for public use,
designed for the travel of motorized vehicles to enter and exit through passage
and to include the ways used for internal circulation of traffic.
   STREET NAME. Alphabetic name assigned, not including the street type
designator, to identify both public and private streets and is one of the
primary components of a legal situs address.
   STREET NUMBER. Name of a street designated with numerals according to its
numerical position on a regional address grid relative to the baseline or
meridian axis streets.
   STREET TYPE. Standardized identification descriptor that corresponds to
physical and functional characteristics of a street (i.e., "Avenue," "Bay,"
"Boulevard," "Circle," "Court," "Cove," "Drive," "Expressway," "Lane,"
"Parkway," "Place," "Road," "Row," "Spur," "Street," and "Way").
   SUBDIVISION. Division of a tract or lot or parcel of land into two or more
lots, plots, sites, or other divisions of land for the purpose - whether
immediate or future - of sale or building development or redevelopment and a
plat has theretofore been recorded in the office of the county recorder under a
unique name to identify one subdivision from another. In the context of
property identification, "subdivision name" may also be used to identify other
conditional use or project names.
   SUB-STRUCTURE SUFFIX. Component of a legal situs address not present in all
addresses that is used to identify a one-to-one correspondence between a
building and high-density occupancy structures within the building such as
suites, rooms, apartments, and condominium units. A sub-structure suffix
component must contain both a "#" symbol and a unit number (104, C, 104C).
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.003 DUTIES OF ADDRESSING AGENCY AND ADDRESSING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the addressing agency to establish an
addressing standards and definitions policy for the County.
   (B)   The addressing agency shall have a duty to offer addressing guidance,
as requested, from incorporated cities. They must also approve alphabetical
street names and create and maintain address point data for the whole county by
creating a positive relationship with the cities in San Juan County. The agency
is responsible for maintaining address points through data documented and/or
validated by the incorporated cities, including creating new addresses,
updating existing addresses, and making changes to data associated with
individual addresses.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the addressing authority to name and number
all streets, to designate numbers for houses or buildings fronting upon all
such streets, to certify addresses in accordance with the addressing standards
and definitions policy, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter, for the
unincorporated area of the county as well as contract municipalities. The
addressing authority shall inform the county addressing agency before making
addressing changes in the unincorporated county.
   (D)   The addressing agency shall establish and make changes as necessary to
the baseline/meridian streets and boundaries for the individual regions that
make up the regional grid system.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.004 NAMES OF STREETS DESIGNATED IN THE OFFICIAL STREET AND ADDRESS FILES.
   All streets, whether public or private, shall be known by the names by which
they are so designated in the official street and address files of the
addressing agency, with such additions, changes, and corrections of the names
as shall from time to time be placed in the official files by ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.005 SYSTEM OF NUMBERING.
   The addressing authority in numbering the houses or buildings upon the
streets of unincorporated San Juan County or contract municipalities shall
adhere to the following address format:
   (A)   The initial point of intersection in any regional address grid shall
be the junction of a Baseline Street and Meridian Street axis, and the
numbering shall extend thence east, west, north, and south; the even numbers
always on the right and odd numbers on the left, looking away from the initial
point.
   (B)   Each property identification number must contain:
      (1)   An "address number" component that is numerically sequenced and
assigned to a structure or parcel along a street according to its relative
distance perpendicular to a baseline or meridian axis of a regional address
grid.
      (2)   A "direction component" referencing the regional address grid
quadrant and the compass
in which the address numbers run shall be required whenever a street number is
used in an address, abbreviated with the single letter equivalent for its
compass direction (N, S, E, or W).
         (a)   A prefix directional component is not required on streets with
an alphabetic name in
instances where the direction of travel away from the initial point of
intersection is deemed by the addressing agency to be too inconsistent or would
otherwise be confusing to assign as a singular compass direction. However, in
any regional address grid, a directional component should be included in the
official street and address files, regardless of whether or not the directional
is used as part of an assigned address.
         (b)   A suffix directional component is an optional component to be
included after the street
type that indicates the compass direction taken by the thoroughfare from an
arbitrary starting point - or the sector where it is located.
      (3)   A "street name component" consisting of either an alphabetic name
or a number name, but not both is assigned to both public and private rights-
of-way for locating purposes.
         (a)   Alphabetically named streets.
            1.   Alphabetic names should only contain letters of the alphabet,
without special characters, numerical characters, or hyphens as part of their
name.
            2.   Words that serve as a street type shall not be allowed to
serve as street names or parts of street names. Refer to the definition of
"street type" under section 155.002 of this chapter for a list of street types.
            3.   Alphabetic street names should never be abbreviated.
            4.   Street names shall not be duplicated by exact name, exact
sound, similar name, or similar sound with any other existing or proposed
street names within a regional addressing grid or
singular zip code.
            5.   Street names with unconventional spelling, difficult spelling,
or any combination of the two shall not be used, preferring commonly accepted
spellings on all street names instead.
            6.   A compass directional shall not be used as, or as part of, any
street name.
            7.   No street name shall exceed the number of characters that can
comfortably fit on a street sign. Generally no more than two words not
exceeding 13 characters including spaces but not including the street.
         (b)   Numbered streets.
            1.   Numerically designated based on their location within the
regional address grid relative to either the baseline or meridian axis streets.
            2.   Street numbers shall never contain alphanumeric characters.
            3.   A directional component is required for all addresses
containing a street number to correspond with its orientation on the grid.
      (4)   A "street type component" that modifies the name to distinguish
specific locational, functional, and physical characteristics of the street to
which an address is assigned. Refer to the San Juan County Addressing Policy
for a list of street type definitions. Street types should be abbreviated
following the USPS street type standards.
   (C)   A property identification number may also contain one or more of the
following:
         (1)   A "unit locator component" is a component used to identify a
one-to-one correspondence between a building and high-density occupancy
structures within the building, such as suites, rooms, apartments, and
condominium units. This code is always preceded with a "#" sign instead of
using the word suite, unit, apt., or any other identifier when issued in
standardized address format.
         (2)   A "plus code component" is an alphanumeric component most
commonly in the form XXXX+XX based on latitude and longitude to completely
remove uncertainty as to the location of a parcel or structure, typically
included in areas of remote development from which locating an address may not
be clear using ordinary methods.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.006 DISPLAY OF PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION NUMBER.
   When a property identification number has been designated by the addressing
authority, the owner or occupant of such house or building shall cause a
painted, carved, or cast duplicate of such number at least three inches in
height and varying in size according to the setback distance of the structure,
and of a shade contrasting with the background upon which the number is
mounted, to be located on the structure as provided in this chapter. Such
number(s) shall be block numerals (not script) and shall be located in a
conspicuous position upon the portion of such structure which faces the street.
If such structure is concealed from the street upon which it is located, the
owner or occupant shall cause an additional duplicate of such number at a
location visible from the street indicating the true location of the structure.
The property identification number shall be mounted in a permanent, stationary,
and durable manner - unobstructed at all times by vines, screens, or anything
that would tend to hide or obscure the number, and at a sufficient height that
the number will be clearly perceptible with the unaided eye from the centerline
of the street upon which the structure is located.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.007 PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION APPROVAL IS REQUIRED FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   Property identification approval must be given by the addressing authority
prior to final approval of a subdivision. The property identification approval
must appear on the final plat of a subdivision, PUD, condominium, or other
proposed development prior to final approval and upon amendment. The developer
shall pay for and arrange to manufacture and install all street identification
signs as required by the addressing authority.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.008 STREET IDENTIFICATION CHANGE.
   (A)   Upon application from seventy-five percent of the owners of structures
located upon a street for a change in street name identification, and upon
payment of a fee set by the addressing agency and approved by the board of
county commissioners, the addressing agency may grant a street name change. If
the request is granted, the applicant shall pay the cost of changing signage.
The addressing agency shall change the official street file.
   (B)   If, in the opinion of the addressing agency, the requested change of
street name serves a legitimate public interest, the addressing agency may
waive payment of the fee.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.009 STREET IDENTIFICATION CHANGE ORIGINATED BY THE COUNTY, CONTRACT
ENTITY, CONTRACT MUNICIPALITY, OR ADDRESSING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The county, contract entity, contract municipality, or addressing
authority may initiate a street name change when doing so would be in the
public interest.
      (1)   The addressing authority shall notify all owners of properties that
have structures on the proposed for a name change, by mailing to the county-
recorded property owner address.
      (2)   If the property owners who own lots with structures on a street
proposed for a name change desire to participate in renaming the street, they
may sign a petition agreeing and proposing a new street name. The new name
petition must contain at least seventy-five percent of the signatures of
recorded property owners with structures and must be completed within 30 days
after notification of the proposed name change by the addressing authority.
      (3)   If property owners do not provide a petition agreeing on a new
street name, the name change shall be based on the recommendation from the
addressing authority to the addressing agency.
   (B)   The addressing authority will recommend a proposed street name change
to the addressing agency. The addressing agency will approve any street name
change by communicating the approval, in writing, to the addressing authority.
The payment of a fee may be waived by the addressing agency when a name change
is based on public safety reasons.
   (C)   The addressing authority will record the appropriate documentation to
officially change a street name after approval of the change has been given in
writing by the addressing agency. The addressing authority shall notify the
United States Postal Service, the relevant emergency communications center(s),
and other appropriate government and public safety agencies of the name change.
After recordation, the addressing agency shall change the original street file.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.010 ADDRESS CHANGE ORIGINATED BY THE COUNTY, CONTRACT ENTITY, CONTRACT
MUNICIPALITY, OR ADDRESSING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   In the interest of public safety, the county, contract entity,
contract municipality, or addressing authority may direct the change of an
address. Address changes may be made only after providing written notification
to the property owners whose address is proposed for change, mailed to the
county's recorded address.
   (B)   A letter will be sent informing the property owner of the proposed
address change and requesting that the owner contact the addressing authority
to discuss the proposed change. The addressing authority will provide a
reasonable time, not to exceed one month, and make appropriate efforts to
contact and discuss the proposed address change with the property owner.
   (C)   A final letter notifying the property owner of the address change will
be sent, by registered mail, to the owner's county-recorded address and shall
include a copy of the recorded address change affidavit.
   (D)   The addressing authority will record the appropriate documentation to
officially change an address. The addressing authority shall notify the United
States Postal Service, the relevant emergency communications center(s), and
other appropriate government and public safety agencies of the address change.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.011 SYSTEM OF STREET IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.
   It shall be the duty of the addressing agency to establish a uniform system
for street identification signs.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.012 STREET IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.
   Street identification signs, approved by the addressing authority, shall be
paid for and installed by the developer or property owner with installation at
the intersections of all streets and highways and at such other locations as
may be determined to be necessary by the addressing authority.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.013 STREET SIGNS - COMPLIANCE.
   It is unlawful to erect or maintain any street identification sign which has
not been approved by the addressing authority.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
§ 155.014 STREET SIGNS - REQUIREMENTS.
   All street signs shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the
specifications on file with the addressing agency.
(Ord. 2024-05, passed 5-21-2024)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FUNDS AND ACCOUNTS
      
II.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
      
III.   ROAD CLOSURES AND VACATIONS
      
IV.   SERVICE AREAS
      
V.   TEMPORARY REGULATIONS
      
VI.   ZONING AND REDISTRICTING
TABLE I: FUNDS AND ACCOUNTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1959-5   12-7-1959   Cumulative reserve fund (planning, constructing and
                     equipping a county medical clinic)
1962-1   11-26-1962  Courthouse Improvements Fund
1965-1   9-13-1965   Road Fund
1965-2   12-6-1965   Outdoor Recreation Fund
1968-1   3-25-1968   Motezuma Creek Health Facility Fund
1973-1   2-26-1973   Buildings, Grounds and Equipment Fund
2007-02  5-6-2007    Public Land Corner Preservation Fund Account
                    
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        6-5-1945    Ferry franchise (A.L. Graffin)
-        1-13-1955   Electric light, heat and power franchise (Utah Power and
                     Light Company)
-        8-22-1955   Gas franchise (Loran L. Laughlin)
-        6-16-1958   Gas, water and oil transportation franchise (El Paso
                     Natural Gas Company)
1970-2   7-27-1970   Telephone service franchise (Navajo Communications
                     Company, Inc.)
1974-1   10-29-1974  Gas distribution franchise (Utah Gas Service Company)
1983-2   4-12-1983   Gas, water and oil transportation franchise (El Paso
                     Natural Gas Company)
2019-05  12-3-2019   Communications system franchise (Emery Telecommunications
                     and Video, Inc.)
2024-03  2-6-2024    Electric utility franchise (Rocky Mountain Power).
                    
 
TABLE III: ROAD CLOSURES AND VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
2001-01   - -2001     Twenty-foot alley in Cottonwood Addition
2005-1    5-9-2005    Road #358 (temporary closing)
2006-  �- -2006     Road #159 (partial, temporary closing)
2006-02   8-14-2006   Road #176 (vacating and permanently closing a two-mile
                      segment)
2007-07   7-9-2007    Road #1251 (permanently closing)
2008-     6-2-2008    Road #383 (permanently closing)
                     
 
TABLE IV: SERVICE AREAS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1973-3   4-2-1973    Organizing and establishing County Service Area #1
-        2-17-1981   Dissolving County Service Area #1; transferring assets
                    
 
TABLE V: TEMPORARY REGULATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Temporary land use restriction prohibiting new land use
2019-01  5-21-2019   application permits for commercial uses in the Highway
                     Commercial Zone, extending 1,000 feet along each side of
                     U.S. Highway #191 (known as “Spanish Valley”)
                    
 
TABLE VI: ZONING AND REDISTRICTING
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
2021-11  12-21-2021  Redistricting the Board of Commission and school board
                     voting districts as required by state statute
                     Amending Ord. 2021-11, redistricting the Board of
2021-11A 1-4-2022    Commission and school board voting districts as required
                     by state statute
                     Amending Ord. 2021-11, redistricting the Board of
2021-11B 1-18-2022   Commission and school board voting districts as required
                     by state statute
2022-02  3-15-2022   Adopting voter precincts within the county as required by
                     state statute
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Utah Code Annotated
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO UTAH CODE ANNOTATED
 
UCA Cites Code Section
UCA Cites                  Code Section
Title 4, Ch. 17            90.001;
                           90.005
Title 4, Ch. 17, 107       90.001;
                           90.005
Title 4, Ch. 17, 108       90.003
Title 4, Ch. 17, 110       90.003
Title 4, Ch. 17, 111       90.004
11-7                       93.001
Title 11, Ch. 9            33.076
Title 15A                  153.028
Title 16, Ch. 6a           111.016
17C-1-101 et seq.          31.117
17-16-9                    32.200
17-21-18.5                 33.002,
                           33.130
17-21-18.5m(5,6)           33.133
17-21-18.5, paragraph 6    33.002
17-22-2.5                  33.132
17-22-2.5(2)(a)            33.132
17-22-2.5(2)(d)            33.132
17-22-2.5(4)(a)(i)         33.132
17-22-2.5(5)               33.132
17-22-2.5(6)               33.132
17-27a-101 et seq.         152.003;
                           153.999
17-27a-302                 153.040
17-36                      34.006
17-50-309                  70.001
17-53-223                  93.001
17-54-104                  31.037
17-55-201                  31.132
17-55-201(2)(b)            31.132
17-55-201(4)               31.130
17-55-201(4)(a)            31.134
17-36-19                   34.003
17-36-27                   34.003
Title 17, Ch. 31           33.051;
                           33.052
Title 19                   31.079
26-81-403                  33.125
Title 26A                  31.075
Title 26A, Ch. 1           31.076
26A-1-101 through 26-1-124 31.075
26A-1-103                  31.076
26A-1-108                  31.078
26A-1-109                  31.077
26A-1-121                  31.079
32B-101 et seq.            111.049
Title 34, Ch. 41           32.220
34A-5-101, et seq.         32.021
34-A-5-102(o)              32.021,
                           32.223
34-41-101(10)              32.220
41-1a-102                  71.002,
                           94.002
41-1a-102(42)              94.002
41-6a-502                  71.007
41-6a-1509                 94.002
Title 41, Ch. 6A           71.003
41-22-2                    94.002
Title 46                   33.002
49-11-505                  32.074
Title 51, Ch. 7            33.030
51-7                       31.002
51-7-2                     33.031
                           33.033;
51-7-11                    33.034;
                           33.036
51-7-17                    33.032
52-3-1 to 52-3-4           32.022
                           31.016;
Title 52, Ch. 4            31.038;
                           31.097;
                           154.005
52-4-207                   31.015
53-7                       93.001
Title 54                   33.077
Title 57, Ch. 8            153.213
Title 58, Ch. 37           32.220
59-1-401                   33.060
59-1-402                   33.060
59-2-1001 through 1006     33.003
59-2-1017                  33.003
59-2-1343                  33.091
59-2-1351                  33.091
59-2-1351 et seq.          33.090;
                           33.091
Title 59, Ch. 12           33.076
Title 59, Ch. 12, part 1   33.054
Title 59, Ch. 12, part 3   33.051;
                           33.052
59-12-1                    33.077,
                           33.078
59-12-106                  33.054
59-12-302                  33.059
Title 59, Ch. 15           33.076;
                           33.077
59-15-3                    33.077
Title 59, Ch. 16           33.076;
                           33.078
Title 63G, Ch. 2           31.097
63C-29-201                 11.005
63G-6a-1205                34.004
63G-6a-2105                34.009
63G-6a-2404.3              34.004
Title 63G, Ch. 3           31.039;
                           31.079
65A-8                      93.001
67-16                      34.004
67-16-4(1)(c)              32.280
67-16-6                    32.276
67-19a-101 (8)(d)          Ch. 32, App. B
67-19a-101(11)(d)          Ch. 32, App. B
67-19a-402.5               Ch. 32, App. B
67-19a-406(5)(b)           Ch. 32, App. B
67-20-4                    32.272
67-21-1                    Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-1, et seq.           32.107
67-21-2                    Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-3                    Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-3.5                  Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-3.5(2)               Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-3.6                  Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-3.7                  Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-4                    Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-5                    Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-6                    Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-3.6(1)(a)            Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-7                    Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-8                    Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-9                    Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-10                   Ch. 32, App. B
67-21-37(1)(a)             Ch. 32, App. B
70c-7-104                  32.219
76-3-205                   10.999
76-3-301(1)(d)             10.999
76-3-301(1)(e)             10.999
76-3-302(3)                10.999
76-3-302(4)                10.999
76-8-402                   32.280
76-8-402(1)(b)(iii)        32.280
76-9-102                   94.007
78B-22-102                 10.999
78B-22-301                 10.999
                           
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
2021-07   - -         32.270—
                      32.280
2021-08   - -         32.200—
                      32.204
-         6-5-1945    TSO Table II
-         1-13-1955   TSO Table II
-         8-22-1955   TSO Table II
-         6-16-1958   TSO Table II
1959-5    12-7-1959   TSO Table I
1962-1    11-26-1962  TSO Table I
1965-1    9-13-1965   TSO Table I
1965-2    12-6-1965   TSO Table I
1968-1    3-25-1968   TSO Table I
1970-2    7-27-1970   TSO Table II
                      92.001—
1971-2    9-13-1971   92.006;
                      92.999
1973-1    2-26-1973   TSO Table I
1973-3    4-2-1973    TSO Table IV
1974-1    10-29-1974  TSO Table II
1974-4    12-23-1974  151.001
                      33.075—
1975-1    5-12-1975   33.079;
                      33.999
1975-2    8-11-1975   130.001
1975-2    8-11-1975   130.999
1976-1    2-2-1976    130.001
1978-2    1-3-1978    31.001
-         2-17-1981   TSO Table IV
1983-1    2-22-1983   111.999
                      111.001;
                      111.015—
1983-1    2-22-1983   111.027;
                      111.040—
                      111.048
1983-2    4-12-1983   TSO Table II
2001-01   - -2001     TSO Table III
                      150.001;
2002-01   11-18-2002  150.002;
                      150.999
2002-04   11-18-2002  33.001
2003-01   8-11-2003   31.095—
                      31.100
2003-01   10-27-2003  33.050—
                      33.060
2004-01   6-28-2004   111.049
2004-01   6-28-2004   111.999
2004-02   6-28-2004   35.001—
                      35.007
2005-1    5-9-2005    TSO Table III
2006-01   2-21-2006   70.001
2006-     4- -2006    TSO Table III
2006-02   8-14-2006   TSO Table III
2007-02   5-6-2007    TSO Table I
2007-07   7-9-2007    TSO Table III
                      91.001—
2008-01   5-12-2008   91.010;
                      91.999
2008-     6-2-2008    TSO Table III
2011-01   4-11-2011   31.001
                      153.001—
                      153.006;
                      153.020—
                      153.027;
                      153.040—
                      153.042;
                      153.055—
                      153.057;
                      153.070—
                      153.076;
                      153.090—
                      153.095;
                      153.110;
-         9- -2011    153.111;
                      153.125—
                      153.137;
                      153.150—
                      153.152;
                      153.165—
                      153.173;
                      153.185—
                      153.196;
                      153.210—
                      153.217;
                      153.230—
                      153.232;
                      153.999
                      71.001—
2012-1    8-6-2012    71.008;
                      71.999
                      152.001—
                      152.008;
                      152.037;
-         4- -2016    152.039;
                      152.050—
                      152.065;
                      152.999
2017-01   12-19-2017  31.115—
                      31.118
2018-01   - -2018     31.075—
                      31.080
2019-01   5-21-2019   TSO Table V
2019-02   11-19-2019  153.138
2019-03   11-19-2019  153.072
2019-04   11-19-2019  152.038
2019-05   12-3-2019   TSO Table II
2020-2    2-4-2020    153.028
2020-03   2-18-2020   154.001—
                      154.008
                      34.001—
                      34.011;
2020-04   2-18-2020   34.025—
                      34.027;
                      34.040—
                      34.062
2020-05   2-18-2020   32.001
07        4-7-2020    90.001—
                      90.005
2020-06   4-7-2020    31.015—
                      31.022
2020-08   4-21-2020   31.035—
                      31.042
2020-09   5-5-2020    31.055—
                      31.061
2020-11   9-2-2020    11.001—
                      11.012
                      110.001—
2020-10-A 12-15-2020  110.010;
                      110.999
2020-12   12-15-2020  30.001
2021-02   1-19-2021   33.002
2021-03   1-19-2021   33.015—
                      33.019
2021-04   1-19-2021   33.030—
                      33.038
2021-05   1-19-2021   31.002
2021-06   8-17-2021   32.281
2021-09   9-21-2021   32.282
2021-10   11-16-2021  32.220
2021-11   12-21-2021  TSO Table VI
2021-12   12-21-2021  32.135—
                      32.143
2021-13   12-21-2021  32.155—
                      32.168
2021-14   12-21-2021  30.001
2021-11A  1-4-2022    TSO Table VI
2021-11B  1-18-2022   TSO Table VI
                      93.001—
2022-01   2-1-2022    93.006;
                      93.999
2022-03A  3-15-2022   154.001—
                      154.008
2022-02   3-15-2022   TSO Table VI
2022-03   8-16-2022   33.003
2022-04   9-6-2022    33.090—
                      33.102
2022-05   11-22-2022  31.130—
                      31.135
                      32.155,
                      32.157—
2022-06   - -         32.160,
                      32.164,
                      32.168
2022-07   12-6-2022   Adopting Ordinance
2023-01   - -         32.182—
                      32.185
2023-02   3-21-2023   32.076
                      11.001,
                      11.002,
                      11.005,
                      11.007,
                      11.008,
                      11.010—
                      11.012,
                      31.081,
                      32.121—
                      32.123,
                      33.003,
2023-03   5-16-2023   33.059,
                      33.099,
                      34.062,
                      35.005,
                      90.004,
                      91.011,
                      93.007,
                      110.007,
                      111.027,
                      150.003,
                      152.009,
                      153.041,
                      153.042
2023-04   12-5-2023   94.001—
                      94.008
2023-05   12-19-2023  30.001
2024-01   1-16-2024   153.005,
                      153.138
2024-02   1-16-2024   12.001—
                      12.007
2024-03   2-6-2024    TSO Table II
2024-04   3-5-2024    33.115—
                      33.136
2025-05   5-21-2024   155.001—
                      155.014
2024-06   12-17-2024  30.001
                      33.115—
                      33.117,
                      33.125,
2024-04A  8-19-2025   33.128,
                      33.129,
                      33.132,
                      33.135,
                      33.136
                     
 
