CITY CODE
of
SANTA CLARA, UTAH
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-17, passed October 22, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Santa Clara, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-17, passed October 22, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
         Sterling Codifiers began supplementation of this Code in 2005.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
SECTION:
1.01.010: Adoption
1.01.020: Title; Citation; Reference
1.01.030: Reference Applies To All Amendments
1.01.040: Title, Chapter And Section Headings
1.01.050: Reference To Specific Ordinances
1.01.060: Ordinances Passed Prior To Adoption Of The Code
1.01.070: Effect Of Code On Past Actions And Obligations
1.01.080: Constitutionality
1.01.090: References To Prior Code
1.01.100: Effective Date
1.01.010: ADOPTION:
There is adopted the "Santa Clara Municipal Code", as compiled, edited and
published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 99-04 § 1)
1.01.020: TITLE; CITATION; REFERENCE:
This code shall be known as the SANTA CLARA MUNICIPAL CODE and it shall be
sufficient to refer to said code as the "Santa Clara municipal code" in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision of this code or in any
proceeding at law or equity. It is sufficient to designate any ordinance adding
to, amendment to, correction or repealing all or any part or portion of this
code as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Santa Clara
municipal code". References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and
subsections of the "Santa Clara municipal code" and such references shall apply
to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code.
(Ord. 99-04 § 2)
1.01.030: REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS:
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Santa Clara municipal code"
or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Santa Clara,
Utah, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections
and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 99-04 § 3)
1.01.040: TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS:
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed
to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent
of the provisions of any title, chapter or section in this code. (Ord. 99-04 §
4)
1.01.050: REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record
which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein
specifically designated by number or otherwise which are included within the
code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding
provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 99-04 § 5)
1.01.060: ORDINANCES PASSED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THE CODE:
The last ordinance included in this code was ordinance 98-14, passed November
25, 1998. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to ordinance 98-14, but
prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code:
ordinances 98-15, 98-16, 98-18, 98-19, 98-20, 98-21, 98-22, 98-23, 98-26, 98-
29, 98-30, 98-31. (Ord. 99-04 § 6)
1.01.070: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinances
violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive
any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does
not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited
pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. (Ord. 99-04 § 7)
1.01.080: CONSTITUTIONALITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of the book. (Ord. 99-04 § 8)
1.01.090: REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE:
References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and
sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 99-04 § 9)
1.01.100: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become effective immediately upon
adoption, recording and posting in the manner prescribed by law. (Ord. 99-04 §
10)
CHAPTER 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1.04.010: Definitions
1.04.020: Interpretation Of Language
1.04.030: Grammatical Interpretation
1.04.040: Acts By Agents
1.04.050: Prohibited Acts Include Causing And Permitting
1.04.060: Computation Of Time
1.04.070: Construction
1.04.080: Repeal Shall Not Revive Any Ordinances
1.04.090: Numbering Ordinances
1.04.100: Statutes Or Codes Included And Excluded
1.04.110: Incorporation By Reference Of Provisions Of State Criminal Code
1.04.120: Misdemeanor; Any Infraction; Commencement Of Prosecution
1.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of
Santa Clara, Utah, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from
the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is
specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or
phrases:
   CITY: The city of Santa Clara, Utah, or the area within the territorial
limits of the city, and such territory outside the city over which the city has
jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
   COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Santa Clara, Utah. "All its
members" or "all council members" means the total number of council members
holding office.
   LAW: Denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the
state of Utah, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate, any and all
rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
   MAY: Is permissive.
   MONTH: A calendar month.
   MUST AND SHALL: Each are mandatory.
   OATH: Includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law,
an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words
"swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
   OWNER: Applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or a part of such building or land.
   PERSON: Means and includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock
company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of
any of them.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: Means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in
action and evidences of debt.
   PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY: Means and includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY: Means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE: The state of Utah.
   STREET: Means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys,
courts, places, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so
designated in any law of this state.
   TENANT AND OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, mean and include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   WRITTEN: Means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed,
multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.
   YEAR: A calendar year. (Ord. 98-09 § 2(1): prior code § 1-005)
1.04.020: INTERPRETATION OF LANGUAGE:
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved
usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed
and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 98-09
§ 2(2): prior code § 1-005)
1.04.030: GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION:
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city
unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is
intended:
   A.   Gender: Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter
genders.
   B.   Singular And Plural: The singular number includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
   C.   Tenses: Words used in the present tense include the past and the future
tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 98-09 § 2(3):
prior code § 1-005)
1.04.040: ACTS BY AGENTS:
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be
done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 98-
09 § 2(4))
1.04.050: PROHIBITED ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING AND PERMITTING:
Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it
shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or
concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 98-09 § 2(5))
1.04.060: COMPUTATION OF TIME:
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day,
unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be
excluded. (Ord. 98-09 § 2(6))
1.04.070: CONSTRUCTION:
The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them,
are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice.
(Ord. 98-09 § 2(7))
1.04.080: REPEAL SHALL NOT REVIVE ANY ORDINANCES:
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an
ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 98-09
§ 2(8))
1.04.090: NUMBERING ORDINANCES:
   A.   The recorder shall, in so far as possible, assign all ordinances of a
general nature adopted after these revised ordinances a number which shall
conform to the numbering system used in this code and shall indicate upon the
face of the ordinance the date adopted.
   B.   The recorder shall keep all ordinances of a local, private or temporary
nature, including franchises, grants, dedications, bond issues and tax levies,
in a separate book of "special ordinances" properly indexed and organized
according to date adopted. The first number of such an ordinance shall be the
last two (2) digits of the year the ordinance is adopted, followed by a dash
which is followed by a number which shall be a sequential, ascending number
indicating the order in which such special ordinance was adopted during the
year.
   C.   Failure to comply with this section shall not affect or render invalid
any ordinance of this city. (Prior code § 1-008)
1.04.100: STATUTES OR CODES INCLUDED AND EXCLUDED:
Any reference or citation to any statute shall not be interpreted or construed
to include, incorporate or make the citation or statute part of this code
unless the provisions of this code specifically include, incorporate, or make
the citation or statute part of this code by reference or incorporation, and
any such reference or citation not specifically included or incorporated may be
changed, amended or deleted without publication on an order of the city
council. (Prior code § 1-009)
1.04.110: INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE OF PROVISIONS OF STATE CRIMINAL CODE:
The provisions of Utah Code Annotated 1953, 76-1-402 through 76-1-405, are
adopted as part of this code and incorporated herein by reference. (Prior code
§ 1-142)
1.04.120: MISDEMEANOR; ANY INFRACTION; COMMENCEMENT OF PROSECUTION:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this part, prosecutions for other
offenses are subject to the following periods of limitation:
      1.   A prosecution for a misdemeanor must be commenced within two (2)
years after it is committed;
      2.   A prosecution for any infraction must be commenced within one year
after it is committed.
   B.   The prosecution is commenced on the filing of a complaint or
information. (Prior code § 1-132)
CHAPTER 1.08
ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES
SECTION:
1.08.010: Request
1.08.020: Form Of Request
1.08.030: Procedure
1.08.040: Not Additional Remedy
1.08.010: REQUEST:
Unless otherwise specifically provided in any ordinance of the city or any code
adopted by reference, a hearing before the city council may be requested by any
person:
   A.   Who is denied or refused a permit or license by any officer, agent or
employee of this city;
   B.   Whose permit or license is revoked, restricted, qualified, or limited
from that for which it was first issued. (Prior code § 1-411)
1.08.020: FORM OF REQUEST:
The request for hearing must be made in writing to the mayor or recorder and
made within thirty (30) days following the date the notice denying, refusing,
revoking, qualifying, restricting or revoking the license or permit is mailed
by the city to the applicant or license holder at his or her address as it
appears on the application or license. (Prior code § 1-412)
1.08.030: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Following receipt of a request for hearing, the city council shall
inform the person requesting a hearing of the time and place the hearing is to
be held.
   B.   At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall have the right to hear and
examine any witnesses the city may produce to support its decision and to
present his or her own evidence in support of his or her contention.
   C.   The city council shall, within ten (10) days following the conclusion
of the hearing, in writing, inform the person who requested the hearing of the
decision of the city council. (Prior code § 1-413)
1.08.040: NOT ADDITIONAL REMEDY:
This part shall not be constructed so as to afford any aggrieved party more
than one hearing before the city council nor shall the hearing provided in this
part apply to any criminal complaint or proceeding. (Prior code § 1-414)
CHAPTER 1.12
CIVIL LIABILITY
SECTION:
1.12.010: No Liability On City
1.12.010: NO LIABILITY ON CITY:
None of the provisions of this code shall create any civil liability on the
city, its officers or employees whether or not the code imposes mandatory or
directional duties and whether or not the city, its officers or employees
perform or do not perform such duties. (Prior code § 1-501)
CHAPTER 1.16
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1.16.010: Designated
1.16.010: DESIGNATED:
   A.   Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with
any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city shall be guilty
of an infraction unless the violation is made a misdemeanor by ordinance.
   B.   1. Except in ordinances where a different punishment is prescribed by
any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a class B misdemeanor for
violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
      2.   Except in ordinances where a different punishment is prescribed by
any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a class C misdemeanor for
violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment.
   C.   Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of an ordinance of
the city is punishable by a penalty of not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
   D.   Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the
ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person,
and such person shall be punishable accordingly. (Amended during 1998
codification: Ord. 98-10 § 2)
TITLE 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
CHAPTER 2.04
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
2.04.010: Time, Place; Exceptions
2.04.010: TIME, PLACE; EXCEPTIONS:
The city council of the city of Santa Clara, Utah, shall hold two (2) regular
meetings per month, which meetings shall be held on the second and fourth
Wednesday of each month; and one regularly scheduled work meeting, which shall
be held on the first Wednesday of each month. All meetings of said city council
shall be held in the city council chamber of the town hall at 2603 Santa Clara
Drive, Santa Clara, Utah, and shall begin promptly at five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
   A.   The city council may, by motion at a regularly scheduled city council
meeting and proper posting of agendas, cancel, reschedule or add additional
meetings in order to facilitate the business of the city.
   B.   The city council may determine its own procedure policies and conduct a
public meeting in accordance with the rules of order and procedure. These
policies shall be in effect until such time as they are amended or new policies
are adopted by the city council. (Ord. 2013-12: Ord. 2010-04)
CHAPTER 2.05
CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
2.05.010: City Manager Appointment; Qualifications; Substitute
2.05.020: Compensation
2.05.030: Removal
2.05.040: Qualifications, Powers And Duties
2.05.010: CITY MANAGER APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; SUBSTITUTE:
The city council shall appoint a city manager who shall be the administrative
head of the municipal government under the direction and supervision of the
mayor and city council, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city
council. The city manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of their
executive and administrative qualifications, without regard to political
belief. During the extended absence or disability of the city manager, the city
council may designate some properly qualified person to temporarily execute the
functions of the office. (Ord. 99-05 § 2)
2.05.020: COMPENSATION:
The city manager shall receive compensation as the city council may determine
and designate. (Ord. 99-05 § 2)
2.05.030: REMOVAL:
The city manager may be removed by the city council for just cause; however, if
removed at any time after having served six (6) months, the city manager may
demand written charges and a public hearing upon the same before the city
council, which must be held within sixty (60) days, and the final removal shall
not take effect until such hearing has been had, but the city council may
suspend the city manager from office with or without pay pending such hearing.
(Ord. 99-05 § 2)
2.05.040: QUALIFICATIONS, POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city manager shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the
proper administration of all affairs of the city and to that end, the city
manager's powers are and they shall be:
   A.   To see that the laws and ordinances are enforced;
   B.   Except as hereinafter specifically provided, to appoint and remove all
subordinate officers and employees of the city. All appointments are to be made
upon merit and fitness alone. The appointment of all department heads shall be
made only with the advice and consent of the mayor/city council;
   C.   To exercise control and direct supervision over all departments and
divisions of the municipal government as provided by this code, or which may
hereafter be created by the city council;
   D.   To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or
its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, contract, agreement, or other
binding documents are faithfully kept and performed. Upon knowledge of any
violation thereof, to call the same to the attention of the city council who
may authorize such legal steps as may be necessary to enforce the same;
   E.   To attend all meetings of the city council, and of its committees, with
right to take part in the discussion, but without having a vote. The city
manager shall retain the right to appoint a designee to attend meetings of
committees as necessary;
   F.   To recommend to the city council for adoption such measures as may be
deemed necessary or expedient in the interest of the city;
   G.   To keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition
and needs of the city and to submit for its consideration an annual budget;
   H.   To enforce and administer any zoning regulations established by the
city council;
   I.   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed under this code or as
may be required by ordinance, resolution, job description of assignment of the
mayor and city council;
   J.   The city manager shall be the purchasing agent for the city, by whom
all purchases of supplies shall be made and all vouchers approved for payment.
(Ord. 99-05 § 2)
CHAPTER 2.08
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
2.08.010: Compensation And Salaries
2.08.020: Amount Of Bond
2.08.010: COMPENSATION AND SALARIES:
   A.   The salaries of elected and statutory officers and employees of this
city shall be paid in the following amounts:
      1.   Mayor: One thousand one hundred ninety-six dollars and ninety-six
cents ($1,196.96) per month;
      2.   Council members: Five hundred eighty-seven dollars and ninety-nine
cents ($587.99) per month;
      3.   Recorder: Approved annually via the adoption of the annual budget;
      4.   Treasurer: Approved annually via the adoption of the annual budget;
      5.   Justice court judge: As provided by state statute 78A-7-206.
   B.   In addition to the salaries set out above, the officers and employees
of this city shall receive reimbursement for expenses advanced by them, per
diem and mileage compensation, and other benefits, all as set forth in the
city's official personnel policy.
   C.   Whenever the statutory offices of recorder or treasurer are filled by a
city employee who as part of his or her duties discharge the duties of either
of these offices, the employee's compensation shall be considered to include
the compensation authorized for the statutory office under this section for the
discharge of the duties of recorder or treasurer.
   D.   The treasurer, or other designated employee, shall pay to each elected
and statutory officer or employee, according to the pay period schedule
established by resolution and stated in the personnel policy of the city of
Santa Clara, the compensation authorized by this section. Said compensation
shall be paid by delivering a check drawn on the municipal checking account, to
the elected or statutory officer or employee personally; by mailing said check
to the elected or statutory officer or employee at his or her home address,
postage prepaid; or by direct deposit to the account indicated by said elected
or statutory officer or employee and on file in the records of the payroll
office. (Ord. 2020-12 § 1: Ord. 2010-04: Ord. 2006-16 § 2: Ord. 2005-11 § 2:
Ord. 2002-03 § 2: Ord. 2001-05 § 2: Ord. 99-17 § 2: Ord. 97-13 § 2: Ord. 93-121
§ 1: prior code § 3-818)
2.08.020: AMOUNT OF BOND:
   A.   Before taking the oath of office and entering into the duties of their
respective offices, the following named city officers shall each give and
maintain a bond with good and sufficient securities, payable to the
municipality conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their
respective offices and the payment of all monies received by such officers
according to law and the ordinances of this city in the following amounts:
      1.   Mayor: Sixty six thousand dollars ($66,000.00);
      2.   Council member: Forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00);
      3.   Recorder: Sixty six thousand dollars ($66,000.00);
      4.   Treasurer: Calculated annually in compliance with state code 51-7-
15;
      5.   Justice court judge: Forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00).
   B.   The treasurer's bond shall be superseded by any rules, regulation or
directive of the state money management council when such rule, regulation or
directive is binding on this city.
   C.   The premium charged by any corporate surety for any bond required in
this section shall be paid by this city.
   D.   The bond required in this section may be a blanket bond. (Ord. 2010-04:
Ord. 98-08 § 2: Ord. 93-122 § 1: prior code § 3-819)
CHAPTER 2.12
BUILDING OFFICIAL
SECTION:
2.12.010: Position Created
2.12.020: Stop Order
2.12.030: Entry Powers
2.12.040: Additional Duties Of Building Inspector
2.12.010: POSITION CREATED:
There is created the position of building official who shall also be known as
the city building inspector. (Prior code § 9-511)
2.12.020: STOP ORDER:
The building inspector shall have the power to order all work stopped on
construction, alteration or repairs of buildings in the city when such work is
being done in violation of any provisions of any ordinance relating thereto, or
in violation of the subdivision or zoning ordinance. Work shall not be resumed
after the issuance of such order except on the written permission of the
inspector, provided that if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed
by a written stop order within one hour. Such written stop order may be served
by any peace officer or authorized person. (Prior code § 9-512)
2.12.030: ENTRY POWERS:
The building inspector shall have the power to enter into any building or the
premises where the work of altering, repairing or constructing any building or
structure is going on, for the purpose of making inspections at any reasonable
hour, pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter, chapter 2.44 of this
title, and titles 8 and 15 of this code. (Prior code § 9-513)
2.12.040: ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The building official (inspector), in addition to all other duties imposed on
him or her by this city, shall:
   A.   Enforce the provisions of the international building codes;
   B.   Inspect all buildings, structures, ditches, signs, fences and objects
to determine their safety and effect on the persons who are within this city;
   C.   The building inspector shall be responsible for enforcing title 15,
chapter 15.28 of this code;
   D.   Review all building permit applications for the construction or
substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be
reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a location
that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial
improvement (including prefabricated and mobile homes) must: 1) be designed (or
modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure, 2) use construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage, and 3) use construction methods and practices that
will minimize flood damage;
   E.   Review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to
assure that: 1) all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage, 2) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located, elevated, and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage, and 3) adequate drainage is provided so as
to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
   F.   Require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage
systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and require
on site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them
or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2010-06: prior code § 9-514)
CHAPTER 2.16
POUNDMASTER
SECTION:
2.16.010: Office Of Poundmaster Created
2.16.020: Duties Of Poundmaster
2.16.030: Interference With Officer Prohibited
2.16.040: Fees; Services Of Poundmaster
2.16.010: OFFICE OF POUNDMASTER CREATED:
The position of municipal poundmaster is created. Until such time as a
poundmaster is appointed, the animal control officer shall be poundmaster ex
officio. (Prior code § 13-20-1-01)
2.16.020: DUTIES OF POUNDMASTER:
The poundmaster shall perform the following duties:
   A.   Carry out and enforce the provisions of this chapter;
   B.   Take into his or her possession and impound all strays running at large
and dispose of the same as hereinafter provided;
   C.   Enforce the licensing of and control all dogs within the city as
hereinafter provided;
   D.   File complaints in the courts against any person, firm, or corporation
failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter and obtain licenses when
required thereunder;
   E.   Capture and secure all dogs found running at large contrary to the
provisions of this chapter and impound such dogs in a humane manner;
   F.   Provide for a good and sufficient pound in which all animals duly
committed to his or her charge or otherwise impounded by him or her shall be
maintained;
   G.   Enter a description thereof in records kept for that purpose stating
the kind of animal, the circumstances under which received or impounded, and a
description thereof sufficient to provide identification, the cost expended for
the maintenance of the animal and amounts received arising out of maintenance
or sale of animals. (Prior code § 13-20-1-02)
2.16.030: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICER PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to interfere, molest, hinder or obstruct the
poundmaster or any of his or her authorized representatives in the discharge of
their duties as herein prescribed. (Prior code § 13-20-1-03)
2.16.040: FEES; SERVICES OF POUNDMASTER:
The poundmaster shall charge, and the owners of animals taken into his or her
possession for impound disposal or other services shall pay, such fees and
charges for services performed by the pound or poundmaster as the city council
shall establish from time to time by resolution. All fees received by the
poundmaster shall be paid over to the city treasurer. (Prior code § 13-20-1-04)
CHAPTER 2.28
PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2.28.010: Creation
2.28.020: Creation Of Position Of Director
2.28.030: Powers And Duties Of Director
2.28.040: Employees
2.28.050: Additional Powers And Duties
2.28.060: Register Of Arrest
2.28.070: Permission To Burn
2.28.080: Removal Of Obstructions At Fire
2.28.090: Control Of Persons
2.28.100: Interference With Firefighters In The Discharge Of Their Duties
2.28.110: Right Of Entry For Inspection
2.28.120: Persons Present At Fire Or Valid Emergency Are Subject To Orders
2.28.130: False Alarm
2.28.140: Santa Clara-Ivins Fire Rescue General Fire, Standby Fees And
Ambulance Billing Rates
2.28.010: CREATION:
There is created a public safety department which shall comprise of the
following divisions: a) a regularly constituted police force in which the
public safety director shall serve as the marshal-chief of police and shall
consist of such other police officers as shall be employed by the city or as
shall be appointed as volunteers; and b) a fire department to be known as the
Santa Clara volunteer fire department in which the public safety director shall
serve as the fire chief and shall consist of such other fire personnel as shall
be employed by the city or as shall be appointed as volunteers; and c) any
other public safety function as shall be constituted from time to time under
the direction of the Santa Clara city council. (Ord. 99-13 § 2)
2.28.020: CREATION OF POSITION OF DIRECTOR:
There is created the position of director for the public safety department who
shall be appointed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the mayor
and city council. (Ord. 99-13 § 2)
2.28.030: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
The public safety director, as marshall, shall have all the powers, rights, and
duties respectively conferred on such officers as declared in sections 10-3-913
through 10-3-915 of the Utah code. The public safety director, as fire chief
shall have all the powers, rights, and duties as declared by this code, the
laws of Utah, and/or as may be required by ordinance, resolution, job
description and/or as empowered by the city manager, mayor or city council.
(Ord. 99-13 § 2)
2.28.040: EMPLOYEES:
The director may make recommendations to the city manager relating to the
employment of public safety personnel as may be necessary to enforce the
provision of this chapter. (Ord. 99-13 § 2)
2.28.050: ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   To suppress riots, disturbances, and breaches of the peace, and to
apprehend all persons committing any offense against the laws of the state or
ordinances of the city;
   B.   To execute and serve all warrants, processes, commitments and writs
whatsoever issued by the justice court judge or other persons of appropriate
authority;
   C.   To preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest
offenders, protect persons and property, remove nuisances, enforce every law
relating to the suppression of offenses, render assistance in the collection of
licenses as may be required by the license collector and preform all duties
enjoined upon them by law and by ordinance;
   D.   During an emergency, has full authority to take all measures, as deemed
necessary, subject to state law, to control and mitigate the emergency;
   E.   May delegate duties and authorities to any person, employee or
appropriate volunteer, but such delegation shall not relieve the director from
his or her responsibility for the performance thereof. (Ord. 99-13 § 2)
2.28.060: REGISTER OF ARREST:
The director shall provide and cause to be kept a register of arrest. Upon such
register shall be entered a statement showing the date of such arrest, the name
of the person arrested, the name of the arresting officer, the offense charged
and a description of any property found upon the person arrested. (Ord. 99-13 §
2)
2.28.070: PERMISSION TO BURN:
Whenever a person has authority to open air burn, they shall first notify the
public safety department. (Ord. 99-13 § 2)
2.28.080: REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS AT FIRE:
The officer in charge at any fire or other valid emergency, may order the
removal or destruction to any fence, building or structure, or that any utility
be closed, cut or removed when deemed necessary to control and/or mitigate the
fire or other valid emergency. (Ord. 99-13 § 2)
2.28.090: CONTROL OF PERSONS:
All persons present at a fire or other valid emergency shall obey the orders of
any public safety officer. (Ord. 99-13 § 2)
2.28.100: INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTERS IN THE DISCHARGE OF THEIR DUTIES:
Every person present at the scene of any fire or other valid emergency who
disobeys the lawful orders of any public safety officer, or offers any
resistance to or interference with the efforts of any public safety officers to
perform their duties, or who engages in any disorderly conduct calculated to
prevent the same, or who prevents or dissuades others from assisting to control
and/or mitigate the emergency shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor
punishable as directed by this code. (Ord. 99-13 § 2)
2.28.110: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
   A.   Whenever any officer or employee of the city is authorized to enter any
building or premises for the purpose of making an instruction to enforce any
ordinance, the officer or employee may enter such building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same; provided, that the officer or employee
shall affect entry in the manner provided in subsection B of this section,
except in emergency situations, or when consent of the person having charge or
control of such building or premises have been otherwise obtained.
   B.   If the building or premises to be inspected is occupied, the authorized
officer or employee shall first present proper credentials and demand entry;
and if such building or premises is unoccupied, the officer or employee shall
first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having
charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If consent to
such entry is not given, the authorized officer or employee shall have recourse
to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
   C.   It shall not be a violation of this section to refuse or fail to
consent to an entry for inspection. (Ord. 99-13 § 2)
2.28.120: PERSONS PRESENT AT FIRE OR VALID EMERGENCY ARE SUBJECT TO ORDERS:
Every person eighteen (18) years or older present at a fire or other valid
emergency shall be subject to the orders of the officer in command and shall
render assistance in the manner directed by the officer in command. (Ord. 99-13
§ 2)
2.28.130: FALSE ALARM:
It is unlawful for any person to turn in or report to the public safety
department a false alarm or to tamper or remove any part of an alarm system.
(Ord. 99-13 § 2)
2.28.140: SANTA CLARA-IVINS FIRE RESCUE GENERAL FIRE, STANDBY FEES AND
AMBULANCE BILLING RATES:
   A.   Collection. Fees, costs, expenses, and all other similar charges
incurred by the city in rendering fire, emergency, rescue, and other similar
services shall be subject to collection by the city.
   B.   Parties subject to collection. All persons or entities having received
the services and all persons or entities responsible for payment of the
services shall be subject to collection by the city.
   C.   Methods of collection. The city shall undertake collection against any
person or entity receiving or responsible for the services or shall contract
for the collection with a third party as approved by the city council.
   D.   Policies and fees. The collection of fees by the city in rendering such
services may be governed by such policies, and the amounts of fees to be
collected set forth in a schedule or schedules, which are adopted by the City
Council by resolution from time to time. (Ord. 2024-01)
CHAPTER 2.32
STREET DEPARTMENT 1
(Rep. by Ord. 2010-13)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 13, chapter 13.28 of this code.
CHAPTER 2.36
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2.36.010: Creation Of Commission
2.36.020: Number Of Commissioners
2.36.030: Terms Of Office
2.36.040: Officers
2.36.050: Voting
2.36.060: Duties, Responsibilities And Accountability
2.36.070: Violation; Penalty
2.36.010: CREATION OF COMMISSION:
There is created the economic development commission of the city of Santa
Clara, Utah. (Ord. 93-11 § 1)
2.36.020: NUMBER OF COMMISSIONERS:
The commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the mayor with
the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 99-28 § 1: Ord. 93-11 § 2)
2.36.030: TERMS OF OFFICE:
Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years and shall serve
not more than two (2) consecutive five (5) year terms. The terms of the members
shall be staggered so that no more than three (3) members' terms will expire at
the same time. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member
whose term is vacant. Any member may be removed for cause by the appointing
authority. (Ord. 2009-13 § 1)
2.36.040: OFFICERS:
The mayor of the city of Santa Clara, Utah, with advice and consent of the city
council, shall appoint one member of the economic development commission to
serve as chairperson for that body. The chairperson shall call and conduct all
meetings and shall serve for a term of two (2) years. At the end of this term,
he/she may be reappointed for an additional two (2) year term. (Ord. 2009-16 §
1)
2.36.050: VOTING:
All members of the commission shall have the right to vote on all matters acted
upon by the commission. (Ord. 99-28 § 1: Ord. 93-11 § 5)
2.36.060: DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND ACCOUNTABILITY:
The commission shall serve as an advisory body to the city council, and is not
vested with authority to take final action on any substantive matters which
could be legally binding upon the city.
The commission shall take all actions it deems appropriate and desirable to
place into effect an acceptable plan for the orderly economic growth of the
city and for the implementation of such plan, including planning for commercial
and/or industrial uses in coordinating its recommendations with the planning
commission, interviewing prospective businesses, and in general making all
actions it deems desirable to and for the advancement of desired economic
growth of the city. (Ord. 93-11 § 6)
2.36.070: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a class B
misdemeanor, punishable as provided by law. (Ord. 93-11 § 7)
CHAPTER 2.44
HEALTH OFFICER
SECTION:
2.44.010: Health Director; Position Created
2.44.020: Powers And Duties Of Health Director
2.44.030: Permits
2.44.010: HEALTH DIRECTOR; POSITION CREATED:
Inasmuch as the city of Santa Clara, under agreement dated October 19, 1976,
was included and made a part of the Southwestern Utah health district, the
health director of the Southwestern Utah health district is hereby designated
as the health director of this city. (Ord. 2010-16)
2.44.020: POWERS AND DUTIES OF HEALTH DIRECTOR:
   A.   The health director may appoint or designate any qualified person to
act as his or her assistant for the purpose of enforcing the ordinances of this
city.
   B.   The health director or designee shall act as a consultant and resource
to officers of this city in enforcing all rules, regulations and ordinances
relating to:
      1.   Plumbing, sanitation, contagious infectious diseases, quarantine and
sewage disposal;
      2.   Producing, storing, keeping and selling meat, dairy or other foods
or food products;
      3.   The quarantine and disposal of all animals affected with any
contagious or infectious diseases;
      4.   Enforcing the nuisance ordinances of this city.
   C.   The health director or designee shall review and approve all
applications for permits to operate any business or engage in any construction
for which a permit is required from the health district pursuant to any
ordinances or regulations of this city or the state of Utah.
   D.   The health director shall have the power to impose and maintain a
strict quarantine of all infected persons and premises having contagious or
infectious diseases, and to require such persons or premises to be disinfected.
(Ord. 2010-16)
2.44.030: PERMITS:
It is unlawful for any person engaged in a commercial business or in otherwise
providing goods or services to members of the public, to engage in any of the
following businesses or activities without first obtaining a permit from the
health director or designee:
   A.   Handling, selling, offering for sale, preparing or serving any food or
food products or beverages or water intended for human consumption;
   B.   Operating or permitting public access to any public swimming pool;
   C.   Commercially operating any public landfill, garbage or refuse
collection or disposal facility, or cleaning out or installing any privy,
cesspool or septic tank;
   D.   Fumigating or eradicating pests, insects, vermin or any other
infestation from any building occupied or to be occupied by humans. (Ord. 2010-
16)
CHAPTER 2.48
OPEN AND PUBLIC MEETINGS
SECTION:
2.48.010: Minutes Of Public Meetings
2.48.010: MINUTES OF PUBLIC MEETINGS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this chapter the following definitions
shall apply so long as they are consistent with the definitions of the same
terms found in the Utah open and public meetings act. If a term is defined
differently in the Utah open and public meetings act, the definition found in
that act shall apply:
   CONVENING: The calling of a meeting of a public body by a person authorized
to do so for the express purpose of discussing or acting upon a subject over
which that public body has jurisdiction or advisory power.
   MEETING:
      1. The convening of a public body, with a quorum present, including a
workshop or an executive session whether the meeting is held in person or by
means of electronic communications, for the purpose of discussing, receiving
comments from the public about, or acting upon a matter over which the public
body has jurisdiction or advisory power.
      2.   "Meeting" does not mean:
         a.   A chance meeting;
         b.   A social meeting; or
         c.   The convening of a public body that has both legislative and
executive responsibilities where no public funds are appropriated for
expenditure during the time the public body is convened and:
            (1)   The public body is convened solely for the discussion or
implementation of administrative or operational matters for which no formal
action by the public body is required; or
            (2)   The public body is convened solely for the discussion or
implementation of administrative or operational matters that would not come
before the public body for discussion or action.
   MEETING CLERK: The city recorder (or their acting deputies) for a city
council, or shall mean the person assigned by a public body, other than a city
council, to record and to take the written minutes of a meeting of a public
body of this municipality.
   MINUTES OF A MEETING: A written record of the meeting that shall include:
      1.   The date, time, and place of the meeting;
      2.   The names of members present and absent;
      3.   The substance of all matters proposed, discussed, or decided by the
public body which may include a summary of comments made by members of the
public body;
      4.   A record, by individual member, of each vote taken by the public
body;
      5.   The name of each person who:
         a.   Is not a member of the public body; and
         b.   After being recognized by the presiding member of the public
body, provided testimony or comments to the public body;
      6.   The substance, in brief, of the testimony or comments provided by
the public under subsection 5b of this definition; and
      7.   Any other information that is a record of the proceedings of the
meeting that any member requests be entered in the minutes or recording.
   PROPOSED MINUTES: The written minutes prepared by the meeting clerk that
have been given to the members of a public body for their review and approval.
   PUBLIC BODY: Any administrative, advisory, executive, or legislative body of
this municipality that:
      1.   Is created by the Utah constitution, statute, rule, ordinance, or
resolution;
      2.   Consists of two (2) or more persons;
      3.   Expends, disburses, or is supported in whole or in part by tax
revenue; and
      4.   Is vested with the authority to make decisions regarding the
public's business.
   B.   Policy For Approval Of Minutes: The following shall be the policy and
procedure for the approval of minutes for the city of Santa Clara:
      1.   Written minutes shall be taken for all public meetings of any public
body of this municipality. The minutes of all public meetings of any public
body of this municipality shall be recorded and taken down by the meeting clerk
during the course of any public meeting of the public body.
      2.   As soon as possible after the end of the meeting, the meeting clerk
shall prepare proposed minutes for the meeting and give a copy of the proposed
minutes to each member of the public body for his or her review and comments;
as a part of an agenda packet for a regular meeting of said public body.
      3.   Once the proposed minutes have been given to the members of the
public body as part of an agenda packet for the meeting at which said minutes
are on the agenda for possible approval, the meeting clerk shall immediately
make available to the public the proposed written minutes, which shall be
clearly identified as "DRAFT" or with some other appropriate notice that the
proposed minutes are subject to change until formally approved and they shall
become a public document available to any member of the public who requests to
read or copy the proposed minutes.
      4.   The public body shall consider the proposed minutes for approval at
the meeting of the public body for which said minutes are on the agenda for
approval action. The members of the public body shall either approve the
proposed written minutes as presented; or vote to correct and amend the
proposed written minutes and then approve the corrected and amended written
minutes at that meeting.
      5.   If the public body fails to consider the proposed minutes, or does
not take any action to approve the proposed minutes at the public meeting held
by the public body immediately following the public body's receipt of the
proposed minutes from the meeting clerk and for which said minutes are on the
agenda for approval action, the proposed minutes shall be deemed to have been
approved by the public body and will stand as proposed; unless such approval is
officially tabled by the public body at that same meeting.
      6.   Once the proposed minutes have either been approved by the public
body, tabled for approval at a future meeting or have been deemed to have been
approved by the inaction of the public body, they shall become the official
record of the proceedings of the public body and shall be signed by the
chairperson and the clerk of the meeting and shall be retained in the official
records of this municipality and shall be a public document available for the
inspection and copying by members of the public as appropriate under Utah law.
(Ord. 2009-09 §§ 1, 2)
CHAPTER 2.52
ORDER OF SUCCESSION OF AUTHORITY
SECTION:
2.52.010: Definitions
2.52.020: Condition For Order Of Succession For Elective Authority
2.52.030: Order For Administrative Functions
2.52.040: Order For Other Statutory Officers
2.52.010: DEFINITIONS:
   CATASTROPHIC DISASTER: An event that results in large numbers of deaths and
injuries; causes extensive damage or destruction of facilities that provide and
sustain human needs; produces an overwhelming demand on state and local
response resources and mechanisms; causes a severe long term effect.
   EMERGENCY: An event or set of circumstances which demands immediate action
to preserve public health, protect life, protect property, or to provide relief
to any stricken community overtaken by such occurrences, or reaches such a
dimension or degree of destructiveness as to warrant the governor declaring a
state of emergency. (Ord. 2009-11 § 1)
2.52.020: CONDITION FOR ORDER OF SUCCESSION FOR ELECTIVE AUTHORITY:
In the event of an emergency or disaster, actual or impending, and in the
further event of the absence, death or disability of the mayor, the succession
of elective authority shall be as follows: the appointed mayor pro tempore and
thereafter the senior council member (if more than 1 elected at same time, use
alphabetical order); to serve, in the event of the death of the mayor, until a
successor is appointed or elected, as provided by law; and in the event of
absence or disability, to serve until the return of the mayor. (Ord. 2009-11 §
2)
2.52.030: ORDER FOR ADMINISTRATIVE FUNCTIONS:
The administrative functions of the city shall be, in the event of disaster or
emergency, vested first in the city manager and thereafter in the next council
member in line for the elective authority; all subject to the elective
authority. (Ord. 2009-11 § 3)
2.52.040: ORDER FOR OTHER STATUTORY OFFICERS:
   A.   City Treasurer: The functions of the city treasurer shall be, in the
event of disaster or emergency, vested first in the appointed city treasurer
and thereafter in the appointed deputy treasurer.
   B.   City Recorder: The functions of the city recorder shall be, in the
event of disaster or emergency, vested first in the appointed city recorder and
thereafter in the appointed deputy recorder. (Ord. 2009-11 § 4)
CHAPTER 2.56
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
2.56.010: Records Access And Management Act
2.56.010: RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT ACT:
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah government records access and management act (GRAMA), Utah
Code Annotated section 63G-2-101 et seq., as amended, are hereby adopted by the
city of Santa Clara. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered class B
violations of this chapter and each such violation shall subject the violator
thereof to penalty as provided in section 63G-2-801 of the Utah code. (Ord.
2010-17)
CHAPTER 2.60
DISPOSAL OF CITY OWNED REAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
2.60.010: Definitions
2.60.020: Public Comment
2.60.030: Notice
2.60.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   CITY OWNED REAL PROPERTY: Any parcel of real property owned by the city
excluding real property held jointly with other entities under the Utah
interlocal cooperation act, Utah Code Annotated section 11-13-1 et seq., or
real property purchased and held under the Utah redevelopment agencies act,
Utah Code Annotated section 17C-4-101 et seq.
   DISPOSAL: The alienation of city owned real property by sale, trade, or
transfer of title.
   SIGNIFICANT PARCEL: Any parcel of real property with an estimated fair
market value of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) or more. (Ord. 2004-
07)
2.60.020: PUBLIC COMMENT:
The public shall be allowed to comment on any proposed disposal of a
significant parcel of city owned real property. Comment shall be made in the
following manner to be designed prior to the disposal by the city council:
   A.   In writing submitted to the city recorder by the time and dates set for
the public hearing set under subsection B of this section; or
   B.   In a public meeting, the time and date of which shall be set by the
city council. (Ord. 2004-07)
2.60.030: NOTICE:
Not less than fourteen (14) days' notice shall be given prior to the disposal
of a significant parcel of city owned real property, as follows:
   A.   In a public meeting along with the date, time, and place of the
meeting, published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Santa
Clara.
   B.   Notice shall be posted at the city office. (Ord. 2004-07)
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 3.04
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
3.04.010: Findings And Authority
3.04.020: Definitions
3.04.030: Establishment Of Service Area
3.04.040: Applicability
3.04.050: Assessment And Calculation Of Impact Fees
3.04.060: Exemptions From Impact Fees
3.04.070: Offsets
3.04.080: Waiver
3.04.090: Appeals
3.04.100: Establishment Of Impact Fee Accounts
3.04.110: Refunds
3.04.120: Use Of Funds
3.04.130: Impact Fee As Supplemental Regulation To Other Financing Methods
3.04.140: Review
3.04.150: Independent Fee Calculations
3.04.160: Violation; Penalty
3.04.010: FINDINGS AND AUTHORITY:
The city council of the city of Santa Clara (the "council") finds and
determines that growth and development activity in the city will create
additional demand and need for public streets and roads, publicly owned parks,
open space and recreational facilities, storm drainage, electrical facilities,
sanitary sewer facilities, culinary water facilities, and public safety
facilities in the city and the council finds that growth and development
activity should pay a proportionate share of the cost of such planned
facilities needed to serve the growth and development activity. The council
further finds that impact fees are necessary to achieve an equitable allocation
to the costs borne in the past and to be borne in the future, in comparison to
the benefits already received and yet to be received. Therefore, pursuant to
Utah Code Annotated, title 11, chapter 36a, the council adopts this chapter to
assess impact fees for planned facilities. The provisions of this chapter shall
be liberally construed in order to carry out the purpose of the council in
establishing the impact fee program. (Ord. 2011-02)
3.04.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for the
purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: The city manager, unless the city council, by
resolution, appoints another person, persons and/or official to administer this
chapter.
   BUILDING PERMIT: The permit required for any "development activity" as
defined herein, pursuant to section
17.04.060 of this code.
   CONSTRUCTION VALUE: The value of construction per square foot used by the
city to determine plan check and building permit fees, multiplied by the area
of development activity.
   DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any subdivision of land or any construction or
expansion of a building, structure, or use, any change in use of a building or
structure, or any change in the use of land, which is accompanied by a request
for a building permit.
   DWELLING UNIT: A primary or secondary residential unit, including, but not
limited to, single-family dwelling, duplex, condominium unit, townhouse,
apartment unit, multi-family unit or mobile home.
   ELECTRICAL POWER IMPACT FEE: The impact fee imposed as a condition precedent
to the approval of a building permit that is used to offset the proportionate
impact of the development activity on the need for the planning, design,
engineering, acquisition, financing and construction of additional electrical
power generation, transmission and distribution facilities.
   ENCUMBER: To reserve, set aside or otherwise earmark the impact fees in
order to pay for commitments, contractual obligations or other liabilities
incurred for public facilities.
   ENVIRONMENTAL MITIGATION IMPACT FEE: The impact fee imposed as a condition
precedent to the approval of a building permit that is used to offset the
proportionate impact of the development activity related to environmental
mitigation expenses related to environmental mitigation as provided in Utah
Code Annotated section 11-36a-205.
   FIRE PROTECTION IMPACT FEE: The impact fee imposed as a condition precedent
to the approval of a building permit that is used to offset the proportionate
impact of the development activity on the need for planning, design,
acquisition, engineering, financing, and construction of fire protection
facilities.
   IMPACT FEE: Any fee levied pursuant to this chapter as a condition of
approval of a subdivision plat or approval of a building permit.
   INDEPENDENT FEE CALCULATION: An impact fee calculation prepared by a fee
payer to support assessment of an impact fee different from any fee set forth
herein.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT IMPACT FEE: The impact fee imposed as a condition precedent
to the approval of a building permit that is used to offset the proportionate
impact of the development activity on the need for the planning, design,
acquisition, engineering, financing, and construction of law enforcement
facilities.
   OWNER: The owner of record of real property, or a person with an
unrestricted written option to purchase property; provided that, if the real
property is being purchased under a recorded real estate contract, the
purchaser shall be considered the owner of the real property.
   PARKS, TRAILS AND OPEN SPACE IMPACT FEE: The impact fee imposed as a
condition precedent to approval of a building permit that is used to offset the
proportionate impact of the development activity on the need for the planning,
design, engineering, acquisition, financing and construction of city owned
parks, trails and open space.
   PRIMARY DWELLING UNIT: Any dwelling unit used as a full time residence and
taxed as such pursuant to Utah Code Annotated chapter 59-2 et seq.
   PROJECT IMPROVEMENT: Site improvements and facilities that are planned and
designed to provide service for the development activity and are necessary for
the use and convenience of the development resulting from the development
activity.
   PUBLIC FACILITY: Any structure built by or for, or maintained by, a
governmental entity.
   SEWER DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE: The impact fee imposed as a condition
precedent to approval of a building permit that is used to offset the
proportionate impact of the development activity on the need for the planning,
design, engineering, acquisition, financing and construction of additional
sewer collection and sewer treatment facilities.
   STORMWATER DRAIN DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE: The impact fee imposed as a
condition precedent to approval of a building permit that is used to offset the
proportionate impact of the development activity on the need for the planning,
design, engineering, acquisition, financing and construction of additional
stormwater drain facilities.
   STREETS DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE: The impact fee imposed as a condition
precedent to approval of a building permit that is used to offset the
proportionate impact of the development activity on the need for the planning,
design, engineering, acquisition, financing and construction of additional
street facilities.
   WATER DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE: The impact fee imposed as a condition
precedent to approval of a building permit that is used to offset the
proportionate impact of the development activity on the need for the planning,
design, engineering, acquisition, financing and construction of water delivery
systems, and for the acquisition and transfer of water rights and points of
diversion and the planning, design, engineering, acquisition, financing and
construction of physical sources to realize those water rights. (Ord. 2013-15)
3.04.030: ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE AREA:
The corporate boundaries of the city of Santa Clara, as presently defined and
as they may, from time to time, be modified, are established as the boundaries
of the service area within which the city shall calculate and impose the impact
fees. (Ord. 2011-02)
3.04.040: APPLICABILITY:
The collection of impact fees shall apply to all new development in the city
unless otherwise provided herein. Until any applicable impact fee required by
this chapter has been paid in full, no building permit, electrical permit,
certificate of compliance, certificate of occupancy, recording of subdivision
plat, or other permit subsequent to development plan approval for any
development shall be issued. A stop work order shall be issued on any
development for which the applicable impact fee has not been paid in full.
   A.   Park: Park impact fees shall apply only to new residential development.
   B.   Electrical: Electrical impact fees shall apply to any land use that
makes improvements to any land which will generate a need for electrical
service.
   C.   Streets: Streets impact fees shall apply to any land use which makes
improvements to any land which will generate additional traffic.
   D.   Water: Water impact fees shall apply to any connection to the culinary
water system, placing additional demand for storage facilities and distribution
lines.
   E.   Sewer: Sewer impact fees shall apply to any connection to the sanitary
sewer system, placing additional demand for treatment facilities and/or
distribution lines.
   F.   Public Safety: Public safety impact fees shall apply to any development
of land or land use which makes improvements to any land which will generate
additional public safety (fire and police protection) needs.
   G.   Other Impact Fees: Any impact fees required by contract, agreement or
other association of the city of Santa Clara with other entities shall be
considered a part of this chapter.
   H.   Movement Of Structures: The movement of a structure onto a lot shall be
considered development and shall be subject to the impact fee provisions,
unless otherwise provided herein. (Ord. 2011-02)
3.04.050: ASSESSMENT AND CALCULATION OF IMPACT FEES:
Impact fees shall be assessed and calculated according to the terms of the
current applicable capital facilities plan and impact fee calculation study
approved by the council by resolution and as adjusted and allocated by said
council provided that:
Existing lots that have not been assessed impact fees in the past at platting,
to which impact fees are now assessed, shall be deemed due and assessed in
connection with the approval of the building permit.
Where impact fees have been paid at platting in the past to any part or
category of impact fees, applicants for building permit for new construction
involving new impact to the systems shall be given credit for any prior impact
fee paid at platting against the fee otherwise due at the approval of the
building permit. (Ord. 2013-15)
3.04.060: EXEMPTIONS FROM IMPACT FEES:
   A.   The following development activities shall be exempt from the payment
of impact fees:
      1.   Replacement of a habitable structure with a new structure of the
same use at the same site or lot when such replacement occurs within twelve
(12) months of the demolition or destruction of the structure and does not
result in the construction of an additional dwelling unit or a change in use.
      2.   Alterations to, or expansion, enlargement, remodeling,
rehabilitation, or conversion of an existing dwelling unit where no additional
dwelling unit is created, or alteration to, or remodeling or rehabilitation of
an existing development activity that does not result in expansion of the
existing use. To the extent that an existing use is expanded, an incremental
developmental impact fee equal to the difference between the fee that would
have been charged for the existing use and the fee that would have been charged
for the expanded use shall be charged.
   B.   The administrative officer shall determine whether a particular
dwelling unit falls within the exemption identified in this or any other
section. Determinations by the administrative officer shall be reduced to
writing, which shall state the basis therefor, and shall be subject to the
appeals procedures set forth in section
3.04.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02: Ord. 98-04 § 2: Ord. 96-102 § 3: prior
code § 7-114)
3.04.070: OFFSETS:
   A.   A fee payer can request that an offset or offsets be awarded to him or
her for the value of a system improvement required by the city as a condition
of approval of a development activity under the following conditions:
      1.   For each request for an offset or offsets, unless otherwise agreed,
the fee payer shall retain an appraiser approved by the city to determine the
value of the system improvement provided by the fee payer.
      2.   The fee payer shall pay the cost of the appraisal.
      3.   After receiving the appraisal, the administrative officer shall
provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar
amount of the offset, the reason for the offset, where applicable, the legal
description of the site donated, and the legal description or other adequate
description of the project or development to which the offset may be applied.
The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of the letter or certificate
indicating his or her agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate and
return the signed document to the administrative officer before the impact fee
offset will be awarded. The failure of the applicant to sign, date, and return
the document within sixty (60) days shall nullify the offset.
      4.   Any claim for offset must be made not later than the time of
application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed
waived.
      5.   Determinations made by the administrative officer pursuant to this
section shall be subject to the appeals set forth in section
3.04.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02: Ord. 96-102 § 3: prior code § 7-115)
3.04.080: WAIVER:
The city council may waive all or a portion of development impact fees for
development activity attributable to:
   A.   Affordable housing;
   B.   The state;
   C.   A school district or charter school, provided that a request for waiver
made by either a school district or charter school shall be reviewed and
approved on the same basis; or
   D.   Other development activity with a broad public purpose.
Except for a waiver granted for development activity attributable to affordable
housing, when granting a waiver of impact fees the city council shall identify
one or more sources of funds other than impact fees to pay for that development
activity. (Ord. 2015-14)
3.04.090: APPEALS:
   A.   A fee payer may appeal the impact fees imposed or other determinations
which the administrative officer is authorized to make pursuant to this
chapter. However, no appeal shall be made unless and until the impact fees at
issue have been paid.
   B.   Appeals shall be taken within ten (10) days of the administrative
officer's issuance of a written determination, by filing with the city a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The city shall hear the appeal
and issue a written decision no later than thirty (30) days after the challenge
to the impact fee is filed.
   C.   The city shall fix a time for the hearing of the appeal and give notice
to the parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or
by agent or attorney.
   D.   The city council is authorized to make findings of fact regarding the
applicability of the impact fees to a given development activity, the
availability or amount of the offset, or the accuracy or applicability of any
independent fee calculation. The decision of the city council shall be final,
and may be appealed to the appropriate court of law.
   E.   The city council may, so long as such action is in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may
modify the determinations of the administrative officer with respect to the
amount of the impact fees imposed or the offset awarded upon a determination
that it is proper to do so based on principles of fairness, and may make such
order, requirements, decision or determination as, in its judgment, ought to be
made.
   F.   Where the city council determines that there is a flaw in the impact
fee program or that a specific exemption or offset should be awarded on a
consistent basis or that the principles of fairness require amendments to this
chapter, the city council shall advise the city attorney as to any question or
questions that the city council believes should be reviewed and/or amended.
   G.   Within ninety (90) days of a decision by the city council or within one
hundred twenty (120) days after the date the challenge to the impact fee was
filed, whichever is earlier, any party who is adversely affected by the
decision may petition the district court for a review of the decision. (Ord.
2011-02: Ord. 96-102 § 3: prior code § 7-116)
3.04.100: ESTABLISHMENT OF IMPACT FEE ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Impact fees shall be earmarked specifically and deposited in special
interest bearing accounts. The fees received shall be prudently invested in a
manner consistent with the investment policies of the city.
   B.   Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be used in accordance with the
provisions of section
3.04.120 of this chapter. Interest earned on the impact fees shall be retained
in each of the accounts and expended for the purposes for which the impact fees
were collected. Money in these accounts shall not be commingled with other
funds.
   C.   Impact fees shall be disbursed, expended, or encumbered within six (6)
years of receipt, unless the city council identifies in written findings an
extraordinary and compelling reason or reasons for the city to hold the fees
beyond the six (6) year period. Under such circumstances, the city council
shall establish the period of time within which impact fees shall be expended
or encumbered. (Ord. 2011-02: Ord. 96-102 § 3: prior code § 7-117)
3.04.110: REFUNDS:
   A.   If the city fails to disburse, expend, or encumber the impact fees
within six (6) years of when the fees were paid, or where extraordinary or
compelling reasons exist, such other time periods as established pursuant to
subsection
3.04.100C of this chapter, the current owner of the property on which the
impact fees have been paid may request a refund of the fees. In determining
whether impact fees have been disbursed, expended, or encumbered, the fees
shall be considered disbursed, expended, or encumbered on a first in, first out
basis.
   B.   Owners seeking a refund of impact fees must submit a written request
for a refund of the fees to the administrative officer within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the date that the right to claim the refund arises.
   C.   Any impact fees for which no application for a refund has been made
within the one hundred eighty (180) day period shall be retained by the city
and expended on the type of public facilities for which they were collected.
   D.   Refunds of impact fees under this section shall include any interest
earned on the impact fees.
   E.   When the city seeks to terminate any or all components of an impact fee
program, any funds not disbursed, expended, or encumbered from any terminated
component or components, including interest earned, shall be refunded pursuant
to this section. Upon finding that any or all fee requirements are to be
terminated, the city shall place notice of such termination, and the
availability of refunds, in a newspaper of general circulation at least two (2)
times. All funds available for refund shall be retained for a period of one
hundred eighty (180) days. At the end of the one hundred eighty (180) day
period, any remaining funds shall be retained by the city, but must be expended
on the type of public facilities for which they were collected.
   F.   The city shall refund to the owner of property for which impact fees
have been paid all impact fees paid, including interest earned on the impact
fees attributable to the particular development activity, within one year of
the date that right to claim the refund arises, if the development activity for
which the impact fees were imposed did not occur, no impact resulted, and the
owner makes written request for a refund within one hundred eighty (180) days
of the expiration or abandonment of the permit for development activity. (Ord.
2011-02: Ord. 96-102 § 3: prior code § 7-118)
3.04.120: USE OF FUNDS:
   A.   Pursuant to this chapter and subject to the provisions of Utah code
section 11-36-302, impact fees:
      1.   Shall be used for public facilities that reasonably benefit the new
development; and
      2.   Shall not be imposed to make up for deficiencies in public
facilities serving existing developments; and
      3.   Shall not be used for maintenance or operation of public facilities.
   B.   Impact fees may be used to recoup costs of designing, constructing and/
or the expansion of existing facilities in anticipation of new growth and
development to the extent that the development activity will be served by the
previously constructed improvements or the previously incurred costs.
   C.   In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are or have been
issued for the advanced provision of public facilities for which impact fees
may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or
similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities or improvements
provided are consistent with the requirements of this section and are used to
serve the development activity. (Ord. 2011-02: Ord. 98-08 § 2: Ord. 96-102 § 3:
prior code § 7-119)
3.04.130: IMPACT FEE AS SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATION TO OTHER FINANCING METHODS:
   A.   Except as herein otherwise provided, impact fees are in addition to any
other requirements, taxes, fees or assessments imposed by the city on
development or the issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy
which are imposed on and due against property within the jurisdiction of the
city. Impact fees are intended to be consistent with the city's general plan,
capital facilities plan, land development ordinances and other city policies,
ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of
capital facilities in conjunction with development.
   B.   In addition to the use of impact fees, the city may finance qualifying
capital improvements through the issuance of bonds, the formation of assessment
districts or any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such
limitation as may be provided by law. (Ord. 2011-02)
3.04.140: REVIEW:
   A.   The city may adjust the impact fees or service areas periodically, for
an impact fee, after a study and proper notice as provided in Utah Code
Annotated title 11, chapter 36a, as amended.
   B.   The city may adjust the standard impact fee in the current applicable
calculation of impact fees study to:
      1.   Respond to unusual circumstances in specific areas.
      2.   Ensure the impact fees are imposed fairly. (Ord. 2011-02)
3.04.150: INDEPENDENT FEE CALCULATIONS:
   A.   If a fee payer believes that a fee should be charged different from the
impact fees determined according to this chapter, the fee payer shall prepare
and submit to the city administrator an independent fee calculation for the
impact fee(s) associated with the development activity for which a building
permit is sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which
the independent fee calculation was made. The administrative officer is not
required to accept any documentation which the administrative officer
reasonably deems to be inaccurate, unsubstantiated, or unreliable, and may
require the fee payer to submit additional or different documentation prior to
the administrative officer's consideration of an independent fee calculation.
   B.   Any fee payer submitting an independent fee calculation shall pay an
administrative processing fee, per calculation, of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   C.   Based on the information within the administrative officer's
possession, the administrative officer is authorized to adjust the impact fee
to the specific characteristics of the development activity, and/or according
to principles of fairness. Such adjustments shall be preceded by written
findings justifying the fee.
   D.   Determinations made by the administrative officer pursuant to this
section may be appealed subject to the procedures set forth in section
3.04.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-02: Ord. 96-102 § 3: prior code § 7-120)
3.04.160: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any firm, corporation, person, or persons violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred ninety nine dollars
($299.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both, at the
discretion of the court. (Ord. 2011-02: Ord. 96-102 § 3: prior code § 7-121)
CHAPTER 3.08
MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.08.010: Purpose
3.08.020: Definitions
3.08.030: Municipal Energy Sales And Use Tax
3.08.040: Exemptions From The Municipal Energy Sales And Use Tax
3.08.050: No Effect Upon Existing Franchise Agreements; Credit For Franchise
Fees
3.08.060: Tax Collection Contract With State Tax Commission
3.08.070: Incorporation Of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59, Utah Code, Including
Amendments
3.08.080: No Additional License To Collect The Municipal Energy Sales And Use
Tax Required; No Additional License Or Reporting Requirements
3.08.010: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the city to repeal its utility revenue tax levied on gas
energy sales within Santa Clara and adopt the municipal sales and use tax,
pursuant to, and in conformance with, Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-301 et
seq, "the municipal energy sales and use tax act". (Ord. 97-11 § 2: prior code
§ 6-301)
3.08.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject
to municipal energy sales and use tax.
   CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE: A. A fee:
      1.   Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
      2.   That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
   B.   1. A fee similar to subsection A of this definition; or
      2.   Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
   DELIVERED VALUE: The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for
sale or use in the municipality and includes:
   A.   The value of the energy itself; and
   B.   Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service charges,
or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to
each class of customer in the municipality.
"Delivered value" does not include the amount of a tax paid under part 1 or
part 2 of chapter 12, title 59, of the Utah Code Annotated.
   ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons
supplying a de minimus amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded
by rule promulgated by the state tax commission.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract, or agreement
granting a franchise.
   FRANCHISE TAX: A. A franchise tax;
   B.   A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
   C.   Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
   PERSON: Means and includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate,
this state, any county, city, municipality, district, or other local
governmental entity of the state, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
   SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange, or barter, conditional or otherwise,
in any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
   A.   Installment and credit sales;
   B.   Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
   C.   Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable
energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable
if an outright sale were made.
   STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in this city for any
purpose except sale in the regular course of business.
   USE: The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the
ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy.
"Use" does not include the sale, display, demonstration, or trial of the
taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale.
   TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity. (Ord. 97-11 § 2: prior code § 6-302)
3.08.030: MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX:
There is levied, subject to the provisions of this chapter, a tax on every sale
or use of taxable energy made within the city equaling six percent (6%) of the
delivered value of taxable energy to the consumer. This tax shall be known as
the municipal energy sales and use tax.
   A.   The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable
energy to the consumer.
   B.   The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy
imposed by the city authorized by title 59, chapter 12, part 2 of the Utah Code
Annotated, the local sales and use tax act. (Ord. 97-11 § 2: prior code § 6-
303)
3.08.040: EXEMPTIONS FROM THE MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX:
   A.   No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax
except as expressly provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b);
notwithstanding an exemption granted by section 59-1-104 of the Utah code.
   B.   The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b):
      1.   Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, and special fuels
subject to taxation under title 59, chapter 13 of the Utah Code Annotated;
      2.   Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under
federal law, the United States constitution, or the Utah constitution;
      3.   Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored in the state for
resale;
      4.   Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of
the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a
fuel subject to taxation under title 59, chapter 13 of the Utah Code Annotated;
      5.   Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or
working in the state at the time of purchase;
      6.   The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a
fuel or energy; and
      7.   The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the
city.
   C.   The sale, storage, use or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt
from the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter, provided:
      1.   The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a
municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the
state authorized by title 10, chapter 1, part 3 of the Utah Code Annotated;
      2.   The city is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other
municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this chapter, if the
tax due under this chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality.
(Amended during 1998 codification: Ord. 98-08 § 2: Ord. 97-11 § 2: prior code §
6-304)
3.08.050: NO EFFECT UPON EXISTING FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS; CREDIT FOR FRANCHISE
FEES:
   A.   This chapter shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between
the city and energy suppliers.
   B.   There is a credit against the tax due from any consumer in the amount
of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
      1.   The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the city
pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
      2.   The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy
supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
      3.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 97-11 § 2:
prior code § 6-305)
3.08.060: TAX COLLECTION CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
   A.   On or before the effective date of this chapter, the city shall
contract with the state tax commission to perform all functions incident to the
administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and use tax, in
accordance with this chapter. The mayor is authorized to enter any agreements
with the state tax commission that may be necessary to the continued
administration and operation of the municipal energy sales and use tax
ordinance enacted by this chapter.
   B.   An energy supplier shall pay the municipal energy sales and use tax
revenues collected from consumers directly to the city monthly if:
      1.   The city is the energy supplier; or
      2.   a. The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and
use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more; and
         b.   The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use
tax.
   C.   An energy supplier paying the municipal energy sales and use tax
directly to the city may deduct any contractual franchise fees collected by the
energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit the net tax less any amount
the energy supplier qualifying as credit and remit the net tax less any amount
the energy supplier retains as authorized by section 10-1-307(4), Utah Code
Annotated. (Ord. 97-11 § 2: prior code § 6-306)
3.08.070: INCORPORATION OF PART 1, CHAPTER 12, TITLE 59, UTAH CODE, INCLUDING
AMENDMENTS:
   A.   1. Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of title 10, chapter 1, part 3, municipal
energy sales and use tax act, as well as this chapter, all of the provisions of
part 1, chapter 12, title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, and
if force and effect on the effective date of this chapter, insofar as they
relate to sales and use taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119
thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales and use taxes levied
therein, are adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that in part 1, chapter 12, title 59,
Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, the state of Utah is named or referred to
as the "taxing agency", the name of the city of Santa Clara shall be
substituted, insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as
part 3, chapter 1, title 10, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended. Nothing in
this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name "city of
Santa Clara" for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title
of the state tax commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall the name
of the city of Santa Clara be substituted for that of the state in any section
when the result of such a substitution would require action to be taken by or
against the city of Santa Clara or any agency thereof, rather than by or
against the state tax commission in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this chapter.
      3.   Any amendments made to part 1, chapter 12, title 59, Utah Code
Annotated 1953, as amended, which would be applicable to the city of Santa
Clara for the purposes of carrying out this chapter are incorporated herein by
reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a
Utah statute. (Ord. 97-11 § 2: prior code § 6-307)
3.08.080: NO ADDITIONAL LICENSE TO COLLECT THE MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE
TAX REQUIRED; NO ADDITIONAL LICENSE OR REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use
tax levied by this chapter is required, provided the energy supplier collecting
the tax has a license under section 59-12-106, Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 97-11
§ 2: prior code § 6-308)
CHAPTER 3.12
SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.12.010: Purpose
3.12.020: Contract With State Of Utah
3.12.030: Sales Tax Levied
3.12.040: Use Tax
3.12.050: Highways Tax
3.12.060: Municipality Transient Room Tax
3.12.070: Transit Sales Tax
3.12.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to levy a seven-eighths (7/8) of one percent
(1%) sales and use tax in compliance with the provisions of the uniform local
sales and use tax law, chapter 9 of title 11, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, and in
compliance with the applicable provisions of chapters 15 and 16 of title 59,
Utah Code Annotated, 1953. (Prior code § 6-201)
3.12.020: CONTRACT WITH STATE OF UTAH:
The existing contract between the city and the state tax commission, which
provides that the commission will perform all functions incident to the
administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance of this city,
is declared to be in full force and effect. (Prior code § 6-202)
3.12.030: SALES TAX LEVIED:
   A.   Levy Of Tax: There is levied a tax upon every retail sale of tangible
personal property, services, and meals made within the city at the rate of
seven-eighths (7/8) of one percent (1%).
   B.   Situs Of Levy: For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales shall
be presumed to have been consummated at the place of business of the retailer
unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his
or her agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery
to an out of state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place
of business in the state, or has more than one place of business, the place or
places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under
the rules and regulations prescribed and adopted by the state tax commission.
Public utilities are defined by title 54, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, shall not
be obligated to determine the place or places within any county or city where
public utilities services are rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax
revenues arising from such service allocable to the city shall be as determined
by the state tax commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and other rules
and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
   C.   Application Of State Sales Tax Provisions: Except as hereinafter
provided, and except insofar as otherwise inconsistent with the provisions of
the uniform local sales and use tax law of Utah, all of the provisions of
chapter 15, title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, and in force and effect on the
effective date hereof insofar as related to sales taxes, excepting sections 59-
15-1 and 59-15-21 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the tax levied
therein, are adopted and made a part of this chapter.
   D.   Substitution Of City For State: Whenever, and to the extent that
chapter 15 of title 59, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, the state of Utah is named
or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted
therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of
the name of the city for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the
title of the state tax commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall
the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when
the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against
the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state tax
commission in performing the functions incidental to the administration or
operations of this chapter.
   E.   Additional License Not Required: If an annual license has been issued
to a retailer under section 59-15-3, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, an additional
license shall not be required by reason of this section.
   F.   Exemptions: There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or
charged by which the tax is measured:
      1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of Utah upon
a retailer or consumer;
      2.   Receipts from the sale of tangible personal property upon which a
sales or use tax has become due by reason of the same transaction to any other
city and any county in the state of Utah, under a sales or use tax ordinance
enacted by the county or city in accordance with uniform local sales and use
tax law of Utah. (Prior code § 6-203)
3.12.040: USE TAX:
   A.   Levy Of Tax: An excise tax is levied on the storage, use or other
consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any
retailer on or after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of seven-
eighths of one percent of the sales price of the property.
   B.   Application Of State Use Tax Provisions: Except as hereinafter
provided, and except insofar as inconsistent with the provisions of the uniform
local sales and use tax law of Utah, all of the provisions of chapter 15, title
59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, and in force and effect on the effective date
hereof, applicable to use taxes, excepting provisions of sections 59-16-1 and
59-16-25 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the tax levied therein, are
adopted and made a part of this section.
   C.   Substitution Of City For State: Wherever and to the extent that in
chapter 16 of title 59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, the state of Utah is named or
referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted
therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the
substitution of the name of this city for the word "state" when that word is
used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or the constitution of
Utah, nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in
any section when the results of that substitution would require action to be
taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against
the state tax commission in performing the functions incidental to the
administration or operation of this chapter.
   D.   Exemptions: There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
      1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of Utah upon
a retailer or consumer;
      2.   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sales of or the cost of which has been
subject to sales or use tax under a sales or use tax ordinance enacted in
accordance with the uniform local sales and use tax law of Utah by any other
city and any county of the state of Utah. (Prior code § 6-204)
3.12.050: HIGHWAYS TAX:
   A.   There is levied a tax on all sales and uses described in subsection 59-
12-103(1), Utah Code Annotated, as the same may be amended from time to time,
subject to the exceptions provided for in section 59-12-104, Utah Code
Annotated, as amended from time to time.
   B.   Commencing upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
section, the tax imposed by this section shall be collected by the Utah state
tax commission (the "commission"). The commission shall transmit to the city by
electronic funds transfer the revenues generated by the tax imposed by this
section.
   C.   The tax imposed by this section shall be used by the city for the
construction and maintenance of certain highways under the city's jurisdiction.
   D.   The effective date for the tax shall be January 1, 1999. (Ord. 98-30)
3.12.060: MUNICIPALITY TRANSIENT ROOM TAX:
   A.   There is levied a one percent (1%) municipality transient room tax on
all public accommodations as outlined in 59-12-351 and 59-12-352, Utah Code
Annotated, as the same may be amended from time to time. The tax is imposed on
all rents charged to transients occupying public accommodations for less than
thirty (30) consecutive days.
   B.   The tax imposed by this section shall be collected by the Utah state
tax commission (commission). The commission shall transmit to the city by
electronic funds transfer the revenues generated by the tax imposed by this
section.
   C.   The tax imposed by this section shall be used for general governmental
purposes. (Ord. 2002-05 § 2)
3.12.070: TRANSIT SALES TAX:
   A.   In addition to any other tax authorized by the laws of the state of
Utah and/or of this municipality, there is hereby established, approved, and
levied a sales and use tax upon the retail sales, as defined and included in
Utah Code Annotated subsection 59-12-103(1) and as restricted in Utah Code
Annotated subsection 59-12-1001(1)(b), as amended, of three-tenths of one
percent (0.30%), the same to be used in connection with the financing of public
transportation for the city of Santa Clara, Utah.
   B.   This section shall become effective on January 1, 2008. (Ord. 2007-30
§§ 2, 3)
CHAPTER 3.16
TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE PROVIDERS TAX
SECTION:
3.16.020: Definitions
3.16.030: Levy Of Tax
3.16.040: Rate
3.16.050: Rate Limitation And Exemption Therefrom
3.16.060: Effective Date Of Tax Levy
3.16.070: Changes In Rate Or Repeal Of The Tax
3.16.080: Interlocal Agreement For Collection Of The Tax
3.16.090: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
3.16.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   COMMISSION: The state tax commission.
   CUSTOMER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this definition, "customer"
means the person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications
provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "customer" means:
      1.   The person who is obligated under a contract with a
telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received
under the contract; or
      2.   If the end user is not the person described in subsection B1 of this
definition, the end user of telecommunications service.
   C.   "Customer" does not include a reseller:
      1.   Of telecommunications service; or
      2.   For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an
agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's
licensed service area.
   END USER: A. The person who uses a telecommunications service.
   B.   For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is
not an individual, "end user" means the individual who uses the
telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the
telecommunications service.
   GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE MUNICIPALITY: Those gross receipts from a
transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the
municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah Code title 59,
chapter 12, sales and use tax act and determined in accordance with Utah code
section 59-12-207.
   GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered
except for amounts collected or paid as:
   A.   A tax, fee or charge:
      1.   Imposed by a governmental entity;
      2.   Separately identified as a tax, fee or charge in the transaction
with the customer for the telecommunications service; and
      3.   Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
   B.   Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a
customer under title 59, chapter 12, sales and use tax act; or
   C.   Interest, a fee or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications
provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when
payment is due.
   MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: As defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
   MUNICIPALITY: Santa Clara City.
   PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: A. For telecommunications service other than mobile
telecommunications service, means the street address representative of where
the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which
shall be:
      1.   The residential street address of the customer; or
      2.   The primary business street address of the customer; or
   B.   For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, "service
address" means:
   A.   If the location described in this subsection A is known, the location
of the telecommunications equipment:
      1.   To which a call is charged; and
      2.   From which the call originates or terminates;
   B.   If the location described in subsection A of this definition is not
known but the location described in this subsection B is known, the location of
the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first
identified by:
      1.   The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
      2.   If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications
provider from its service provider; or
   C.   If the locations described in subsection A or B of this definition are
not known, the location of a customer's place of primary use.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this
definition a person that:
      1.   Owns, controls, operates or manages a telecommunications service; or
      2.   Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition
for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications
service.
   B.   A person described in subsection A of this definition is a
telecommunications provider whether or not the public service commission of
Utah regulates:
      1.   That person; or
      2.   The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls,
operates or manages.
   C.   "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined
in Utah code section 54-8b-2.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: A. Telephone service, as defined in Utah code
section 59-12-102, other than mobile telecommunications service, that
originates and terminates within the boundaries of this state; and
   B.   Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah code section 59-
12-102:
      1.   That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state;
and
      2.   Only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act, 4 USC section 116 et seq. (Ord. 2004-11)
3.16.030: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this municipality. (Ord.
2004-11)
3.16.040: RATE:
   A.   The rate of the tax levy shall be four percent (4%) of the
telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service
that are attributed to the municipality subject to the following:
   B.   If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than this
municipality then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications
services shall be the lower of: 1) the rate imposed by the taxing jurisdiction
in which the transaction is located or 2) the rate for nonmobile
telecommunication services shall be the rate imposed by the municipality in
which the customers service address is located; or for mobile
telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the municipality of the
customer's primary place of use. (Ord. 2004-11)
3.16.050: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION THEREFROM:
This rate of this levy shall not exceed four percent (4%) of the
telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunication service
attributed to the municipality unless higher rate is approved by a majority
vote of the voters in this municipality that vote in:
   A.   A municipal general election;
   B.   A regular general election; or
   C.   A local special election. (Ord. 2004-11)
3.16.060: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1, 2004, or the first
day of any calendar quarter after a seventy five (75) day period beginning on
the date the commission received notice pursuant to Utah code section 10-1-403
that this municipality has enacted the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(Ord. 2004-11)
3.16.070: CHANGES IN RATE OR REPEAL OF THE TAX:
This chapter is subject to the requirements of Utah code section 10-1-403. If
the tax rate is changed or the tax is repealed, then the appropriate notice
shall be given as provided in Utah code section 10-1-403. (Ord. 2004-11)
3.16.080: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF THE TAX:
On or before the effective date hereof, the municipality shall enter into the
uniform interlocal agreement with the commission as described in Utah code
section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement and administration of this
municipal telecommunications license tax. (Ord. 2004-11)
3.16.090: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality under authority of Utah
code section 10-1-203 or Utah code title 11, chapter 26, local taxation of
utilities limitation, is hereby repealed.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal ordinance
or fee which provides that the municipality may recover from a
telecommunications provider the management costs of the municipality caused by
the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights of way of the
municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah code section 72-7-
102 and is not related to the municipality's loss of use of a highway as a
result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way,
or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the activities of the
telecommunications provider in a right of way, nor does the ordinance codified
in this chapter limit the municipalities right to charge fees or taxes on
persons that are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax
under this chapter and locate telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah
code section 72-7-108, in this municipality. (Ord. 2004-11)
CHAPTER 3.20
PURCHASING POLICY
SECTION:
3.20.010: Purpose
3.20.020: Definitions
3.20.030: General Policy
3.20.040: Authority Of City Manager
3.20.050: Approval Of Purchases
3.20.060: Exemptions
3.20.070: Purchases Not Requiring Sealed Bids
3.20.080: Purchases Requiring Sealed Bids
3.20.090: Requirements For Bids
3.20.100: Award Of Contract
3.20.110: Rejection Of Bids
3.20.120: Disqualification Of Bidders
3.20.130: Prequalification Of Bidders
3.20.140: Appeal Procedures
3.20.150: Accounts Payable
3.20.160: Cancellation And Rejection Of Bids
3.20.170: Cost-Plus-A-Percentage-Of-Cost Profits Contracts
3.20.180: Required Contract Clauses
3.20.190: Final Action On Appeals
3.20.200: Conflicts Prohibited
3.20.010: PURPOSE:
The underlying purpose of this chapter is:
   A.   To ensure that purchases and services contracted for the City are in
the best interest of the public and to assure fair and equitable treatment of
all persons who wish to or do conduct business with the City.
   B.   To provide for the greatest possible economy in procurement activities
for the City.
   C.   To foster effective broad-based competition within the free enterprise
system to ensure that the City will receive the best possible service or
product at the lowest possible price.
   D.   To provide a systematic and uniform method of purchasing goods and
services for the City. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.020: DEFINITIONS:
   BUSINESS: Means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole
proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal
entity.
   CHANGE ORDER: Means a written order signed by the City Manager or department
head, directing the contractor to suspend work or make changes, which the
appropriate clauses of the contract authorize the City Manager to order without
the consent of the contractor or any written alteration in specifications,
delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or
other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties
to the contract.
   CITY: Means Santa Clara City and all other reporting entities controlled by
or financially dependent upon the City Council.
   CITY MANAGER: Means the City Manager of Santa Clara City.
   CONTRACT: Means a written agreement for the delivery or disposal of
supplies, services, or construction.
   INVITATION FOR BIDS: Means all documents, whether attached or incorporated
by reference, used for soliciting bids.
   PERSON: Means any business, individual, union, committee, club, other
organization, or group of individuals.
   PROCUREMENT: Means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, leasing with an
option to purchase, or otherwise acquiring any supplies, services, or
construction.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES CONTRACT: Means a contract for services performed by
an independent contractor in a professional capacity who produces a service
predominantly of an intangible nature. These include, but are not limited to,
the services of an attorney, physician, engineer, accountant, architectural
consultant, dentist, artist, appraiser or photographer.
   PUBLIC UTILITIES EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES: Means equipment and materials
purchased by the Public Works Department or Parks Department that are used in
the regular course of supplying public utilities or park and trail amenities,
and includes but is not limited to such items as piping, irrigation equipment,
meters, conduit, terminations, transformers, cable, wire, hoses, pad mounted
equipment, and general construction materials. "Public utilities equipment and
supplies" does not include any purchase that includes, in whole or in part,
labor (not including freight or delivery), services, vehicles or machinery.
   PUBLIC WORKS PROJECT: Means the construction of a street, road, curb and
gutter, sidewalk, power line or electrical generation or transmission facility;
a public park, trail, or other recreational facility; a pipeline, culvert, dam,
canal, or other system or facility for water, sewage, stormwater, or flood
control; or any other public infrastructure, system, or improvement
constructed, owned, operated, or maintained by the City.
   PURCHASE: Means the acquisition of goods (supplies, equipment, etc.) in a
single transaction such that payment is made prior to receiving or upon receipt
of the goods.
   PURCHASE DESCRIPTION: Means the words used in a solicitation to describe the
supplies or services to be acquired, and includes specifications attached to or
made a part of the solicitation.
   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS: Means all documents, whether attached or incorporated
by reference, used for soliciting proposals.
   SEALED BIDS: Means written proposals from persons or entities offering to
contract with or to sell to the City which are received in sealed envelopes to
be opened after the deadline for receipt of bids as defined in an invitation to
bid.
   SOLE SOURCE: Means goods or service for which there is only one source for
the procurement item. Circumstances under which there is only one source for a
procurement item may include: a) where the most important consideration in
obtaining a procurement item is the compatibility of equipment, technology,
software, accessories, replacement parts, or service; b) where a procurement
item is needed for trial use or testing; c) where transitional costs are
unreasonable or cost prohibitive; or d) where reasonably equivalent goods or
services are not available from any other source. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.030: GENERAL POLICY:
   A.   All City purchases and contracts for goods and services shall be
subject to this chapter unless specifically exempted.
   B.   No contract or purchase shall be so arranged, fragmented or divided
with the purpose or intent to circumvent this chapter.
   C.   No purchase shall be contracted for, or made, unless sufficient funds
have been budgeted in the years in which the funds are to be expended.
   D.   Reasonable attempts shall be made to publicize anticipated purchases or
contracts to known vendors, contractors and suppliers.
   E.   When it is advantageous to the City, annual or other recurring
contracts for services and supplies regularly purchased should be approved.
   F.   All purchases and contracts must be approved by the City Manager unless
otherwise specified in this chapter.
   G.   All contracts for services shall be approved as to form by the City
Attorney. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.040: AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER:
The City Manager or a person designated by the City Manager shall be
responsible for the following:
   A.   Ensure that all purchases for services comply with this chapter.
   B.   Review and approve all purchases of the City.
   C.   Establish necessary additional procedures for the efficient and
economical management of the contracting and purchasing functions authorized by
this chapter. Such procedures shall be in writing and on file in the City
Recorder's Office as a public record.
   D.   Maintain accurate and sufficient records concerning all City purchases
and contracts for services.
   E.   Maintain a list of contractors for public improvements and personal
services who have made themselves known to the City and are interested in
soliciting City business.
   F.   Make recommendations to the City Council concerning amendments to this
chapter.
   G.   In the absence of the City Manager, the Mayor shall be designated and
authorized to fulfill the duties of the City Manager with respect to any
contract, purchase or payment that requires immediate action or execution. The
Mayor shall promptly notify the City Manager of any actions taken by the Mayor.
(Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.050: APPROVAL OF PURCHASES:
The following approvals are required for all purchases unless otherwise
exempted in this chapter:
   A.   Any contract, purchase, purchase order, check request, or service
request for nonprofessional services and supplies or building improvements in
the total amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less may be made or
approved by the City Manager or department head, or an employee or Supervisor
authorized by the City Manager or department head to make such purchase,
purchase order, check request, or service request.
   B.   Any contract, purchase, purchase order, check request, or service
request for nonprofessional services and supplies or building improvements in
the total amount of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) but less than
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) must be made or approved by the City Manager
or department head.
   C.   Any contract, purchase, purchase order, check request, or service
request for nonprofessional services and supplies or building improvements in
the total amount of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but less than
forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) must be made or approved by the City
Manager.
   D.   Any contract, purchase, purchase order, check request, or service
request for public utilities equipment and supplies in the total amount of more
than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but less than one hundred twenty five
thousand dollars ($125,000.00) must be made or approved by both the Public
Works Director or Parks Director and the City Manager.
   E.   The City Manager may establish additional policies and controls which
are consistent with the approval mechanism set forth in this chapter.
   F.   The following contracts and purchases must be approved by the City
Council:
      1.   Any contract and purchase in the amount of forty thousand dollars
($40,000.00) or more, or any contract or purchase for public utilities
equipment and supplies in the amount of one hundred twenty five thousand
dollars ($125,000.00) or more.
      2.   Any contract awarded through the formal bidding process.
      3.   Any contract, purchase or payment over ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) which is not anticipated in the current budget and is not funded
by development fees (including connection fees or impact fees) or paid for by
third parties.
      4.   Accumulated "change orders" which would increase a previously
approved contract by five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more, taking into
consideration all previously approved change orders to the contract under
consideration.
   G.   Credit cards issued in the City's name may be made available for use by
specific City employees. Credit cards may be used for purchasing where there is
some benefit to the City such as convenience, the ability to make recurring
payments where required, or cash back to the City through a loyalty program.
Purchases using credit cards shall be subject to all the required limitations,
requirements, and approvals of this chapter. Each credit card statement shall
be reviewed monthly by at least two (2) persons, which shall include at least
the City Manager or City Finance Officer, and a department head, to protect
against misuse or fraud. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.060: EXEMPTIONS:
The following transactions are exempt from the competitive bidding requirements
of this chapter. The City Manager shall determine whether or not a particular
contract or purchase is exempt under the following criteria:
   A.   When the provisions of this chapter would prevent the City from
complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, or bequest that is
otherwise consistent with law.
   B.   When any purchase or encumbrance is made with State or Federal funds
and the applicable State or Federal laws or regulations are in conflict with
this chapter to the extent that following the provisions of this chapter would
jeopardize the use of those State or Federal funds, such conflicting provisions
of this chapter shall not apply and the City officials making such purchases
shall follow the procedure required by the State or Federal laws or
regulations.
   C.   Emergency contracts which require prompt execution of the contract
because of an imminent threat to the safety or welfare of the public, or public
or private property; circumstances which place the City or its officers and
agents in a position of serious legal liability; or circumstances which are
likely to cause the City to suffer financial harm or loss, the gravity of which
clearly outweighs the benefits of competitive bidding in the usual manner. The
City Manager or Mayor shall notify the City Council of any emergency contract
which would have normally required their approval at the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting.
   D.   Projects which are acquired, expanded, or improved under the Local
Building Authority Act.
   E.   Purchases from vendors or suppliers who are a sole source of the goods
or services under procurement. If any sole source procurement exceeds forty
thousand dollars ($40,000.00), notice of the sole source procurement shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the State or a newspaper of
local circulation in the area at least ten (10) days before the public meeting
to approve the purchase or contract by the City Council.
   F.   Purchases from State or local surplus property agencies or entities or
purchases from entities under State-awarded equipment contracts.
   G.   The selection of personal service contracts shall be based on an
evaluation of the services needed, the abilities of the contractors, the
uniqueness of the service and the general performance of the contractor. The
lowest quote need not necessarily be the successful contractor. Usually,
emphasis will be placed on quality, with cost being the deciding factor when
everything else is equal. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.070: PURCHASES NOT REQUIRING SEALED BIDS:
   A.   Purchases and expenditures of less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) shall not require bids or quotes of any type, but are otherwise
subject to the general policies of this chapter. These purchases and
expenditures are intended to include materials, supplies and services regularly
purchased and consumed by the City such as office supplies, janitorial
supplies, postage, food and beverages. Purchases shall not be artificially
divided so as to constitute a purchase or expenditure under this section.
   B.   All purchases and expenditures of more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) but less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall require two
(2) documented price quotes unless the purchase or expenditure is exempt from
the competitive bidding requirement of this chapter or requires a sealed bid.
   C.   All purchases and expenditures of more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) shall require a minimum of three (3) documented price quotes unless
the purchase or expenditure is exempt from the competitive bidding requirement
of this chapter or the purchase expenditure requires a sealed bid. The City
Manager may approve a purchase or expenditure without the required price quotes
if the City Manager determines that there are not two (2) additional vendors or
suppliers of such items.
   D.   Purchases made through the cooperative purchasing contracts
administered by the State Division of Purchasing shall not require bids or
quotes of any type. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.080: PURCHASES REQUIRING SEALED BIDS:
   A.   Invitations For Bids And Requests For Proposals: Unless specifically
exempt from the competitive bidding requirements of this chapter, whenever the
total price of a contract for services, supplies or building improvements is
estimated to be forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) or more, or the total price
of a contract for a public works project or public utilities equipment and
supplies is estimated to be one hundred twenty five thousand dollars
($125,000.00) or more, an invitation for bids or a request for proposals shall
be issued prior to acquisition.
   B.   Bid Specifications: Specifications for public contracts shall not
expressly or implicitly require any product by any brand name or make, nor the
product of any particular manufacturer or seller, unless the product is exempt
by these regulations or by the directive of City Council.
   C.   Advertising Requirements: An advertisement for bids is to be published
at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, and in as
many additional issues and publications as the City Manager may determine, at
least five (5) days prior to the opening of bids.
   D.   Advertisement Requirements: All advertisements for bids shall state:
      1.   The date and time after which bids will not be accepted;
      2.   The date that prequalification applications must be filed, and the
class or classes of work for which bidders must be prequalified if
prequalification is a requirement;
      3.   The character of the work to be done or the materials or things to
be purchased;
      4.   The office where the specifications for the work, material or things
may be seen;
      5.   The name and title of the person designated for receipt of bids;
      6.   The type and amount of bid security if required;
      7.   The date, time and place that the bids will be publicly opened.
(Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.090: REQUIREMENTS FOR BIDS:
All bids made to the City shall be:
   A.   In writing;
   B.   Filed with the City Recorder, unless specifically stated in the bid
requests;
   C.   Opened publicly by the City Manager, department head or other
designated person at the time designated in the advertisement and filed for
public inspection;
   D.   Have the appropriate bid security attached, if required by the
specifications for the project. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.100: AWARD OF CONTRACT:
After bids are opened, and a determination made that a contract be awarded, the
award shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder. "Lowest responsible
bidder" shall mean the lowest bidder who has substantially complied with all
prescribed requirements, has submitted the bid in good faith, has a history of
fully performing work at the bid price, and who has not been disqualified as
set forth herein.
The successful bidder shall promptly execute a formal contract and, if
required, deliver a performance and payment bond to the City in a sum equal to
the contract price, together with proof of appropriate insurance. Upon
execution of the contract, bond, and insurance, bid security shall be returned.
Failure to execute the contract, bond, or insurance shall be cause to forfeit
the bid security. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.110: REJECTION OF BIDS:
The City Manager or the City Council may reject any bid not in compliance with
all prescribed requirements, and reject all bids if rejection of all bids is
determined to be in the best interest of the City. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.120: DISQUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS:
The City Manager, upon investigation, may disqualify a bidder if:
   A.   The bidder does not have sufficient financial ability to perform the
contract;
   B.   The bidder does not have equipment available to perform the contract;
   C.   The bidder does not have key personnel available, of sufficient
experience, to perform the contract;
   D.   The person has previously breached contractual obligations with public
or private agencies; or
   E.   The bidder fails to comply with the requests of an investigation by the
City Manager. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.130: PREQUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS:
The City may require prequalification of bidders.
   A.   Upon establishment of the applicant's qualifications, the City Manager
or department head shall issue a qualification statement. The statement shall
inform the applicant of the project for which the qualification is valid, as
well as any other conditions which may be imposed on the qualification. It
shall advise the applicant to notify the City Manager or department head
promptly if there has been any substantial change of conditions or
circumstances which would make any statement contained in the prequalification
application no longer applicable or untrue.
   B.   If the City Manager or department head does not qualify an applicant,
written notice to the applicant is required stating the reasons the
prequalification was denied and informing the applicant of the right to appeal
the decision within five (5) business days after receipt of the notice. Appeals
shall be made to the City Council. The City Manager or department head may,
upon discovering that a prequalified party is no longer qualified, revoke
prequalification by sending notification of the revocation to the party subject
to the revocation. The notice shall state the reason(s) for revocation, and
that the revocation will be effective immediately. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.140: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Any supplier, vendor, or contractor subject to an adverse procurement decision
by the City, in violation of this chapter, may appeal that decision to the City
Council.
   A.   The complainant shall promptly file a written appeal letter, with the
City Recorder, within five (5) working days from the time the alleged incident
occurred. The letter of appeal shall state all relevant facts of the matter and
the remedy sought.
   B.   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the City Recorder shall forward
to the City Council the appeal notice, investigation of the matter and any
other relevant information.
   C.   The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the matter and provide the
complainant an opportunity to be heard. A written decision shall be sent to the
complainant. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.150: ACCOUNTS PAYABLE:
The City's Finance Director will be responsible for establishing a system and
process for the accurate and timely processing of all disbursements of City
funds with emphasis on taking advantage of discounts when available and
avoidance of late charges. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.160: CANCELLATION AND REJECTION OF BIDS:
   A.   An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation
may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected, in whole or
in part, as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is in the best
interest of the City; the reasons for cancellation or rejection shall be made
part of the contract file.
   B.   Bids, proposals, and contracts which create a conflict of interest
under the Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act shall be rejected
unless a legally required conflict disclosure has been made by the official or
employee subject to the conflict. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.170: COST-PLUS-A-PERCENTAGE-OF-COST PROFITS CONTRACTS:
Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract which will
promote the best interests of the City may be used; provided, that the use of a
cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost profit contract is prohibited unless
specifically approved by the City Council under special circumstances which
clearly justify the use of such contracts because the scope of work or the
nature of the work is to be closely supervised by the City and the City Council
so finds in writing. A cost-reimbursement contract may be used only when a
determination is made in writing that such contract is likely to be less costly
to the City than any other type or that it is impracticable to obtain the
supplies, services, or construction required except under such a contract.
(Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.180: REQUIRED CONTRACT CLAUSES:
All contracts for work entered into by the City shall, whenever practicable,
contain clauses permitting or requiring the following:
   A.   The unilateral right of the City to order, in writing, changes in the
work within the scope of the contract and changes in the time of performance of
the contract that do not alter the scope of the contract work.
   B.   Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in a contract
and actual quantities.
   C.   Suspension of work ordered by the City.
   D.   Requirements for performance bonds and labor and material payment bonds
as required by law for construction projects.
   E.   Other provisions required for compliance with Federal or State law.
All contract specifications shall seek to promote overall economy and best use
for the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the needs of
the City and shall not be unduly restrictive. Where practical and reasonable,
and within the scope of this chapter, Utah products shall be given preference
as required by Utah law. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.190: FINAL ACTION ON APPEALS:
The decision of the City Council with respect to any appeal shall be the final
action of the City with respect to that appeal. (Ord. 2018-10)
3.20.200: CONFLICTS PROHIBITED:
No person involved in making procurement decisions may have personal
investments or derive any income from any business entity which may create a
conflict between their private interests and their public duties. In the event
of a conflict, the conflicted person shall recuse themselves from the
particular procurement decision or decisions creating the conflict by notifying
the City Manager (or, in the event the City Manager is the conflicted party, by
notifying the Mayor) of the conflict, and shall not participate in that
particular decision or decisions. (Ord. 2018-10)
CHAPTER 3.24
WATER SYSTEM IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
3.24.010: Definitions
3.24.020: Adoption
3.24.030: Impact Fee Calculations
3.24.040: Impact Fee Imposed
3.24.050: Fee Exceptions And Adjustments
3.24.060: Appeal Procedures
3.24.010: DEFINITIONS:
Except as provided below, words and phrases that are defined in the Impact Fee
Act shall have the same meaning in this chapter.
   PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS: Does not mean system improvement and includes, but is
not limited to, a minimum eight inch (8") culinary water line.
   SERVICE AREA: Shall mean all of the incorporated area of the City of Santa
Clara, Utah.
   SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT: Shall mean those improvements outlined in the capital
facilities plan, and shall except any portion that serves only the project to
which the impact fee applies or are otherwise "project improvements".
   UTAH STATE IMPACT FEE ACT: Shall mean title 11, chapter 36a, Utah Code
Annotated or its successor State Statute if that title and chapter is
renumbered, recodified, or amended. (Ord. 2018-13)
3.24.020: ADOPTION:
The City Council hereby approves and adopts the Impact Fee Analysis on file
with the City and the analysis reflected therein. The Water Impact Fee
Facilities Plan, Impact Fee Analysis, dated June 2018, are incorporated herein
by reference as though fully set forth herein. Based on the City Council's
approval and adoption of the Water Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee
Analysis, the City Council imposes a requirement that developers install
project improvements as a condition to connection to the City of Santa Clara's
current or future water system and delivery of water services from the City of
Santa Clara. Based on its approval and adoption of the Water Impact Fee
Facilities Plan, Impact Fee Analysis, the City Council hereby imposes the
impact fees specified herein and enacts this chapter to require payment of the
impact fees specified herein as a condition to connection to the City of Santa
Clara's current or future water system and delivery of water service from the
City of Santa Clara. (Ord. 2018-13)
3.24.030: IMPACT FEE CALCULATIONS:
   A.   Impact Fees: The impact fees imposed by this chapter are facilities
impact fees (generally consisting of storage, distribution and treatment),
payable in cash, to fund future facilities and improvements. The impact fees
shall be calculated as set forth below.
   B.   Developer Credits/Developer Reimbursements: A developer, including a
school district or charter school, may be allowed a credit against or
proportionate reimbursement of impact fees if the developer dedicates land for
a system improvement, builds and dedicates some or all of a system improvement,
or dedicates a public facility that the City of Santa Clara and the developer
agree will reduce the need for a system improvement. A credit against impact
fees shall be granted for any dedication of land for, improvement to, or new
construction of, any system improvements provided by the developer if the
facilities are system improvements, or are dedicated to the public and offset
the need for an identified system improvement.
   C.   Impact Fees Accounting: The City of Santa Clara shall establish a
separate interest-bearing ledger account for the cash impact fees collected
pursuant to this chapter. Interest earned on such account shall be allocated to
that account. Impact fees collected prior to the effective date of this chapter
need not meet the requirements of this section.
      1.   Reporting: At the end of each fiscal year, the City of Santa Clara
shall prepare a report on such account generally showing the source and amount
of all monies collected, earned and received by the fund or account and each
expenditure from the fund or account. The report shall also identify impact fee
funds by the year in which they were received, the project from which the funds
were collected, the capital projects for which the funds were budgeted and the
projected schedule for expenditure and be provided in a format approved by the
State auditor and certified by the City of Santa Clara City Manager.
      2.   Impact Fee Expenditures: The City of Santa Clara may expend cash
impact fees covered by this chapter only for systems improvement that are: a)
public facilities identified in the Capital Facilities Plan; and b) of the
specific public facilities type for which the fee was collected.
      3.   Time Of Expenditure: Cash impact fees collected pursuant to this
chapter are to be expended, dedicated or encumbered for a permissible use
within six (6) years of receipt by the City of Santa Clara, unless the City
Council directs otherwise. For purposes of this calculation, the first funds
received shall be deemed to be the first funds expended.
      4.   Extension Of Time: The City of Santa Clara may hold previously
dedicated or unencumbered fees for longer than six (6) years if it identifies
in writing, before the expiration of the six (6) year period: a) an
extraordinary and compelling reason why the fees should be held longer than six
(6) years; and b) an absolute date by which the fees will be expended.
   D.   Refunds: The City of Santa Clara shall refund any impact fee paid by a
developer, plus interest actually earned when: 1) the developer does not
proceed with the building activity and files a written request for a refund; 2)
the fees have not been spent or encumbered; 3) the developer has contributed in
excess of its proportional costs; and 4) no impact has resulted.
   E.   Additional Fees And Costs: The impact fees authorized hereby are
separate from and in addition to user fees and other charges lawfully imposed
by the City of Santa Clara, such as engineering and inspection fees, building
permit fees, review fees and other fees and costs that may not be included as
itemized component parts of the impact fee.
   F.   Fees Effective At Time Of Payment: Unless the City of Santa Clara is
otherwise bound by a contractual requirement, the impact fee shall be
determined from the impact fee schedule in effect at the time of payment in
accordance with the provision of section
3.24.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-13)
3.24.040: IMPACT FEE IMPOSED:
Impact fees are hereby imposed as a condition of the issuance of a building/
development permit by the City of Santa Clara for any development activity
which creates additional demand and need for public facilities or makes demands
on the water supply in the City of Santa Clara's system. The fees imposed are
as follows:
   IMPACT FEE BY METER SIZE
Meter Size X-Sectional Area (Square Inches) Percent Area Increase Impact Fee
Meter Size X-Sectional Area (Square Inches) Percent Area Increase Impact Fee
   3/4" 0.44                             0                     $ 1,973.00
   1"   0.79                             80                    3,542.00
   11/2"1.77                             302                   7,937.00
   2"   3.14                             614                   14,080.00
   3"   7.07                             1,507                 31,703.00
   4"   12.57                            2,757                 56,365.00
   6"   28.27                            6,325                 126,765.00
 
(Ord. 2018-13)
3.24.050: FEE EXCEPTIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   Waiver For Public Purpose: The City Council may, on a project by
project basis, authorize exceptions or adjustments to the then impact fee rate
structure for those projects the City Council determines to be of such benefit
to the community as a whole to justify the exception or adjustment. Such
projects may include low income housing.
   B.   Adjustments: The City Council may adjust impact fees imposed pursuant
to this chapter as necessary in order to respond to unusual circumstances in
specific areas, ensure that impact fees are imposed fairly, permit the
adjustments of the amount of the impact fees based upon studies and data
submitted by an applicant in order to ensure that the impact fee represents the
proportionate share of the cost of providing such public facilities and water
which are reasonably related to and necessary in order to provide the services
in question to anticipate future growth and development activities. The City
Council may also adjust impact fees to respond to a request for a prompt and
individualized impact fee review for the development activity of an agency of
the State of Utah, a school district, or charter school. (Ord. 2018-13)
3.24.060: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: The appeal procedure applies both to challenges to the
legality of impact fees, to similar and related fees of the City of Santa Clara
and to the interpretation and/or application of those fees.
   B.   Request For Information Concerning The Fee: Any person or entity
required to pay an impact fee under this chapter may file a written request for
information concerning the fee with the City of Santa Clara. The City of Santa
Clara will provide the person or entity with the City of Santa Clara's written
impact fee analysis and other relevant information relating to the impact fee
within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the request for information.
   C.   Appeal To The City Of Santa Clara Before Payment Of The Impact Fee: Any
affected or potentially affected person or entity who wishes to challenge an
impact fee under this chapter prior to payment thereof may file a written
request for information concerning the impact fee and proceed under the City of
Santa Clara's appeal procedure.
   D.   Appeal To The City Of Santa Clara After Payment Of The Impact Fee;
Statute Of Limitations For Failure To File: Any person or entity that has paid
an impact fee under this chapter and wishes to challenge the fee shall file a
written request for information concerning the fee after having paid the fee
and proceed under the City of Santa Clara's appeal procedure. The deadlines for
filing an appeal shall be as follows:
      1.   Notice: Within thirty (30) days after the person making the appeal
pays the impact fee he or she may challenge whether the City of Santa Clara
complied with the notice requirements of the Utah State Impact Fee Act with
respect to the imposition of the impact fee; and
      2.   Procedure: Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the person
making the appeal pays the impact fee he or she may challenge whether the City
of Santa Clara complied with other procedural requirements of the Utah State
Impact Fee Act for imposing the impact fee; and
      3.   Impact Fee: Within one year after the person making the appeal pays
the impact fee he or she may challenge the impact fee.
   E.   Appeals To The City Of Santa Clara: Any developer, landowner or
affected party desiring to challenge the legality of any impact fee or related
fee or exaction under this chapter may appeal directly to the City Council of
the City of Santa Clara by filing a written challenge with the City of Santa
Clara before the deadlines provided in subsection D of this section.
      1.   Hearing: An informal hearing will be held not sooner than five (5)
days nor more than twenty five (25) days after the written appeal to the City
of Santa Clara is filed.
      2.   Decision: After the conclusion of the informal hearing, the City
Council shall affirm, reverse or take action with respect to the challenge or
appeal as the City Council deems appropriate. The decision of the City Council
will be issued within thirty (30) days after the date the written challenge was
filed. In light of the statutorily mandated time restriction, the City of Santa
Clara shall not be required to provide more than three (3) working days' prior
notice of the time, date and location of the informal hearing and the
inconvenience of the hearing to the challenging party shall not serve as a
basis of appeal of the City of Santa Clara's final determination.
   F.   Denial Due To Passage Of Time: Should the City of Santa Clara, for any
reason, fail to issue a final decision on a written challenge to an impact fee,
its calculation or application, within thirty (30) days after the filing of
that challenge with the City of Santa Clara, the challenge shall be deemed to
have been denied.
   G.   Judicial Review: Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to alter
the statutory deadlines before which an action to challenge an impact fee must
be initiated in the District Court. After having been served with a copy of the
pleadings initiating a court review, the City of Santa Clara shall submit to
the court the record of the proceedings before the City of Santa Clara,
including minutes, and if available, a true and correct transcript of any
proceedings. (Ord. 2018-13)
TITLE 4
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 4.01
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
4.01.010: Short Title
4.01.020: Declaration Of Purpose
4.01.030: Scope
4.01.040: Existing Law Continued
4.01.050: Criminal Prosecution Right
4.01.060: Effect Of Headings
4.01.070: Severability
4.01.080: No Mandatory Duty; Civil Liability
4.01.090: General Rule Of Interpretation Of Ordinance
4.01.100: Definitions Applicable To Title
4.01.110: Acts Include Causing, Aiding And Abetting
4.01.120: Service Of Process
4.01.130: Constructive Notice Of Recorded Documents
4.01.140: General Enforcement Authority
4.01.150: Adoption Of Policy And Procedures
4.01.160: Failure To Obey Subpoena
4.01.010: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM, the
ACE PROGRAM, or TITLE 4 OF THE SANTA CLARA CITY MUNICIPAL CODE. It may be cited
and pleaded under any such designation. (Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.020: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The city council finds that the enforcement of the city code and applicable
state codes throughout the city is an important public service. Code
enforcement is vital to the protection of the public health, safety, and
quality of life. The city council recognizes that enforcement starts with the
drafting of precise regulations that can be effectively applied in
administrative code enforcement hearings and judicial proceedings. The city
council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system that uses a
combination of judicial and administrative remedies is critical to gain
compliance with these regulations. Failure to comply with an administrative
code enforcement action may require the city attorney to file a judicial action
to gain compliance. (Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.030: SCOPE:
The provisions of this title may be applied to all violations of the city code
or applicable state codes which occur within the city. It has been designed as
an additional remedy for the city to use in achieving compliance with such
codes. (Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.040: EXISTING LAW CONTINUED:
The provisions of this title shall not invalidate any other title or ordinance
but shall be read in conjunction with those titles and ordinances as an
additional remedy available for enforcement of those ordinances. (Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.050: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION RIGHT:
The city has sole discretion in deciding whether to file a civil or criminal
case for the violation of any of its ordinances. The city may choose to file
both, or one or the other. The enactment of this administrative remedy shall in
no way interfere with the city's right to prosecute city ordinance violations
as criminal offenses. The city may use any of the remedies available under the
law in both civil and criminal prosecution. If the city chooses to file both
civil and criminal charges for the same day of violation, no civil penalties
may be assessed, but all other remedies are available. (Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.060: EFFECT OF HEADINGS:
Title, chapter, part, and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed
to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent
of the provisions of any title, chapter, part, or section hereof. (Ord. 2023-
01)
4.01.070: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision of
this title is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The city council hereby
declares that it would have adopted this title and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision thereof, irrespective of the
fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases,
portions, or provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section
shall apply to all amendments heretofore or hereafter made to this title. (Ord.
2023-01)
4.01.080: NO MANDATORY DUTY; CIVIL LIABILITY:
It is the intent of the city council that in establishing performance standards
or establishing an obligation to act by a city officer or employee, these
standards shall not be construed as creating a mandatory duty for purposes of
tort liability if the officer or employee fails to perform his or her directed
duty or duties. (Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.090: GENERAL RULE OF INTERPRETATION OF ORDINANCE:
   A.   For purposes of this title:
      1.   Any gender includes the other gender.
      2.   "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
      3.   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
      4.   Words used in the present tense include the past and future tense,
and vice versa.
      5.   Words and phrases used in this title and not specifically defined
shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language.
(Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.100: DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE TO TITLE:
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this title, shall be
constructed as defined in this section, unless a different meaning is
specifically stated to apply:
                                        Any action the city may take, or cause
                                        a responsible person to take, on public
                                        or private property as may be necessary
ABATEMENT:                              to remove or correct a violation,
                                        including, but not limited to,
                                        demolition, removal, repair, boarding
                                        and securing or replacement of
                                        property.
                                        Any person authorized by the city to
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING supervise, administer the
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR OR ACE            administrative code enforcement hearing
ADMINISTRATOR:                          program, and enforce violations of the
                                        city code or applicable state codes.
                                        An order issued by an administrative
                                        law judge. The order may include an
                                        order to abate the violation, pay civil
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:  penalties and administrative costs, or
                                        take any other action as authorized or
                                        required by this title and applicable
                                        state codes.
                                        The administrative law judge appointed
                                        by the mayor and city council to
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:               preside over the administrative code
                                        enforcement hearings established
                                        herein.
                                        Santa Clara City, a Utah municipal
                                        corporation, and the area within the
                                        territorial city limits of the city,
CITY:                                   and such territory outside of this city
                                        over which the city has jurisdiction or
                                        control by virtue of any constitutional
                                        or incorporation provisions or any law.
CITY CODE:                              The Santa Clara municipal code or other
                                        codes of Santa Clara City.
CITY COUNCIL:                           The city council of Santa Clara City.
                                        A bond posted by a responsible person
                                        to ensure compliance with city code,
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERFORMANCE BOND:      applicable state codes, a judicial
                                        action, or an administrative code
                                        enforcement order.
                                        A lien recorded to collect outstanding
CODE ENFORCEMENT TAX LIEN:              civil penalties, administrative fees,
                                        and abatement costs.
                                        The fee schedule adopted by the city
                                        council that sets forth civil penalties
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE:              and costs applicable to enforcement of
                                        this title. The consolidated fee
                                        schedule is on file in the office of
                                        the city recorder.
                                        Any person authorized to enforce
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:                   violations of the city code or
                                        applicable state codes.
                                        Any person that holds a recorded
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION:                  mortgage or deed of trust on a
                                        property.
                                        Incapacitating illness; death; lack of
                                        proper notice; unavailability due to
                                        unavoidable, unpreventable, or
GOOD CAUSE:                             extenuating emergency or circumstance;
                                        if a required act causes an imminent
                                        and irreparable injury; and acts of
                                        nature adverse to performing required
                                        acts.
                                        Any condition that creates a present,
IMMINENT LIFE SAFETY HAZARD:            extreme, and immediate danger to life,
                                        property, health, or public safety.
                                        Any interest that is represented by a
                                        document, such as a deed of trust,
                                        quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment
LEGAL INTEREST:                         lien, tax or assessment lien,
                                        mechanic's lien, or other similar
                                        instrument that is recorded with the
                                        Washington County recorder's office.
                                        A document issued by the city,
NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE:                   representing that a property complies
                                        with the requirements outlined in the
                                        notice of violation.
                                        A document or form approved by the
                                        administrative law judge or his or her
                                        designee, which indicates that all
                                        outstanding civil penalties and costs
                                        have been either paid in full, or that
                                        the city has negotiated an agreed
NOTICE OF SATISFACTION:                 amount, or that a subsequent
                                        administrative or judicial decision has
                                        resolved the outstanding debt. In
                                        addition to the satisfaction of the
                                        financial debt, the property must also
                                        be in compliance with the requirements
                                        outlined in the notice of violation.
                                        A written notice prepared by an
                                        enforcement official that informs a
NOTICE OF VIOLATION:                    responsible person of code violations
                                        and orders the responsible person to
                                        take certain steps to correct the
                                        violations.
OATH:                                   Includes affirmations and oaths.
                                        Any natural person, firm, joint
                                        venture, joint stock company,
                                        partnership, association, club,
                                        company, corporation, business trust,
PERSON:                                 organization, or the manager, lessee,
                                        agent, sergeant, officer, or employee
                                        of any of them, or any other entity
                                        that is recognized by law as the
                                        subject of rights or duties.
PROPERTY OWNER:                         The record owner of real property based
                                        on the county assessor's records.
                                        Any condition caused, maintained, or
                                        permitted to exist that constitutes a
                                        threat to the public health, safety,
                                        and welfare, or that significantly
                                        obstructs, injures, or interferes with
PUBLIC NUISANCE:                        the reasonable or free use of property
                                        in a neighborhood or community or by
                                        any considerable number of persons. A
                                        "public nuisance" also has the same
                                        meaning as set forth in Utah Code
                                        Annotated and this code.
                                        A person who is responsible for causing
                                        or maintaining a violation of the city
                                        code or applicable state codes. The
                                        property owner, tenant, person with a
RESPONSIBLE PERSON:                     legal interest in the real property, or
                                        person in possession of the real
                                        property shall be liable for any
                                        violation maintained on the property.
                                        In all cases, the property owner shall
                                        be considered a "responsible person".
                                        Includes handwritten, typewritten,
WRITTEN:                                photocopied, computer printed or
                                        facsimile. (Ord. 2023-01)
 
4.01.110: ACTS INCLUDE CAUSING, AIDING AND ABETTING:
Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful in this title, it shall include
causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting such act or omission. (Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.120: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
   A.   Whenever service is required to be given under this title for
enforcement purposes, the document shall be served by any of the following
methods, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically stated to
apply:
      1.   Personal service.
      2.   Regular mail, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the
owner or other responsible person.
      3.   Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the property. If
not inhabited, the notice must also be mailed as in subsection A2 of this
section. The form of the posted notice shall be approved by the ACE
administrator or his or her designee; or
      4.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation where the identity
or whereabouts of the person to be served are unknown and cannot be ascertained
through reasonable diligence, where service is impracticable under the
circumstances, or where there exists good cause to believe that the person to
be served is avoiding service of process.
   B.   Service by regular mail in the manner described above shall be deemed
served on the fifth day after the date of mailing.
   C.   If service complies with the requirements of this section, it shall be
deemed a valid service even if a party claims not to have received the service
and it shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this title.
   D.   The failure to serve all responsible persons shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings. (Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.130: CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE OF RECORDED DOCUMENTS:
Whenever a document is recorded with the Washington County recorder as
authorized or required by this title or applicable state codes, recordation
shall provide constructive notice of the information contained in the recorded
documents. (Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.140: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
Whenever the ACE administrator or any enforcement official finds that a
violation of the city code or applicable state codes has occurred or continues
to exist, the appropriate administrative enforcement procedure may be used as
outlined in this title. The ACE administrator or enforcement official has the
authority and power necessary to gain compliance with the provisions of the
city code and applicable state codes. These powers include the power to issue
notices of violation and administrative citations, inspect public and private
property, abate public and private property, and use whatever judicial and
administrative remedies are available under the city code or applicable state
codes. (Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.150: ADOPTION OF POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
The administrative law judge is authorized to develop policies and procedures
relating to the hearing procedures, scope of hearings, subpoena powers, and
other matters relating to the administrative code enforcement hearings program.
(Ord. 2023-01)
4.01.160: FAILURE TO OBEY SUBPOENA:
It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to obey a subpoena issued for
an administrative code enforcement hearing. Failure to obey a subpoena
constitutes contempt and may be prosecuted as a class B misdemeanor. (Ord.
2023-01)
TITLE 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 5.04
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5.04.010: Definitions
5.04.020: Business License Required
5.04.030: License Assessor And Collector
5.04.040: Payment Dates
5.04.050: Penalty For Late Payment
5.04.060: Applications For License
5.04.070: Certificate
5.04.080: Display
5.04.090: Transfer Of License Prohibited
5.04.100: Revocation Or Denial Of Business License
5.04.110: Branch Establishments
5.04.120: Joint License
5.04.130: Reciprocal Recognition Of Licenses
5.04.140: Exemptions To License
5.04.150: Fee Not To Constitute Undue Burden On Interstate Commerce
5.04.160: Categories And Fee Schedule
5.04.170: Business Licenses And Regulations
5.04.180: Residential Rental Properties
5.04.190: Commercial Businesses
5.04.200: Food Trucks/Trailers
5.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title:
   BUSINESS: Means and includes all kinds of vocations, occupations,
professions, enterprises, establishments and all other kinds of activities and
matters, whether full time or part time, together with all devices, machines,
vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private
profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises within this
city or anywhere within its jurisdiction.
   EACH SEPARATE PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate establishment or place of
operation, whether or not operating under the same name, within the city,
including a home or other place of lodging if the same is held out by
advertisements, listings or otherwise as the establishment or place of
operation of a person engaging in the business of selling tangible, personal
property at either retail or wholesale, or both, in the city.
   EMPLOYEE: The operator, owner or manager of a place of business and any
persons employed by such person in the operation of said place of business in
any capacity and also any salesman, agent or independent contractor engaged in
the operation of the place of business in any capacity.
   ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Means and includes, but is not limited to, the sale of
tangible personal property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods
or property and the rendering of personal services for others for a
consideration by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business,
occupation or other calling, except the rendering of personal services by an
employee to his or her employer under any contract of personal employment.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate location maintained or operated by the
licensee within this city from which business activity is conducted or
transacted.
   WHOLESALE: A sale of tangible personal property by wholesalers to retail
merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for resale, and does not
include a sale by wholesalers or retailers to users or consumers not for
resale, except as otherwise specified.
   WHOLESALER: A person doing a regularly organized wholesale jobbing business
and selling to retail merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers, for the
purpose of resale. (Ord. 99-25 § 1: prior code § 9-111)
5.04.020: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be a class B misdemeanor for any person to transact, engage in or
carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or to operate a vending,
pinball or coin operated machine without first receiving the class or type of
license required by the city. (Prior code § 9-112)
5.04.030: LICENSE ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR:
The recorder is designated and appointed as ex officio assessor of license fees
for this city. On receipt of any application of a license, the recorder shall
assess the amount due thereon and shall collect all license fees based upon the
rate established by ordinance. He or she shall enforce all provisions of this
title, and shall cause to be filed complaints against all persons violating any
of the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 9-113)
5.04.040: PAYMENT DATES:
All license fees shall be due and payable as follows, except as may be
otherwise provided in the applicable ordinance:
   A.   Annual fees shall be payable before each calendar year in advance. The
annual license shall date from January 1 of each year and shall expire on
December 31 of each year.
   B.   Annual fees shall be due on the first day of each calendar year and
shall become delinquent if not paid by February 1 each year.
   C.   One-half (1/2) of annual fee shall be payable for all licenses issued
by the city pursuant to applications made after July 1 of each year and
licenses issued after July 1 shall expire on the following January 1. Payment
shall be due upon the date of application approval. (Prior code § 9-114)
5.04.050: PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT:
If any license fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of the due date, a
penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the amount of such license fee shall be added
to the original amount thereof. No license shall be issued until all penalties
legally assessed have been paid in full. (Ord. 2005-02 § 2: prior code § 9-115)
5.04.060: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
   A.   All applications for license shall include:
      1.   The name of the person desiring a license;
      2.   The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade or
profession to be performed, practiced or carried on;
      3.   The class of license desired, if such licenses are divided into
classes;
      4.   The place where such business, calling, trade or profession is to be
carried on, giving the street number if the business calling, trade or
profession is to be carried on in any building or enclosure having such number;
      5.   The period of time for which such license is desired to be issued.
   B.   In the event that the license application relates to a coin operated
machine or device, the application shall identify the machine or device to
which it applies and the location thereof. (Prior code § 9-116)
5.04.070: CERTIFICATE:
All certificates of license shall be signed by the mayor, attested by the
recorder, and shall contain the following information:
   A.   The name of the person to whom such certificate has been issued;
   B.   The amount paid;
   C.   The type of license and the class of such license if licenses are
divided into classes;
   D.   The term of the license with the commencing date and the date of its
expiration;
   E.   The place where such business, calling, trade or profession is to be
conducted. (Prior code § 9-117)
5.04.080: DISPLAY:
   A.   Every certificate of license issued under this title shall be posted by
the licensee in a conspicuous place upon the wall of the building, room or
office of the place of business so that the same may be easily seen. When such
certificate of license has expired, it shall be removed by the licensee from
such place in which it has been posted, and no certificate of license which is
not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted upon the wall or
any part of any room within the place of business. If the licensee's business
is such that a license cannot be displayed due to the transient or mobile
nature of the business, then the licensee shall carry the license on his or her
person ready to be shown on request by an authorized officer during all such
time or times while the licensee is engaged in or pursuing the business for
which a license is granted.
   B.   In the event the license is for a coin operated machine or device, the
certificate shall be attached or displayed in the immediate vicinity of the
machine for which it has been issued. (Prior code § 9-118)
5.04.090: TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No license granted or issued under any ordinance of this city shall be assigned
or transferred to any other person. It shall not be deemed to authorize any
person other than therein named to do business or to authorize any other
business, calling, trade or profession than is herein named unless by
permission of the city council. (Prior code § 9-119)
5.04.100: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
   A.   Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this code or of any
ordinance of this city may be revoked and any application denied by the city
council because of:
      1.   The failure of the licensee or applicant to comply with conditions
and requirements of this code or any ordinance of the city;
      2.   Unlawful activities conducted or permitted on the premises where the
business is conducted.
   B.   Prior to the revocation of a license or denial of an application to
renew business license, the licensee or applicant shall be given a notice which
shall state in substance that the city council intends to revoke the business
license or deny the application to renew, together with the reason or reasons
therefor, at a regular or special meeting of the city council (which shall be
at least 10 days and not more than 30 days from the date notice is sent) and
that the licensee or applicant has a right to appear, to be represented by
counsel, to hear the evidence against him or her, to cross examine witnesses
and to present evidence as to why the license should not be revoked or the
application denied.
   C.   The preceding subsection shall not apply to applications for licenses
for businesses which have not previously been licensed by the city, and such
applicants need only be informed that their application has been denied. (Prior
code § 9-120)
5.04.110: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
A separate license must be obtained for each separate place of business in the
city and each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the
business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such
license, provided, that warehouses and distributing places used in connection
with or incident to a business licensed under this part shall not be deemed to
be separate places of business or branch establishments. (Prior code § 9-121)
5.04.120: JOINT LICENSE:
A person engaged in two (2) or more businesses at the same location may be
required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses,
except that in the discretion of the city when such businesses are
complementary a single license may be issued which shall specify on its face
all such businesses operated at that location. A fee for each separate business
activity specified on the face of such license shall be required. However, such
joint license shall not include licenses for beer, liquor setups, or amusement
devices. (Ord. 99-25 § 1: prior code § 9-122)
5.04.130: RECIPROCAL RECOGNITION OF LICENSES:
   A.   No license shall be required for operation of any vehicle or equipment
in this city when:
      1.   Such vehicle is merely passing through the city;
      2.   Such vehicle is used exclusively in intercity or interstate
commerce.
   B.   No license shall be required by this title of any person whose only
business activity in this city is the mere delivery in the city of property
sold by him or her at a regular place of business maintained by him or her
outside the city where:
      1.   Such person's business is at the time of such delivery licensed by
the Utah municipality or county in which such place of business is situated;
and
      2.   The authority licensing such business grants to licensees of this
city making deliveries within its jurisdiction the same privileges, upon
substantially the same terms, as are granted by this section; and
      3.   Neither the property delivered nor any of the facilities by which it
was manufactured, produced or processed are subject to inspection by authority
of this city for compliance with health or sanitary standards prescribed by
this city; and
      4.   The truck or other conveyance by which such delivery is made
prominently displays at all times a license plate or symbol used by the said
licensing authority to evidence such business license. Such plate or symbol
shall identify the licensing authority by which it is issued, shall indicate
that it evidences a license issued thereby, and shall specify the year or term
for which it is effective.
   C.   The recorder shall at the request of any person certify a copy of this
section to any municipality or county of the state of Utah to which a copy has
not previously been certified. (Prior code § 9-123)
5.04.140: EXEMPTIONS TO LICENSE:
   A.   No license fee shall be imposed under section
5.04.160 of this chapter on any person engaged in business for solely
religious, charitable, eleemosynary or any other types of strictly nonprofit
purpose which is tax exempt in such activities under the laws of the United
States and the state of Utah, nor shall any license fee be imposed on any
person engaged in a business specifically exempted from municipal taxation and
fees by the laws of the United States or the state of Utah; nor shall any
license fee be imposed upon any person not maintaining a place of business
within this city who has paid a like or similar license tax or fee to some
other taxing unit within the state of Utah and which taxing unity exempts from
its license tax or fee, by reciprocal agreement or otherwise, businesses
domiciled in this city and doing business in such taxing unit.
   B.   The license assessor and collector may, with approval of the city
council, enter into reciprocal agreements with the proper officials of other
taxing units, as may be deemed equitable and proper in effecting the exemption
provided for in subsection A of this section. (Prior code § 9-124)
5.04.150: FEE NOT TO CONSTITUTE UNDUE BURDEN ON INTERSTATE COMMERCE:
None of the license taxes provided for by section
5.04.160 of this chapter shall be applied as to occasion an undue burden on
interstate commerce. In any case, where a license tax is believed by a licensee
or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he or she
may apply to the license assessor and collector for an adjustment of the tax so
that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such
commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within six (6) months
after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by affidavit
and supporting testimony show his or her method of business and the gross
volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the
license assessor and collector may deem necessary in order to determine the
extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The license assessor and
collector shall then conduct an investigation, comparing applicant's business
with other businesses of like nature and shall make findings of facts from
which he or she shall determine whether the tax fixed by section
5.04.160 of this chapter is discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to
applicant's business and shall recommend to the city council a license tax for
the applicant in an amount that is nondiscriminatory, reasonable and fair, and
if the city council is satisfied that such license tax is the amount that the
applicant should pay, it shall fix the license tax in such amount. If the
regular license tax has already been paid, the city council shall order a
refund of the amount over and above the tax fixed by the city council. In
fixing the fee to be charged, the license assessor and collector shall have the
power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales, or employees, or may
use any other method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform
with that assessed on businesses of like nature. (Prior code § 9-125)
5.04.160: CATEGORIES AND FEE SCHEDULE:
   A.   1. Commercial (at an established commercial business location): fee as
established by council from time to time.
      2.   Home occupations (conducted entirely from residence): fee as
established by council from time to time.
   B.   Violation of the ordinance codified herein shall be a class B
misdemeanor, punishable as set forth in this code. (Ord. 2000-12 §§ 1, 3: Ord.
95-104 § 1: prior code § 9-211)
5.04.170: BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   License And Operational Requirements:
      1.   License Required: It is unlawful for any person to keep, conduct,
operate or maintain a "short term residential rental property" as defined in
section
17.20.260 of this code within the city without a business license for such
dwelling unit. A person who owns multiple short-term residential rental
properties is not required to obtain more than one business license for the
operation and maintenance of those short-term residential rental properties.
      2.   License Not Transferable: A short term residential rental property
business license is not transferable between persons or structures. Any person
holding such license shall give written notice within thirty (30) days to the
business license official after having transferred or otherwise disposed of
legal or equitable control of any rental dwelling unit licensed under this
section. Such notice of transferred interest shall be deemed a request to
cancel an existing business license for such rental dwelling unit and shall
include the name, address, and information regarding the person(s) succeeding
to the ownership or control thereof.
      3.   Transient Room Tax: All short-term residential rental properties
shall be subject to the collection of the municipality transient room tax as
allowed under Utah Code.
      4.   Garbage Removal: Garbage shall be removed from the property by the
owner or property manager and properly disposed of within twenty-four (24)
hours of tenants leaving the property.
      5.   Cleaning Service: Each property shall be cleaned at least weekly
while occupied and in between tenant occupancy. Each property shall also comply
with the sanitary facilities requirements outlined for motels in this code.
      6.   Local Property Manager Required: All short-term residential rental
properties shall designate a local property manager. The local property manager
shall be available twenty-four (24) hours per day to respond to tenant and
neighborhood questions or concerns. Each short-term residential rental property
shall have a clearly visible sign within the unit containing the following
information: the name and phone number of the local property manager, and the
maximum occupancy of the unit, and the day of garbage pick-up.
      7.   Owner And Property Manager Responsible: The owner and property
manager shall be jointly and severally liable for any violations of this
section. Any rental dwelling unit which is found in violation of this section,
or any other requirement of this code may be subject to revocation of the
short-term residential rental properties business license.
   B.   City Inspections: The city may require an inspection of the rental
dwelling unit as a condition of obtaining or renewing a business license if
determined necessary by city staff. (Ord. 2023-07)
5.04.180: RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTIES:
   A.   License Required:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to keep, conduct, operate or maintain
a rental dwelling unit within the city without a business license for such
dwelling. A person who owns multiple rental dwelling units or multiple
buildings containing rental dwelling units is not required to obtain more than
one business license for the operation and maintenance of those rental dwelling
units.
      2.   A rental dwelling unit business license is not transferable between
persons or structures. Any person holding such license shall give written
notice within thirty (30) days to the business license official after having
transferred or otherwise disposed of legal or equitable control of any rental
dwelling unit licensed under this chapter. Such notice of transferred interest
shall be deemed a request to cancel an existing business license for such
rental dwelling unit and shall include the name, address, and information
regarding the person(s) succeeding to the ownership or control thereof. The new
owner shall obtain a business license as required by this chapter.
      3.   A business license shall not be required for a dwelling unit which
is ordinarily owner occupied but is temporarily rented because:
         a.   The owner is placed in a hospital, nursing home, assisted living
facility or other similar facility; or
         b.   The owner has a bona fide, temporary absence of three (3) years
or less for activities such as temporary job assignments, sabbaticals, or
voluntary service. Indefinite periods of absence from the dwelling shall not
qualify for this exception; or
         c.   The owner is on extended military deployment.
   B.   City Inspections: The city may require an inspection of the rental
dwelling unit as a condition of obtaining or renewing a business license if
determined necessary by city staff. (Ord. 2023-07)
5.04.190: COMMERCIAL BUSINESSES:
   A.   Any commercial business within one hundred feet (100') of residential
property is required to meet the following:
      1.   The business may be open no earlier than 5:30 A.M. and no later than
12:00 A.M. (midnight) Sunday through Thursday.
      2.   The business may be open no earlier than 5:30 A.M. and no later than
1:00 A.M. on Friday and Saturday.
      3.   The use of a drive-up or drive-thru pickup window service must meet
the requirements of Chapter
9.12.021, Excessive Noise Prohibited, of city code. (Ord. 2024-05)
5.04.200: FOOD TRUCKS/TRAILERS:
   A.   Any food truck/trailer is required to meet the following:
      1.   A food truck/trailer is required to get a business license as well
as an annual health department inspection. Verification of a business license
and annual health department inspection from other Utah jurisdictions is
required during the business license process. A food truck/trailer must meet
the requirements of Chapter
9.12.021, Excessive Noise Prohibited, of city code. (Ord. 2024-05)
CHAPTER 5.05
TRANSIENT AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
SECTION:
5.05.010: Definitions
5.05.020: Permit Required
5.05.030: Application For Permit; Fee; Filing Date
5.05.040: Permit Fee
5.05.050: Investigation And Issuance Of Permit
5.05.060: Permit, Badges; Expiration
5.05.070: Revocation Of Permit
5.05.080: Temporary Use Permit Restrictions
5.05.090: Temporary Sign Permit
5.05.100: Appeal
5.05.110: Additional Requirements
5.05.120: Exception
5.05.130: Penalty
5.05.010: DEFINITIONS:
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: A. Any person, joint venture, partnership, limited
liability company, corporation, association, group, or other entity that is or
holds itself out to be:
      1.   A benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane,
patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public
health, environmental or conservation, or civic organization;
      2.   For the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter
fraternal association; or
      3.   Established for any charitable purpose; and
   B.   Who solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public for a
charitable purpose; or in any manner employs a charitable appeal as the basis
of any solicitation or employs an appeal that reasonably suggests or implies
that there is a charitable purpose to any solicitation.
   C.   Charitable organization includes a "chapter", "branch", "area",
"office", or similar "affiliate" or any person soliciting contributions within
the state for a charitable organization that has its principal place of
business outside the state 1 .
   TEMPORARY USE PERMIT: A temporary use permit issued to any transient
merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor for no more than thirty (30)
days.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT OR ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person, firm
or corporation, whether as owner, agent, cosignee or employee, whether or not a
resident of the municipality, who engages in a temporary business of selling
and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the municipality, and who,
in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
structure, motor vehicle, tent, semitrailer, public room in any hotel, motel,
lodging house, apartment, shop or any street, alley or other place within the
municipality, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise,
either privately or at public auction. The person, firm or corporation so
engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this
chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer,
trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in
connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer. (Ord. 2008-22)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 13-22-2.
5.05.020: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant
vendor to engage in such business without first obtaining a temporary use
permit therefor, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-
22)
5.05.030: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE; FILING DATE:
   A.   Contents: Applicants for the temporary use permit under this chapter
shall file a sworn application in writing signed by the applicant if an
individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a
corporation, or by an agent, including a state or regional agent, with the city
recorder, which shall give the following information:
      1.   The name of the applicant, and if the applicant is an employee or
agent of a corporation, the name of the corporation.
      2.   The address of the applicant, and if the applicant is an agent or
employee of a corporation, the address of the corporation.
      3.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold and from whom or where the applicant obtains the goods to be sold.
      4.   If the applicant is employed by, or an agent of, another person, the
name and permanent address of such other person(s).
      5.   The length of time for which the applicant desires to engage in
business within the city.
      6.   The places within the city where the applicant proposes to carry on
his or her business.
      7.   A list of the other municipalities in which the applicant has
engaged in business within the six (6) month period preceding the date of the
application.
      8.   A photograph of the applicant, taken within six (6) months
immediately prior to the date of filing the application, which photograph shall
be two inches by two inches (2" x 2"), showing the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
      9.   A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any of his
employers, have been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any
municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefor.
      10.   A letter of consent from the property owner where applicant intends
to do business.
      11.   If the applicant desires to sell fresh vegetables, fruits, meats or
other foodstuffs, documents showing proof of registration with the Utah
department of food and agriculture, and a food handler permit where applicable.
      12.   If the applicant is employed by another person, documents showing
that the person for which the applicant proposes to do business is authorized
to do business within the state.
   B.   Fee: At the time of filing the application, a fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00), which shall be deposited with the city recorder, is required.
The application fee is nonrefundable. The application fee reflects the cost of
investigation and issuance of the permit.
   C.   Filing Deadline: The date of application must be at least fourteen (14)
calendar days prior to the first day of use of the temporary use permit. (Ord.
2008-22)
5.05.040: PERMIT FEE:
   A.   Established: Any person or entity who receives a permit as a transient
merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor shall be required to pay
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a permit valid for thirty (30) consecutive
days. This amount reflects the cost of regulation and control of business
activity.
   B.   Interstate Commerce: None of the permit fee provided for by this
section shall be applied as to occasion an undue burden on interstate commerce.
In any case, where a permit fee is believed by a permittee or applicant for
permit to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he or she may apply to the
permit assessor and collector for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not
be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. Such application
may be made before, at or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed
permit fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony show his
or her method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of
business and such other information as the permit assessor and collector may
deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden
on such commerce. The permit assessor and collector shall then conduct an
investigation, comparing applicant's business with other businesses of like
nature and shall make findings of facts from which he or she shall determine
whether the fee fixed by this section is discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair
as to applicant's business and shall recommend to the city council a permit fee
for the applicant in an amount that is nondiscriminatory, reasonable and fair,
and if the city council is satisfied that such permit fee is the amount that
the applicant should pay, it shall fix the permit fee in such amount. If the
regular permit fee has already been paid, the city council shall order a refund
of the amount over and above the fee fixed by the city council. In fixing the
fee to be charged, the permit assessor and collector shall have the power to
base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales, or employees, or may use any
other method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that
assessed on businesses of like nature. (Ord. 2008-22)
5.05.050: INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   Investigation: On receiving the application, the city recorder shall
refer it to the director of public safety who shall cause such investigation of
the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems reasonable
and necessary for the protection of the public good.
   B.   Unsatisfactory Result: If, as a result of the investigation, the
applicant's character and prior business history, if any, is found to be
unsatisfactory, the director of public safety shall endorse such upon the
application, together with a statement of his reasons therefor, and return the
application to the city recorder who shall notify the applicant that his
application has been disapproved and that no permit will be issued.
   C.   Satisfactory Result; Issuance: If, as a result of such investigation,
the character and prior business history, if any, of the applicant is found to
be satisfactory, the director of public safety shall endorse such upon the
application and return it to the city recorder who shall, upon payment of the
prescribed permit fee, deliver to and issue the applicant his permit. The
permit shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the
name, address and photograph of the permittee and the kind of goods to be sold
pursuant to the application, together with an expiration date. (Ord. 2008-22)
5.05.060: PERMIT, BADGES; EXPIRATION:
   A.   Badge: The city recorder shall issue to each permittee at the time of
delivery of his permit a badge which shall contain the words "licensed
transient merchant", "licensed itinerant merchant", or "licensed itinerant
vendor", as the case may be, for which the application was made and the permit
issued, and the number of the permit, in letters and figures easily discernible
from a distance of five feet (5'). Such badge shall, during the time transient
merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor are engaged in the business
for which they are permitted, be worn constantly by them on the front of their
outer garment in such a way as to be conspicuous. Badges shall be issued to
that individual whose name appears on the temporary use permit, and shall
include expiration date, name of company, and wearer's name.
   B.   Exhibit Permit Upon Request: Any person holding a permit pursuant to
this chapter shall exhibit their permit at the request of any citizen of the
municipality.
   C.   Duty To Enforce: It shall be the duty of any public safety officer of
this municipality to require any person seen engaging in business as a
transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor, and who is not
known by such officer to be duly permitted, to produce his or her permit and to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   D.   Expiration: All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on
the date specified on the permit. (Ord. 2008-22)
5.05.070: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Causes: Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the director of public safety, city recorder or the city manager,
after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
      1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained in the
application for the permit.
      2.   Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant
vendor.
      3.   Any violation of this chapter or applicable state law.
      4.   Conviction of any infraction, misdemeanor or felony involving moral
turpitude.
      5.   Conducting the business of merchant in such a manner so as to
constitute an immediate and present danger to the public health, safety or
general welfare. (Ord. 2008-22)
5.05.080: TEMPORARY USE PERMIT RESTRICTIONS:
A permit holder shall not connect to utilities nor camp, sleep, or in any way
reside on the property subject to the temporary use permit. (Ord. 2008-22)
5.05.090: TEMPORARY SIGN PERMIT:
Contemporaneously with the temporary use permit, the city recorder may issue a
temporary sign permit so long as the sign complies with the following:
   A.   The sign dimensions shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area on the
exposed sign face.
   B.   The sign location shall be located at least four feet (4') behind the
property line.
   C.   The sign height shall not be more than six feet (6') above the existing
ground level at the location of the sign.
   D.   There shall be only one sign at the business location. A menu or
product pricing list is permitted to be on the table or counter from which
goods are being sold. (Ord. 2008-22)
5.05.100: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the director of public safety, the city
recorder or the city manager in the denial of a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter, or by the action of the city council of the municipality, shall have
the right to appeal the action. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
council within fourteen (14) days after action by the city official a written
statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set
a time and place for the hearing on such appeal and written notice of such
hearing shall be given to the applicant. (Ord. 2008-22)
5.05.110: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
This chapter shall not be construed so as to waive the provisions and
requirements of any other ordinance of the city of Santa Clara, and the
requirements and fees required herein shall be in addition to any other
requirements and fees of any other ordinance of the city of Santa Clara. (Ord.
2008-22)
5.05.120: EXCEPTION:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any individual who is, at the
time he is engaged in any activity which would otherwise require licensing by
this chapter, engaged in an activity which is authorized by any charitable
organization. (Ord. 2008-22)
5.05.130: PENALTY:
A person found violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a penalty
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 2008-22)
CHAPTER 5.06
RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
SECTION:
5.06.010: Purpose
5.06.020: No Other City License Or Approval Required
5.06.030: Definitions
5.06.040: Exemptions
5.06.050: Solicitation Prohibited
5.06.060: Registration Of Solicitors
5.06.070: Application Form
5.06.080: Written Disclosures
5.06.090: When Registration Begins
5.06.100: Issuance Of Certificates
5.06.110: Form Of Certificate And Identification Badge
5.06.120: Maintenance Of Registry
5.06.130: Nontransferability Of Certificates
5.06.140: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of A Certificate Of Registration
5.06.150: Appeal
5.06.160: Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
5.06.170: "No Solicitation" Notice
5.06.180: Duties Of Solicitors
5.06.190: Time Of Day Restrictions
5.06.200: Buyer's Right To Cancel
5.06.210: Penalties
5.06.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   Residents of the city have an inalienable interest in their personal
safety, well being, and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability
to provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief,
political or charitable activities, and goods and services lawfully in
commerce. The city has a substantial interest in protecting the well being,
tranquility, personal safety, and privacy of its citizens, which includes the
ability to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property.
The city also has a substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or
otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as criminal activity.
   B.   There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the city
and its citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this chapter on the
rights of those who are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of city
officials derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and
property from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens
regarding door to door solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement
officers and those affected by door to door canvassing and solicitation, as
well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional
protections afforded and denied persons seeking to engage in door to door
solicitation, the city adopts this chapter to promote the city's substantial
interests in:
      1.   Respecting citizens' decisions regarding privacy in their
residences;
      2.   Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
      3.   Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious
belief, political position, or charitable activities; and
      4.   Permitting truthful and nonmisleading door to door solicitation
regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
   C.   The city finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in
this chapter are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the city interests
referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights of those
regulated. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
5.06.020: NO OTHER CITY LICENSE OR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Registered solicitors and persons exempt from registration need not
apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the city
to engage in door to door solicitation.
   B.   Any business licensed by the city under another city ordinance that
uses employees, independent contractors, or agents for door to door
solicitation in an effort to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to the
business, shall be required to have such solicitors obtain a certificate,
unless otherwise exempt from registration.
   C.   Those responsible persons or entities associated with registered
solicitors need not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or
registration from the city, provided they do not establish a temporary or fixed
place of business in the city.
   D.   Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other
requirement of federal, state, or other local government law regarding any
license, permit, or certificate that a registered solicitor is otherwise
required to have or maintain. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
5.06.030: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ADVOCATING: Speech or conduct intended to inform, promote, or support
religious belief, political position, or charitable activities.
   APPEALS OFFICER: The city council or designee of the city responsible for
receiving the information from the city and appellant regarding the denial or
suspension of a certificate and issuing a decision as required by this chapter.
   APPELLANT: The person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a
certificate, either personally as an applicant or registered solicitor, or on
behalf of the applicant or registered solicitor.
   APPLICANT: An individual who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and not a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity who
applies for a certificate permitting door to door solicitation.
   APPLICATION FORM: A standardized form provided by the city to an applicant
to be completed and submitted as part of registration.
   BCI: An original or copy, dated no older than one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to the date of the application, of either: a) a Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification verified criminal history report
personal to the applicant; or b) verification by the Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification that no criminal history rising to the
level of a disqualifying status exists for the applicant.
   BUSINESS: A commercial enterprise licensed by the city as a person or entity
under this title, having a fixed or temporary physical location within the
city.
   CERTIFICATE: A temporary, annual, or renewal certificate permitting door to
door solicitation in the city applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of
this chapter.
   CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES: Advocating by persons or entities that either are, or
support, a charitable organization.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: A. Any person, joint venture, partnership, limited
liability company, corporation, association, group, or other entity that is or
holds itself out to be:
      1.   A benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane,
patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public
health, environmental or conservation, or civic organization;
      2.   For the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter
fraternal association; or
      3.   Established for any charitable purpose; and
   B.   Who solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public for a
charitable purpose; or in any manner employs a charitable appeal as the basis
of any solicitation or employs an appeal that reasonably suggests or implies
that there is a charitable purpose to any solicitation.
   C.   Charitable organization includes a "chapter", "branch", "area",
"office", or similar "affiliate" or any person soliciting contributions within
the state for a charitable organization that has its principal place of
business outside the state 1 .
   COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL: A person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen
(18) years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage
in rational thought, conversation, and conduct.
   COMPLETED APPLICATION: A fully completed application form, a BCI, two (2)
copies of the original identification relied on by the applicant to establish
proof of identity, and the tendering of fees.
   CRIMINALLY CONVICTED: The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of
no contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not
been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal
conviction is that offense of which the applicant or registered solicitor was
convicted, without regard to the reduced status of the charge after completion
of conditions of probation or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in
abeyance or diversion agreement.
   DISQUALIFYING STATUS: Anything specifically defined in this chapter as
requiring the denial or suspension of a certificate, and any of the following:
   A.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of:
1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a
minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4) sexual
assault of any kind;
   B.   Criminal charges currently pending against the applicant or registered
solicitor for: 1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or
exploiting a minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4)
sexual assault of any kind;
   C.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of
a felony within the last ten (10) years;
   D.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been incarcerated in a
federal or state prison within the past five (5) years;
   E.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of
a misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: 1) moral
turpitude, or 2) violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
   F.   A final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant or
registered solicitor within the last five (5) years indicating that: 1) the
applicant or registered solicitor had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of the applicant or registered solicitor
was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)
(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
   G.   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently on parole or
probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including
being under house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
   H.   The applicant or registered solicitor has an outstanding arrest warrant
from any jurisdiction; or
   I.   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently subject to a
protective order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: The practice of engaging in or attempting to
engage in conversation with any person at a residence, whether or not that
person is a competent individual, while making or seeking to make or facilitate
a home solicitation sale, or attempting to further the sale of goods and/or
services.
   ENTITY: Includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or
other lawful entity, organization, society or association.
   FEES: The cost charged to the applicant or registered solicitor for the
issuance of a certificate and/or identification badge, which shall not exceed
the reasonable costs of processing the application and issuing the certificate
and/or identification badge.
   FINAL CIVIL JUDGMENT: A civil judgment that would be recognized under state
law as a judgment to which collateral estoppel would apply.
   GOODS: One or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise,
perishables of any kind, subscriptions, or manufactured products offered,
provided, or sold.
   HOME SOLICITATION SALE: To make or attempt to make a sale of goods or
services by a solicitor at a residence by means of door to door solicitation,
regardless of:
   A.   The means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
   B.   The time of delivery of the goods or services; or
   C.   The previous or present classification of the solicitor as a solicitor,
peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or similar designation.
   LICENSING OFFICER: The city employee(s) or agent(s) responsible for
receiving from an applicant or registered solicitor the completed application
and either granting, suspending, or denying the applicant's certificate.
NO SOLICITATION SIGN: A reasonably visible and legible sign that states "No
Soliciting", "No Solicitors", "No Salespersons", "No Trespassing", or words of
similar import.
   POLITICAL POSITION: Any actually held belief, or information for, against,
or in conjunction with any political, social, environmental, or humanitarian
belief or practice.
   REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has been issued a current certificate
by the city.
   REGISTRATION: The process used by the city licensing officer to accept a
completed application and determine whether or not a certificate will be
denied, granted, or suspended.
   RELIGIOUS BELIEF: Any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or
in conjunction with, any theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption,
presumption or position, or religious doctrine, dogma, or practice regardless
of whether or not the belief or information is endorsed by any other person or
public or private entity.
   RESIDENCE: Any living unit contained within any building or structure that
is occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the
city, together with the lot or other real property on which the living unit is
located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street or public rights of
way.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON OR ENTITY: That person or entity responsible to provide
the following to an applicant, registered solicitor, and the competent
individual in a residence to whom a sale of goods or services is made or
attempted to be made by means of a home solicitation sale:
   A.   Maintaining a state sales tax number, a special events sales tax
number, computing the sales taxes owing from any sale of goods or services,
paying the sales taxes, and filing any required returns or reports;
   B.   Facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to
cancel the sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law; and
   C.   Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those
persons who timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights
or law.
   SALE OF GOODS OR SERVICES: The conduct and agreement of a solicitor and the
competent individual in a residence regarding a particular good(s) or service
(s) that entitles the consumer to rescind the same within three (3) days under
any applicable federal, state, or local law.
   SERVICES: Those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided, or
sold to a competent individual of a residence.
   SOLICITING OR SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: Any of the following activities:
   A.   Seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or
consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought.
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase
insurance, subscriptions to publications, or publications.
   C.   Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value
for the benefit of any person or entity.
   D.   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or
services.
   E.   Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence for the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding
religious belief, political position, charitable conduct, or a home
solicitation sale.
   F.   Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of
soliciting, such as hawking or peddling.
   SOLICITOR OR SOLICITORS: A person(s) engaged in door to door solicitation.
   SUBMITTED IN WRITING: The information for an appeal of a denial or
suspension of a certificate, submitted in any type of written statement to the
city offices by certified, registered, priority, overnight or delivery
confirmation mail, facsimile, or hand delivery.
   SUBSTANTIATED REPORT: An oral, written, or electronic report:
   A.   That is submitted to and documented by the city;
   B.   By any of the following:
      1.   A competent individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or
other city employees with publicly available identification of their name,
address, and any other reliable means of contact;
      2.   City law enforcement or licensing officer; or
      3.   Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level
of government;
   C.   That provides any of the following information regarding a registered
solicitor:
      1.   Documented verification of a previously undisclosed disqualifying
status of a registered solicitor;
      2.   Probable cause that the registered solicitor has committed a
disqualifying status which has not yet been determined to be a disqualifying
status;
      3.   Documented, eyewitness accounts that the registered solicitor has
engaged in repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrates failure by the
registered solicitor to adhere to the requirements of this chapter; or
      4.   Probable cause that continued licensing of the registered solicitor
creates exigent circumstances that threaten the health, safety, or welfare of
any individuals or entities within the city.
   WAIVER: The written form provided to applicant by the city wherein applicant
agrees that the city may obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on
the applicant for licensing purposes under this chapter, and which contains
applicant's notarized signature. (Ord. 2008-22: Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 13-22-2.
5.06.040: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exempt from registration under this chapter:
   A.   Persons specifically invited to a residence by a competent individual
prior to the time of the person's arrival at the residence;
   B.   Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the
state of Utah (i.e., insurance brokers, real estate brokers) permits them to
engage in door to door solicitation to offer goods or services to an occupant
of the residence;
   C.   Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a previously made
order, or persons providing services at a residence pursuant to a previously
made request by a competent individual;
   D.   Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any religious belief, or political position regardless of
whether goods, services, or any other consideration is offered or given, with
or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or purchase;
and
   E.   Persons representing a charitable organization. The charitable
exemption shall apply to students soliciting contributions to finance
extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs,
provided that the solicitation has been approved in writing by the school
administration.
Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the duties and
prohibitions outlined in sections 5.06.170,
5.06.180 and
5.06.190 of this chapter while advocating or soliciting. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
5.06.050: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and
provisions of this chapter, the practice of being in and upon a private
residence within the city by solicitors, for the purpose of home solicitation
sales or to provide goods or services, is prohibited and is punishable as set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
5.06.060: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS:
Unless otherwise exempt under this chapter, all persons desiring to engage in
door to door solicitation within the city, prior to doing so, shall submit a
completed application to the licensing officer and obtain a certificate. (Ord.
2006-22 § 1)
5.06.070: APPLICATION FORM:
The licensing officer shall provide a standard application form for use for the
registration of solicitors. Upon request to the licensing officer, or as
otherwise provided, any person or entity may obtain in person, by mail, or
facsimile, a copy of this application form. Each application form shall require
disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the following information,
documentation, and fee:
   A.   Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant has
received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this chapter.
   B.   Contact Information:
      1.   Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former names
or aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
      2.   Applicant's telephone number, home address and mailing address, if
different;
      3.   If different from the applicant, the name, address, and telephone
number of the responsible person or entity; and
      4.   The address by which all notices to the applicant required under
this chapter are to be sent.
   C.   Proof Of Identity: An in person verification by the licensing officer
of the applicant's true identity by use of any of the following which bear a
photograph of said applicant:
      1.   A valid driver's license issued by any state;
      2.   A valid passport issued by the United States;
      3.   A valid identification card issued by any state;
      4.   A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States
military.
Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to
establish proof of identity shall be returned to the applicant.
   D.   Proof Of Registration With Department Of Commerce: The applicant shall
provide proof that either the applicant, or the responsible person or entity,
has registered with the Utah state department of commerce.
   E.   Special Events Sales Tax Number: The applicant shall provide a special
events sales tax number for either the applicant, or for the responsible person
or entity for which the applicant will be soliciting.
   F.   Marketing Information:
      1.   The goods or services offered by the applicant, including any
commonly known, registered or trademarked names;
      2.   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits,
registrations, or other qualifications required by federal or state law to
promote, provide, or render advice regarding the offered goods or services (for
example, if solicitor is selling food item(s), solicitor needs a food handlers
permit issued by state health department).
   G.   BCI Background Check: The applicant shall provide:
      1.   An original or a copy of a "BCI" background check as defined in
section
5.06.030 of this chapter; and
      2.   A signed copy of a waiver whereby applicant agrees to allow the city
to obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on applicant for purposes
of enforcement of this chapter 1 .
   H.   Responses To Questions Regarding "Disqualifying Status": The applicant
shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the
application form:
      1.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of: a) felony homicide,
b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, c) the sale or
distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual assault of any kind;
      2.   Are any criminal charges currently pending against the applicant
for: a) felony homicide, b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting
a minor, c) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual
assault of any kind;
      3.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a felony within the
last ten (10) years;
      4.   Has the applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison
within the past five (5) years;
      5.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within
the past five (5) years involving a crime of: a) moral turpitude, or b) violent
or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
      6.   Has a final civil judgment been entered against the applicant within
the last five (5) years indicating that: a) the applicant had either engaged in
fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or b) that a debt of the applicant was
nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4),
(a)(6), or (a)(19);
      7.   Is the applicant currently on parole or probation to any court,
penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest
or subject to a tracking device;
      8.   Does the applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any
jurisdiction; or
      9.   Is the applicant currently subject to a protective order based on
physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   I.   Fee: The applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the
city, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application
and issuing the certificate and/or identification badge.
   J.   Execution Of Application: The applicant shall execute the application
form, stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on
the present knowledge and belief of the applicant, the information provided is
complete, truthful and accurate. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 53-10-108(1)(b).
5.06.080: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the
applicant of the following:
   A.   The applicant's submission of the application authorizes the city to
verify information submitted with the completed application including:
      1.   The applicant's address;
      2.   The applicant's and/or responsible person or entity's state tax
identification and special use tax numbers, if any;
      3.   The validity of the applicant's proof of identity;
   B.   The city may consult any publicly available sources for information on
the applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any outstanding
warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments.
   C.   Establishing proof of identity is required before registration is
allowed;
   D.   Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant
with a completed application;
   E.   The applicant must submit a BCI background check with a completed
application;
   F.   To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, the applicant's
BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not
available for public inspection;
   G.   The city will maintain copies of the applicant's application form,
proof of identity, and identification badge. These copies will become public
records available for inspection on demand at the city offices whether or not a
certificate is denied, granted, or renewed;
   H.   The criteria for disqualifying status, denial, or suspension of a
certificate under the provisions of this chapter;
   I.   That a request for a temporary certificate will be granted or denied
the same business day that a completed application is submitted. (Ord. 2006-22
§ 1)
5.06.090: WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS:
The licensing officer shall not begin the registration process unless the
applicant has submitted a completed application. The original identification
submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned after the licensing
officer verifies the applicant's identity. A copy of the identification may be
retained by the licensing officer. If an original BCI background check is
submitted by the applicant, the licensing officer shall make a copy of the BCI
and return the original to the applicant. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
5.06.100: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES:
The licensing officer shall review the completed application submitted by the
applicant and issue a certificate in accordance with the following:
   A.   Temporary Certificate:
      1.   A temporary certificate shall issue allowing the applicant to
immediately begin door to door solicitation upon the following conditions:
         a.   Applicant's submission of a completed application;
         b.   Applicant's submission of the required fee;
         c.   Applicant establishes proof of identity;
         d.   The applicant's representations on the application form do not
affirmatively show a disqualifying status;
         e.   The BCI does not affirmatively show a disqualifying status; and
         f.   The applicant has not previously been denied a certificate by the
city, or had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
      2.   A temporary certificate will automatically expire after twenty five
(25) calendar days from issuance, or upon grant or denial of an annual
certificate, whichever period is shorter.
   B.   Annual Certificate: Within twenty five (25) calendar days of the
issuance of a temporary certificate the city shall:
      1.   Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the
truthfulness and completeness of the information submitted by the applicant,
including, but not limited to, those disclosed with the application form.
      2.   Issue written notice to the applicant and the responsible person or
entity, if any, that the applicant either:
         a.   Will be issued an annual certificate, eligible for renewal one
year from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate; or
         b.   Will not be issued an annual certificate for reasons cited in
section
5.06.140 of this chapter.
   C.   Renewal Certificate: An annual certificate shall be valid for one year
from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate and shall expire at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the anniversary date of issuance. Any annual
certificate that is not suspended, revoked, or expired may be renewed upon the
request of the registered solicitor and the submission of a new completed
application and payment of the fee, unless any of the conditions for the
denial, suspension or revocation of a certificate are present as set forth in
section
5.06.140 of this chapter, or a disqualifying status is present. (Ord. 2006-22 §
1)
5.06.110: FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
   A.   Certificate Form: Should the licensing officer determine that the
applicant is entitled to a certificate, the licensing officer shall issue a
certificate to the applicant. The certificate shall list the name of the
registered solicitor and the responsible person or entity, if any, and the date
on which the certificate expires. The certificate shall be dated and signed by
the license officer. The certificate shall be carried by the registered
solicitor at all times while soliciting in the city.
   B.   Identification Badge: With both the temporary and annual certificates,
the city shall issue each registered solicitor an identification badge that
shall be worn prominently on his or her person while soliciting in the city.
The identification badge shall bear the name of the city and shall contain: 1)
the name of the registered solicitor; 2) address and phone number of the
registered solicitor, or the name, address, and phone number of the responsible
person or entity is provided; 3) a recent photograph of the registered
solicitor; and 4) the date on which the certificate expires. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
5.06.120: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The licensing officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a
copy or record of every completed application received and the certificate or
written denial issued by the city. The applicant's BCI background check shall
remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public
inspection. The licensing officer may furnish to the head of the city's law
enforcement agency a listing of all applicants, those denied, and those issued
a certificate. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
5.06.130: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATES:
Certificates shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and shall list
the responsible party or entity, if any. The certificate shall be
nontransferable. A registered solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to
facilitate home solicitation sales with different: a) goods or services; or b)
responsible person or entity, from those designated in the originally submitted
completed application, shall submit a written change request to the licensing
officer. A new certificate based on the amended information shall issue for the
balance of time remaining on the solicitor's previous certificate before the
amendment was filed. Before the new certificate is given to the registered
solicitor, the registered solicitor shall obtain a revised identification badge
from the city, after payment of the fee for the identification badge. (Ord.
2006-22 § 1)
5.06.140: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
   A.   Denial: Upon review, the licensing officer shall refuse to issue a
certificate to an applicant for any of the following reasons:
      1.   Denial Of Temporary Certificate:
         a.   The application form is not complete;
         b.   The applicant fails to: 1) establish proof of identity, 2)
provide a BCI or 3) pay the fees;
         c.   The completed application or BCI indicates that the applicant has
a disqualifying status; or
         d.   The applicant has previously been denied a certificate by the
city, or has had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this chapter.
      2.   Denial Of Annual Certificate:
         a.   The information submitted by the applicant at the time of the
granting of the temporary certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         b.   Since the submission of the completed application, the applicant
is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
         c.   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         d.   Since the submission of the application, the city has received a
substantiated report regarding the past or present conduct of the applicant;
         e.   Since the submission of the application, the city or other
governmental entity has either criminally convicted or obtained a civil
injunction against the applicant for violating this chapter or similar federal,
state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying
status; or
         f.   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of
the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523
(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
      3.   Denial Of Annual Certificate Renewal:
         a.   The information submitted by the applicant when seeking renewal
of a certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         b.   Since the submission of the renewal application, the applicant is
subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
         c.   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         d.   Since the submission of the application or granting of a
certificate, the city has received a substantiated report regarding the past or
present conduct of the solicitor;
         e.   The city or other governmental entity has either criminally
convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the applicant for violating
this chapter or similar federal, state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to
the level of a disqualifying status; or
         f.   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of
the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523
(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation: The city shall either suspend or revoke a
certificate when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a certificate
occurs.
   C.   Notice Of Denial Or Suspension: Upon determination of the licensing
officer to deny an applicant's completed application or to suspend a registered
solicitor's certificate, the city shall cause written notice to be sent to the
applicant or registered solicitor by the method indicated in the completed
application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or suspension,
the documentation or information the city relied on to make the decision, the
availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon one business
day's notice to the city, and the date upon which the denial or suspension of
the certificate shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant or
registered solicitor shall have ten (10) business days from the receipt of the
notice of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The denial or suspension of
the certificate shall be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from
the date the notice is sent, unless that suspension is because of exigent
circumstances outlined in subsection C4 of the "substantiated report"
definition in section
5.06.030 of this chapter, in which case, the suspension is effective
immediately. The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless and until
the order is rescinded, overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to be
contrary to equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a certificate
automatically results in its revocation. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
5.06.150: APPEAL:
An applicant or registered solicitor whose certificate has been denied or
suspended shall have the right to appeal to the city council or its designee.
Any appeal must be submitted by either the applicant, the responsible person or
entity, or legal counsel for either who: a) documents the relationship with the
applicant or responsible person or entity; or b) is licensed or authorized by
the state of Utah to do so, and makes the assertion of an agency relationship.
The following procedures and requirements shall apply:
   A.   Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the city recorder with a
copy to the license officer within ten (10) business days of the decision from
which the appeal is taken. Such appeal shall describe in detail the nature of
the appeal, the action complained of and the grounds for appeal.
   B.   Upon request of the applicant or registered solicitor, within one
business day, the city will make available any information upon which it relied
in making the determination to either deny or suspend the certificate.
   C.   The appeals officer shall review, de novo, all written information
submitted by the applicant or registered solicitor to the licensing officer,
any additional information relied upon by the licensing officer as the basis
for denial, suspension or revocation, and any additional information supplied
by the city, applicant or registered solicitor. Any additional information
submitted by any party to the appeals officer shall be simultaneously submitted
to the opposing party. If desired, any party shall have three (3) business days
to submit rebuttal documentation to the appeals officer regarding the
additional information submitted by the opposing party.
   D.   The appeals officer will render a decision no later than fifteen (15)
calendar days from the date the appeal was taken, unless an extension of time
is agreed upon by the parties. In the event that any party to the appeal
submits rebuttal information as allowed in subsection C of this section, the
fifteen (15) calendar days shall be extended to include the additional three
(3) days for rebuttal.
      1.   The denial or suspension of the certificate shall be reversed by the
appeals officer if upon review of the written appeal and information submitted,
the appeals officer finds that the licensing officer made a material mistake of
law or fact in denying or suspending the applicant or registered solicitor's
certificate.
      2.   If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that the
licensing officer properly denied or suspended the certificate of the applicant
or registered solicitor, the denial or suspension of the certificate shall be
affirmed and constitute a determination that the suspended certificate is
revoked.
      3.   The decision of the appeals officer shall be delivered to the
applicant or registered solicitor by the means designated in the completed
application, or as otherwise agreed upon when the appeal was filed.
   E.   After the ruling of the appeals officer, the applicant or solicitor is
deemed to have exhausted all administrative remedies with the city.
   F.   Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the applicant's,
solicitor's, or city's right to seek relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
5.06.160: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
   B.   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to
face solicitation: 1) the name of the solicitor; 2) the name and address of the
entity with whom the solicitor is associated; and 3) the purpose of the
solicitor's contact with the person and/or competent individual. This
requirement may be satisfied through the use of the badge and an informational
flyer.
   C.   No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other
than his or her true and correct name.
   D.   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the
granting of a certificate of registration implies any endorsement by the city
of the solicitor's goods or services or of the individual solicitor. (Ord.
2006-22 § 1)
5.06.170: "NO SOLICITATION" NOTICE:
   A.   Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse
solicitors by displaying a "No Solicitation" sign which shall be posted on or
near the main entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the
sidewalk leading to the residence.
   B.   The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute
notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to
receive and/or does not invite solicitors.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each residence
for the presence of any such notice.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall apply also to solicitors who are
exempt from registration pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2006-22 § 1)
5.06.180: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS:
   A.   Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for
any "No Soliciting" sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a
solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to, "No
Solicitation" signs. If such sign or placard is posted such solicitor shall
desist from any efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall
immediately depart from such property. Possession of a certificate of
registration does not in any way relieve any solicitor of this duty.
   B.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person soliciting or
advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner
attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a "No
Solicitation" sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or
attempting to engage in advocating, a home solicitation sale, door to door
soliciting, or soliciting.
   C.   It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor through ruse,
deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take action
calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
   D.   Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence or
dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.
   E.   The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical
contact with, or touch another person without the person's consent.
   F.   The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without their
explicit consent.
   G.   The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person
and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their
lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
   H.   The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 2006-22
§ 1)
5.06.190: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a
residence before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
Mountain Time, unless the solicitor has express prior permission from the
resident to do so. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
5.06.200: BUYER'S RIGHT TO CANCEL:
In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to
provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or
solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer's signature to a written
statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the third
business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of "buyer's
right to cancel" shall be in the form required by Utah Code Annotated, section
70C-5-103, or a current version thereof or any state or federal law modifying
or amending such provision. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
5.06.210: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a jail sentence of not to exceed six (6)
months. (Ord. 2006-22 § 1)
CHAPTER 5.08
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
5.08.010: Definitions
5.08.020: License Required
5.08.030: Retail Licenses Affected By This Chapter
5.08.040: Application For License
5.08.050: Qualifications Of Licensee
5.08.060: Licenses And Local Consent; Number Permitted
5.08.070: Fees
5.08.080: Current Status Of Other Charges
5.08.090: Certification Of Employees
5.08.100: Unlawful Acts
5.08.110: Proximity Limitations
5.08.120: Grounds For Revocation, Suspension And Refusal To Renew; Notice,
Hearings, Appeals
5.08.130: Applicability
5.08.140: Violation; Penalty
5.08.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ACT: The Utah alcoholic beverage control act, title 32B, Utah Code Annotated,
as amended.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: "Beer" and "liquor" as those terms are defined in this
section.
ALCOHOLIC PRODUCTS: All products that contain at least 63/100 of one percent
alcohol by volume or at least one-half of one percent by weight, and are
obtained by fermentation, infusion, decoction, brewing, distillation, or any
other process that uses any liquid or combination of liquids, whether drinkable
or not, to create alcohol in an amount greater than the amount prescribed in
this subsection. "Alcoholic products" does not include common extracts,
vinegars, ciders, essences, tinctures, food preparations, or over the counter
drugs and medicines that otherwise come within this definition.
BEER: All products that contain 63/100 of one percent of alcohol by volume or
one-half of one percent alcohol by weight, but not more than four percent (4%)
of alcohol by volume or 3.2 percent by weight, and are obtained by
fermentation, infusion, or decoction of any malted grain. Beer may or may not
contain hops or other vegetable products. "Beer" includes products referred to
as malt liquor, malted beverages, or malt coolers.
CHURCH: A building set apart primarily for the purpose of worship in which
religious services are held and with which clergy is associated, and the main
body of which is kept for that use and not put to any other use inconsistent
with its primary purpose, and which is tax exempt under the laws of the state
of Utah.
CITY: The city of Santa Clara, Utah.
CLASS A, BEER SALES, CONVENIENCE STORE LICENSE: A license entitling the
licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises in original containers of a size
not to exceed one quart, for consumption off the premises.
CLASS B, BEER SALES, GOLF COURSE LICENSE: A license entitling the licensee to
sell beer in original containers of a size not to exceed one quart capacity for
consumption on the licensed premises of a restaurant at which food sales
constitute no less than seventy percent (70%) of the gross monetary receipts of
the licensee's business and in connection with a license issued by the state of
Utah to operate as an on premises beer retailer. Golf course premises where
beer is sold in connection with hot food preparation at the point of sale shall
be included as class B licenses.
CLASS C, BEER SALES, RESTAURANT LICENSE: A license entitling the licensee to
sell beer in original containers of a size not to exceed one (1) quart capacity
for consumption on the licensed premises of a restaurant at which food sales
constitute no less than seventy percent (70%) of the gross monetary receipts of
the licensee's business and in connection with a license issued by the State of
Utah to operate as a beer only restaurant licensee.
CLASS D, WINE AND BEER SALES, RESTAURANT LICENSE: A license entitling the
licensee to sell wine, and beer in original containers of a size not to exceed
one (1) quart capacity for consumption on the licensed premises of a restaurant
at which food sales constitute no less than seventy percent (70%) of the gross
monetary receipts of the licensee's business and in connection with a license
issued by the State of Utah to operate as a limited service restaurant
licensee.
CLASS E, BEER SALES, PRIVATE CLUB LICENSE: A license entitling the licensee to
sell beer in original containers or on draft in a quantity not to exceed two
(2) liters for consumption on the licensed premises and in connection with a
license issued by the State of Utah to operate as a private club.
CLASS F, ALCOHOLIC SALES, FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT LICENSE: A license entitling
the licensee to store, sell, offer for sale, furnish, or allow the consumption
of an alcoholic product on its premises as a full-service restaurant, at which
food sales constitute no less than seventy percent (70%) of the gross monetary
receipts of the licensee's business, and in connection with a license issued by
the State of Utah to operate as a full-service restaurant licensee.
CLASS G, BAR ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE: A license entitling the licensee to operate
a business primarily engaged in serving alcoholic beverages for on-premises
consumption. However, unlike a restaurant license, food service is not
required, although many establishments choose to offer food. Minors are not
permitted to enter areas designated under a bar license.
CLASS H, TYPE 5 PACKAGE AGENCY LICENSE: A license entitling the licensee to
operate a package agency where they may sell only the alcoholic beverages they
manufacture, directly to consumers for off-premises consumption. This license
as well as a manufacturing license is required as it cannot exist
independently. This license allows for the retail sales of sealed containers of
beer, wine or spirits, for customers to take home.
CLASS I, MANUFACTURING LICENSE: A license entitling the licensee to produce and
store alcoholic beverages within Utah. This license as well as a type 5 package
agency license is required as it cannot exist independently. This license
allows the manufacturing entity to produce, package, and distribute its
products, for customers to take home.
INTERDICTED PERSON: A person to whom the sale, gift, or provision of an
alcoholic beverage is prohibited by law or court order.
LICENSE: Unless the context requires otherwise, it refers generally to any
license or permit issued under this chapter.
LICENSE OFFICER: The Business License Officer of the City.
LICENSED PREMISES: Any property, building, enclosure, room, or equipment used
in connection with the sale, storage, service, manufacture, distribution, or
consumption of alcoholic beverages or products by a licensee or permittee.
LICENSEE: Any person issued a license by the City to sell, manufacture, store
or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises owned or controlled by
the person.
LIQUOR: Alcohol, or any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt or other
liquid, or combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, or
fermented, and all other drinks or drinkable liquids that contain more than
one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume and are suitable to use for
beverage purposes. "Liquor" does not include any beverage defined as beer, malt
liquor, or malted beverage that has an alcohol content of less than four
percent (4%) alcohol by volume.
LOW ALCOHOL BEER OR NONALCOHOLIC BEER: Any product containing alcohol in an
amount less than one-half of one percent by weight and obtained by
fermentation, infusion, or decoction of malted grain. Low alcohol or
nonalcoholic beer may or may not contain hops or other vegetable products.
MINOR: Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
PACKAGE AGENCY: A retail liquor location operated under a contractual agreement
with the department, by a person other than the State, who is authorized by the
commission to sell package liquor for consumption off the premises of the
agency.
PERMITTEE: Any person issued a permit by the City to perform acts or exercise
privileges as specifically granted in the permit.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, business
trust, or other form of business enterprise, including a receiver or trustee,
and the plural as well as the singular number, unless the intent to give a more
limited meaning is disclosed by the context.
PRIVATELY HOSTED EVENT OR PRIVATE SOCIAL FUNCTION: A specific social, business,
or recreational event for which an entire room, area, or hall has been leased
or rented, in advance by an identified group, and the event or function is
limited in attendance to people who have been specifically designated and their
guests. "Privately hosted event" or "private social function" does not include
events or functions to which the general public is invited, whether for an
admission fee or not.
PUBLIC BUILDING: Any building or permanent structure owned or leased by the
State, a county, or local government entity that is used for public education,
transacting public business, or regularly conducting government activities.
"Public building" does not mean or refer to any building owned by the State or
a county or local government entity when the building is used by anyone, in
whole or in part, for proprietary functions.
RESIDENCE: The person's principal place of abode within Utah.
RESTAURANT: Any business establishment where a variety of foods is prepared and
complete meals are served to the general public, located on premises having
adequate culinary fixtures for food preparation and dining accommodations and
which is engaged primarily in serving meals to the general public.
SCHOOL: Any building used primarily for the general education of minors.
"School" does not include nursery schools, infant daycare centers, or trade or
technical schools.
SELL, SALE, AND TO SELL: Any transaction, exchange, or barter whereby, for any
consideration, an alcoholic beverage is either directly or indirectly
transferred, solicited, ordered, delivered for value, or by any means or under
any pretext is promised or obtained, whether done by a person as a principal or
proprietor, or an agent, servant or employee, unless otherwise defined in this
title or the rules made by the City.
SHAREHOLDER: Any person who owns twenty percent (20%) or more of a
corporation's stock.
SINGLE EVENT LIQUOR LICENSE: A license entitling the licensee to store, sell,
serve and allow consumption of alcohol on specifically designated premises for
a period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive or non-consecutive days, and by
connection with a bona fide convention, civic or charitable enterprise
conducted by a corporation, church, political organization, or incorporated
association, or a recognized subordinate lodge, chapter or unit thereof.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A permit entitling the permittee to store, serve and allow
consumption of alcohol on specifically designated premises, issued to a person
who qualifies in one (1) of the following categories:
   A.   A religious organization for religious wine use;
   B.   A person engaged in an industrial or manufacturing pursuit, for
industrial or manufacturing use; or
   C.   A person engaged in a scientific or educational pursuit, for scientific
or educational use. The special use permit when issued shall indicate which
category of special use is authorized under the permit.
STATE STORE: A facility for the sale of package liquor located on premises
owned or leased by the State of Utah and operated by State employees. "State
store" does not apply to any licensee, permittee, or package agency.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar
content of fruits, plants, honey, or milk, or any other like substance, whether
or not other ingredients are added. "Wine" is considered "liquor" for purposes
of this title.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2024-16: Ord. 2017-11: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   It is unlawful for any person, licensee, permittee, or their officers,
managers, employees, or agents to keep for sale, or to directly or indirectly
or upon any pretense or device offer to sell, sell, or otherwise furnish or
supply to another, any alcoholic beverage or product without first having
procured appropriate licenses therefor and except as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.030: RETAIL LICENSES AFFECTED BY THIS CHAPTER:
   Retail licenses and permits subject to the provisions of this chapter shall
be classified into the following types (as defined in section 5.08.010 of this
chapter):
   Class A, Beer Sales, Convenience
   Class B, Beer Sales, Golf Course
   Class C, Beer Sales, Restaurant
   Class D, Wine and Beer Sales, Restaurant
   Class E, Beer Sales, Private Club
   Class F, Alcoholic Sales, Full-Service Restaurant
   Class G, Bar Establishment License
   Class H, Type 5 Package Agency License
   Class I, Manufacturing License
   Single Event Liquor License
   Special Use Permit
   No other sales or other furnishing or supply of alcoholic beverages shall be
permitted in the City except those that meet the definition of one (1) or more
of the above classifications and meet all the requirements and conditions of
this chapter. No other license classifications shall be authorized or permitted
under this chapter, regardless of whether such classifications are otherwise
authorized or permitted under the Act or other applicable Utah law. A license
for the sale of any alcoholic beverage shall be required as provided in the
Act, the provisions of which are adopted insofar as applicable to this chapter.
In addition to the license required by this chapter, any person engaged in the
sale of alcoholic beverages or products must obtain a business license and
otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter. Any license issued here
under that is not a special event permit with a finite duration shall expire on
December 31 of the year for which it is issued, and a renewal thereof must be
obtained.  
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2017-11: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.040: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   An application for a license under this chapter shall be made in
writing, under oath, and on a form provided by the License Officer, and
containing at a minimum the applicant's name, social security number, date of
birth, and residence address, the location of the proposed licensed or
permitted premises, the class of license desired, any convictions for crimes
which could disqualify the applicant as a licensee or permittee, and a space
for the applicant to sign, under penalty of law, certifying that the applicant
has complied with all requirements and possesses all qualifications for
issuance of a license and that all information contained in the application is
true. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, or other entity, the names and addresses of all partners, officers,
directors, members, joint venturers, trustees, and shareholders must be stated.
Applications by a partnership, limited liability company, or joint venture must
be subscribed to and sworn to as set out above by all partners or members.
Applications by a corporation must be subscribed and sworn to as set out above
by the president and secretary or trustees.
   B.   Any application submitted under this chapter shall be accompanied by:
      1.   A non-refundable application fee for a Class A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H,
or I license, or a non-refundable application fee for a Single Event Liquor
License or Special Use Permit shall be required as per the adopted Consolidated
Fee Schedule;
      2.   An issuance fee as prescribed in subsection
5.08.070B of this chapter, which is refundable if a license is not issued;
      3.   A copy of the applicant's current business license or application
therefor;
      4.   For applicants that have not previously obtained a license from the
City, character references from at least three (3) individuals who personally
know the applicant (or if a business entity, the agent for applicant), and whom
the City may contact for an opinion on the moral character of applicant and
applicant's fitness to obtain a license; and, if the applicant has previously
held a license in the State of Utah, the references shall have personal
knowledge of the applicant's conduct in relation to said prior licensing or
permitting;
      5.   Evidence of the distance to the nearest school, church, public
library, public playground or park;
      6.   A signed consent form stating that the licensee or permittee will
permit any authorized representative of the City or any law enforcement officer
unrestricted right to enter the licensed premises; and
      7.   Any other information the License Officer may require.
   C.   All applications for any license under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to this section regardless of whether the application is for a new
license, renewal, or due to a change of ownership, a change of lessee of an
existing licensed premises, or a change of location of an existing licensed
premises. However, an applicant renewing an existing license which is in good
standing shall not be required to provide new references or new evidence of
distance, and city council approval shall not be required for renewal provided
that no material changes have occurred that would warrant a new city council
review. However, the city council may, upon recommendation of the license
officer or mayor or of its own volition elect to review any renewal application
as if it were a new application hereunder.
   D.   All applications and accompanying information shall be returned to the
license officer.
   E.   The license officer shall submit copies of the application and
accompanying information to the fire department and police department.
   F.   After receiving the signed, written approval from each of the entities
named in subsection E of this section, the application and accompanying
information, along with a complete criminal history of the applicant and all
appropriate partners, members, officers, directors, agents, and shareholders,
shall be presented for review by the city marshal and approval by the city
council.
   G.   The city council shall issue a license only after considering the
location, physical characteristics, capacity, and condition of the proposed
licensed premises, the character, background, management experience and
qualifications of the applicant, the nature and class of the proposed license,
and public input with respect to issuance of the license, and after finding
that the public convenience requires and the best interests of the community
will be substantially served by the issuance of the license.
   H.   Whenever a license is made available under this chapter, the city shall
give notice of the availability of the license in each category by posting the
notice in the city office building and by publishing such notice in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city. The notice shall provide a deadline of no
less than fourteen (14) days within which to make application for the available
license. Upon expiration of the deadline and review of all applications
submitted in accordance with this section, a hearing shall be set before the
city council to consider issuance of any available license. In the event that
the number of applications exceeds the number of available licenses or permits
in any one category, the available license may be issued to that applicant or
applicants who, in the determination of the city council, best qualify and
which will best serve the interests of the community as determined under this
section. No provisions of this chapter shall require the city to issue any
license applied for under this chapter.
   I.   Any license issued under this chapter shall be to conduct permitted
activities only at the specific place and in the specific manner provided in
such license. A separate license shall be obtained for each license
classification and for each different location for which the applicant desires
to carry on activities regulated by this chapter.
   J.   No license issued under this chapter shall be assigned, transferred,
leased, subleased, sold, or otherwise transferred, except that, in the sole
discretion of the city council, a transfer of a license may be permitted upon a
change of location where the owner remains the same, or upon a change of owners
where the location remains the same. In either case, the same requirements as
to the location of premises and the character and qualifications of the
licensee shall apply, and the same fees will be required as in the case of the
issuance of an original license.
   K.   A license issued under this chapter which is not used by the licensee
within or a period more than ninety (90) consecutive days shall automatically
revert to the city and shall no longer have any validity.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.050: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE:
   A.   Every licensee hereunder shall be of good moral character, over the age
of twenty-one (21) years, and a bona fide citizen of the United States or a
legal resident alien. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability
company, or other entity, it shall be qualified to do business in the state,
and each partner or member shall meet the qualifications of a licensee. If the
applicant is a corporation, it shall be qualified to do business in the state,
and each officer, director, trustee, or shareholder shall meet the
qualifications of a licensee. Any partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, or other entity shall hold its license through an agent who shall
also meet all the qualifications of a licensee. Such agent shall be personally
responsible for assuring compliance with this chapter and the act and shall be
subject to the penalties for any violation of this chapter or the act. Upon the
death, resignation or discharge of its agent, a partnership, limited liability
company, corporation, or other entity shall, within fifteen (15) days, appoint
another agent to qualify for and hold the license. Failure to designate a
substitute agent within the time required shall be grounds for suspension,
revocation or refusal to renew the license.
   B.   No license shall be issued to any person who has violated any provision
of this chapter, this title, or the Act, or who has violated any provision of a
license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by the City or any other
governmental agency within the State of Utah, or who has had such a license
revoked. No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a
felony or any violation of any law or ordinance relating to alcoholic
beverages, driving under the influence, keeping a gambling or disorderly house,
or any law or ordinance involving moral turpitude, or who has pleaded guilty to
or forfeited bail on a charge of having committed a felony or of having
violated any such law or ordinance. No partnership, limited liability company,
corporation or other entity shall be issued a license or have its license
renewed unless it has on file with the License Officer a list of its partners,
members, trustees, officers, directors and shareholders. Any change in
partners, members, trustees, officers, directors or shareholders of a
partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other entity which
occurs after the issuance of a license under this chapter shall be immediately
reported to the License Officer. No partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, or other entity shall be issued a license or have its license
renewed if any of its partners, members, trustees, officers, directors, or
shareholders have been convicted of a felony or any violation of any law or
ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages, driving under the influence, keeping
a gambling or disorderly house, or any law or ordinance involving moral
turpitude, or have pleaded guilty to or forfeited bail on a charge of having
committed a felony or of having violated any such law or ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.060: LICENSES AND LOCAL CONSENT; NUMBER PERMITTED:
   A.   The total number of Class A licenses issued within the City shall not
exceed that number determined by dividing the population of the City by one
thousand (1,000). However, the City Council shall have discretion to issue a
Class A license without regard to the quota set forth above, if the licensee
falls within the category of establishment where the total square footage
devoted to the sale of grocery or related items exceeds ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, total employees will exceed thirty five (35), and the impact of
the applicant upon the economy of the City is determined to be beneficial.
   B.   The total number of Class B licenses issued within the City shall not
exceed that number determined by dividing the population of the City by one
thousand (1,000). The City Council shall have discretion to issue Class B
licenses in the number determined appropriate in accordance with the standards
set forth in section
5.08.010 of this chapter.
      Upon application for a Class B license, or renewal thereof, the licensee
shall submit an exact duplicate of the menu utilized, together with a floor
plan showing all seating and the arrangement thereof. Determination of whether
an establishment is dedicated primarily to restaurant purposes shall be made by
the City Council. A Class B license shall not authorize the sale, storage, or
service of any alcoholic beverage other than beer.
   C.   The total aggregate number of Class C, Class D, Class F, Class G, Class
H, and Class I licenses issued within the City shall not exceed that number
determined by dividing the population of the City by one thousand (1,000). The
City Council shall have discretion to issue Class C, Class D, Class F, Class G,
Class H, or Class I licenses in the number determined appropriate in accordance
with the standards set forth in this chapter.
      Upon application for a Class C, Class D, Class F license, Class G, Class
H, or Class I, or renewal thereof, the licensee shall submit an exact duplicate
of the menu utilized, together with a floor plan showing all seating and the
arrangement thereof. Determination of whether an establishment is dedicated
primarily to restaurant purposes shall be made by the City Council upon initial
application, and, in the City Council's discretion, prior to renewal.
   D.   The total number of Class E licenses issued within the City shall not
exceed that number determined by dividing the population of the City by five
thousand (5,000).
   E.   A license issued by the State of Utah for sale of alcoholic beverages
shall not affect the need for a separate license from the City to sell, offer
to sell, furnish, or supply alcoholic beverages, and holding a license under
one (1) class of license under this chapter shall have no effect on the
applicability of regulations or quotas governing other classes.
   F.   Population for determining the number of licenses shall be by the most
recent United States decennial or special census or by any other population
determination made by the United States government or the State of Utah. If the
City Council wishes to make more frequent determination of population than what
may be available from the above sources, it may do so based on such formula as
it may reasonably consider to be accurate, and in such event it may abandon
that determination upon issuance of a new census figured by the United States
or State of Utah if it believes the latter to be more accurate.
   G.   Single event permits including a single event liquor license associated
with a special event permit may be approved by the City Manager or designee(s)
without reference to or effect upon the quotas herein provided. Local consent
must also be approved by the city as outlined in
Chapter 12.22 of city code.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2024-16: Ord. 2017-11: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.070: FEES:
   A.   A non-refundable application fee for a Class A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, or
I license, or a non-refundable application fee for a Single Event Liquor
License or Special Use Permit shall be required as per the adopted Consolidated
Fee Schedule.
   B.   At the time of application for an original license or renewal, the
applicant shall pay an issuance fee as if a license is issued on or after July
1 in any year, one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee shall be charged.
   C.   The fee payable for a change of agent, as provided in section
5.08.050 of this chapter, shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2017-11: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.080: CURRENT STATUS OF OTHER CHARGES:
   No license shall be issued to any applicant who is in arrears in the payment
to the City for any business license, or who is otherwise indebted to the City.
Failure to pay business license fees or other charges assessed by the City when
due shall be a basis for suspension or revocation of any license issued
hereunder.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.090: CERTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES:
The right to a license hereunder shall be conditioned at all times upon
compliance with the following:
   A.   All employees of a licensee and any licensee who will be authorized to
sell, furnish or serve alcoholic beverages to the public shall complete, within
thirty (30) days after the issuance of a license or commencement of employment,
an instruction seminar as set forth in section 62A-8-403, Utah Code Annotated,
and shall thereafter maintain a current certification under this section. Any
licensee or employee who sells, furnishes or serves alcoholic beverages without
obtaining the certification required herein shall, in addition to any other
penalty provided herein, be prohibited from obtaining certification for a
period of one (1) year from the date of the violation.
   B.   No certificate shall be issued to an employee or licensee who has been
convicted of a drug or alcohol related offense during a period of one (1) year
preceding the application for a certificate, unless this condition is expressly
waived by the Chief of Police after investigation of the circumstances. If
charges are pending against an employee or licensee arising out of a drug or
alcohol related offense, no certificate shall be issued until such charges are
resolved and, if there is a conviction, none shall be issued for a period of
one (1) year thereafter.
   C.   If any certified employee or certified licensee is convicted of any
drug or alcohol related offense, including the crime of driving under the
influence, their certificate shall be automatically revoked and such employee
or licensee shall not be permitted to sell, furnish or serve alcoholic
beverages for a period of one (1) year and until a new certification is
obtained.
   D.   Any revocation of certification under subsection C of this section may
be appealed to the City Council within ten (10) days after the mailing of
written notice by the City of such revocation. Such appeal shall proceed in the
manner prescribed in section
5.08.120 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.100: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It is unlawful:
   A.   For a person to buy for resale, sell or deal in alcoholic beverages
without first having procured appropriate licenses duly issued by the City, and
otherwise complying with the provisions of this chapter, the Act, and any other
applicable law.
   B.   For any retail licensee to purchase alcoholic beverages or products
from any person other than a wholesaler licensed in accordance with the Act.
   C.   For a licensee or other person to sell, offer to sell, or otherwise
furnish or supply any alcoholic beverage or product to any person under the age
of twenty-one (21) years.
   D.   1.   For any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to purchase,
attempt to purchase, solicit another person to purchase, possess, or consume
any alcoholic beverage or product, unless specifically authorized by this
title;
      2.   For any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to
misrepresent his age or for any other person to misrepresent the age of a
minor, for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining an alcoholic
beverage or product for a minor; or
      3.   For any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to possess or
consume any alcoholic beverage while riding in a limousine or chartered bus.
   E.   For a licensee to employ a minor to sell or dispose of any alcoholic
beverage.
   F.   For a licensee or its employee to consume an alcoholic beverage or be
under the influence of an alcoholic beverage while on duty.
   G.   For a licensee or its employee, during that employee's working hours or
in connection with such employment or the operation of the licensee's business,
to give to or purchase for any other person, accept a gift of, purchase for
himself or consume any alcoholic beverage.
   H.   For a person to sell, offer to sell, or otherwise furnish or supply any
alcoholic beverage or product to any person who is apparently under the
influence of intoxicating alcoholic beverages or products or drugs or to a
person whom the person furnishing the alcoholic beverage knew or should have
known from the circumstances was under the influence of intoxicating alcoholic
beverages or products or drugs.
   I.   For a Class A licensee or its employee to sell, dispose of, deliver or
give beer to any person between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M.
   J.   For any Class B, Class C, Class D, or Class F licensee, or any employee
of such to sell, dispose of, deliver, or give away, or allow a person to
consume beer or other alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of any
day, or on any day of any regular general, primary or special election or
Municipal, special district or school election until after the polls are
closed. Failure to pick up all drinks and beverages containing alcohol which
have not been fully consumed at the closing hours as set forth herein shall be
considered permission to consume after the closing hours and shall be a
violation of this section.
   K.   For any Class E, Class F, Class G, or Class I licensee, or any employee
of such to sell, dispose of, deliver, or give away, or allow a person to
consume beer or other alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on weekdays and
Saturdays, on any day of any regular general, primary or special election or
Municipal, special district or school election until after the polls are
closed, or on any Sunday or State or Federal legal holiday between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon. Failure to
pick up all drinks and beverages containing alcohol which have not been fully
consumed at the closing hours as set forth herein shall be considered
permission to consume after the existing hours and shall be a violation of this
section.
   L.   For any single event or special use permittee or any employee or agent
of such to sell, dispose of, deliver, or give away, or allow a person to
consume beer or other alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises at any time
or date other than as expressly established by approval of the City Council at
the time of issuance of the permit, or on any day of any regular general,
primary or special election or Municipal, special district or school election
until after the polls are closed. Failure to pick up all drinks and beverages
containing alcohol which have not been fully consumed at the closing hours as
set forth herein shall be considered permission to consume after the closing
hours and shall be a violation of this section.
   M.   For a Class B, Class C, Class D, Class E, Class F, Class G, Class H, or
Class I licensee to employ a person for the purpose of soliciting the purchase
of alcoholic beverages by patrons of the establishment for themselves, on a
percentage basis or otherwise. No Class B, Class C, Class D, Class E, Class F,
Class G, Class H, or Class I licensee shall serve employees or allow a patron
of the establishment to give alcoholic beverages to, or purchase alcoholic
beverages for, or drink alcoholic beverages with any employee while that
employee is on duty.
   N.   For a Class A licensee to sell beer except in the original container,
or to permit beer to be consumed on the licensed premises.
   O.   For a person to consume liquor in a public building, park, or stadium,
except as provided in this title.
   P.   1.   For any person to sell, offer to sell, or otherwise furnish or
supply any alcoholic beverage or product to any person under the age of twenty-
one (21).
      2.   This section does not apply to the furnishing or supplying of an
alcoholic beverage or product to a minor for medicinal purposes by the parent
or guardian of the minor or by the minor's physician or dentist, in accordance
with this title.
   Q.   For a person to advertise the sale of beer, except as may be expressly
permitted by the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and except for
the placement of a license issued under this chapter in a location in or about
the licensed premises where it will be visible to the public.
   R.   For any Class E licensee or State store, or their agent or employee, to
permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to enter upon or to
remain in or about any portion of the licensed premises where any alcoholic
beverages are sold, dispensed or consumed, unless that portion of the licensed
premises is dedicated primarily to the sale and serving of food. Exceptions may
be made for a musician or entertainer in a prohibited area only upon express
written consent of the Chief of Police.
   S.   The following acts or conduct in a restaurant licensed under this
chapter are considered contrary to the public welfare and morals, and are
prohibited upon the premises:
      1.   Employing or using any person in the sale or service of alcoholic
beverages while the person is unclothed or in attire, costume, or clothing that
exposes to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or
any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals;
      2.   Employing or using the services of any person to dance or mingle
with the patrons while the person is unclothed or in attire, costume, or
clothing described in subsection S1 of this section;
      3.   Encouraging or permitting any person to touch, caress, or fondle the
breasts, buttocks, anus, or genitals of any other person;
      4.   Permitting any employee or person to wear or use any device or
covering, exposed to view, that simulates the breast, anus, pubic hair, or any
portion of these;
      5.   Permitting any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects
to depict any of the prohibited activities in this subsection;
      6.   Permitting any person to remain in or upon the premises who exposes
to public view any portion of that person's genitals or anus; or
      7.   Showing films, still pictures, electronic reproductions, or other
visual productions depicting:
         a.   Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts
prohibited by Utah law;
         b.   Any person being touched, caressed, or fondled on the breasts,
buttocks, anus, or genitals;
         c.   Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are used
to depict, or drawings are used to portray, any of the prohibited activities
described in this subsection; or
         d.   Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva or the anus or the
genitals.
   T.   Although live entertainment is permitted on the premises of a
restaurant liquor licensee, a licensee may not allow any person to perform or
simulate sexual acts prohibited by Utah law, including sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, the touching,
caressing, or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals, or the
displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals. Entertainers shall
perform only upon a stage or at a designated area approved by the City.
   U.   Any violation of subsections E, I through L, R, S and T, inclusive, of
this section shall constitute offenses of strict liability against any agent,
employee or licensee, and such licensee may be liable in addition to an agent
or employee.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2017-11: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.110: PROXIMITY LIMITATIONS:
   No licensee, or establishment vending alcoholic beverages, shall be located
closer to any public or private school, church, public library, public
playground or park than allowed by state law as set forth in Utah Code
Annotated 32B-1-202, unless the city council finds after full investigation
that compliance with the distance requirement would result in either:
   A.   Peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties; or
   B.   Exceptional or undue hardships.
   In either event the city council may, after giving full consideration to the
attending circumstances, following a public hearing in the city, authorize a
variance from the distance requirement so as to relieve the difficulties or
hardships, provided the variance may be granted without substantial detriment
to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose
of this section.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.120: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION, SUSPENSION AND REFUSAL TO RENEW; NOTICE,
HEARINGS, APPEALS:
   A.   The city council may suspend, revoke, refuse to renew, and the license
officer may suspend or refuse to renew, any license issued pursuant to this
chapter for any of the following reasons:
      1.   There occurs on the licensed premises repeated acts of violence.
      2.   The licensee knowingly submits false or fraudulent material
information on any application or document filed with the city.
      3.   The licensee is on the licensed premises habitually drunk or under
the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs.
      4.   The licensed business is delinquent for more than sixty (60) days in
the payment of any fee or charge due to the city.
      5.   The licensee attempts to, or does, assign, transfer or sell a
license in violation of this chapter.
      6.   The licensee fails to keep for a period of two (2) years, or make
available to the city upon reasonable request, all invoices, records, bills or
other papers and documents relating to the purchase, sale and delivery of
alcoholic beverages.
      7.   The licensee is convicted of a felony or any violation of any law or
ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages, driving under the influence of
alcohol or alcohol related reckless driving, keeping a gambling or disorderly
house, or any law or ordinance involving moral turpitude.
      8.   The licensee violates or fails to comply with this chapter or the
act or ceases to possess all of the qualifications required by this chapter or
the act.
   B.   The license officer shall receive all complaints of alleged violation
of this chapter and is responsible for ordering through the police department
or other appropriate department the investigation of all allegations of a
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter, the act, or any condition
imposed upon the licensee by the license. Upon the license officer's initiation
of an investigation or upon the receipt of a complaint and an investigation of
the complaint as deemed necessary, the license officer may cause a complaint
and notice of hearing to be directed to the licensee setting forth the
violations alleged against the licensee, and requesting the licensee, within
ten (10) days after service of the complaint and notice of hearing, to appear
by filing with the license officer an answer to the complaint. Failure of the
licensee to answer is deemed an admission by the licensee of the licensee's
commission of the act charged in the complaint. The license officer or the city
council may then immediately begin disciplinary proceedings. The license
officer may set a hearing before the city council on any of the grounds set
forth in subsection A of this section. The city recorder and investigating
officers shall have all those rights and duties set forth in the act or the
rules of the Utah department of alcoholic beverage control. The complaint and
notice of hearing provided herein shall be sufficient if it conforms to the
rules of the Utah department of alcoholic beverage control.
   C.   A hearing shall conform to the requirements of the rules of the Utah
department of alcoholic beverage control. The city council shall conduct a
hearing and may accept any relevant material evidence and testimony and apply
any evidentiary rules set forth in the rules of the Utah department of
alcoholic beverage control. The city shall prepare an official record of the
hearing, including all testimony recorded mechanically or stenographically and
all exhibits introduced. The city is not required to transcribe such record
except pursuant to an appeal, except that, upon written request and receipt of
a reasonable fee for transcribing such record, the city may transcribe the
record or allow for its transcription by the person requesting it.
   D.   If the hearing is conducted by the city council, the city council shall
issue a decision no later than ten (10) days following the hearing. Such
decision may be in writing or entered on the record at the hearing. Such
decision shall then be final for purposes of appeal.
   E.   Hearings before the city council are open to the public and are
informal, with technical rules of evidence not applying to the proceedings. The
licensee involved and any person requesting a hearing may be present and cross-
examined witnesses and give evidence before the city council at the hearing.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.130: APPLICABILITY:
   This chapter shall be applicable to all persons holding valid licenses
hereunder at the effective date hereof or who may obtain such in the future.
However, all such licensees and other persons shall comply with the provisions
of this chapter. This chapter shall apply regardless of whether the application
of this chapter results in there being licenses in excess of the quotas set
forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2015-20)
5.08.140: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
In addition to the denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a
license, the licensee and any person who shall violate the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished for each
offense by a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
or by incarceration for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both
such fine and incarceration. Each day or incident of violation shall constitute
a separate offense hereunder.
(Ord. 2025-16: Ord. 2015-20)
CHAPTER 5.10
TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA
SECTION:
5.10.010: Applicability; Sale Of Tobacco Products And Tobacco Paraphernalia
Restricted
5.10.020: Definitions
5.10.030: Tobacco Sales Business License Required
5.10.040: Retail Tobacco Specialty Business Not Permitted
5.10.050: Revocation Of A Tobacco Sales Business License
5.10.060: Penalty
5.10.010: APPLICABILITY; SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA
RESTRICTED:
No individual, entity or organization shall:
   A.   Conduct or operate a retail tobacco specialty business; or
   B.   Sell, furnish, or otherwise distribute tobacco products or "tobacco
paraphernalia", as defined in this chapter, unless it satisfies the
requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2017-17)
5.10.020: DEFINITIONS:
   RETAIL TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS: A commercial establishment in which:
   A.   The sale of tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia accounts for
more than thirty five percent (35%) of the total annual gross receipts for the
establishment;
   B.   The sale of food and beverage products, excluding gasoline sales,
accounts for less than forty five percent (45%) of the total annual gross
receipts for the establishment; and
   C.   The establishment is not licensed as a pharmacy under Utah Code title
58, chapter 17b, Pharmacy Practice Act.
   TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA: Means any equipment, product, or material of any
kind, excluding matches and lighters, which is used, intended for use, or
designed for use to package, repackage, store, contain, conceal, ingest,
inhale, or otherwise introduce a cigar, cigarette, or tobacco in any form into
the human body, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or
without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
   B.   Water pipes;
   C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
   D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
   E.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a
cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
   F.   Chamber pipes;
   G.   Carburetor pipes;
   H.   Electric pipes;
   I.   Air driven pipes;
   J.   Chillums;
   K.   Bongs; and
   L.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any cigar, cigarette, or electronic cigarette as defined in
the Utah Code; a tobacco product as defined in the Utah Code, including chewing
tobacco; or any substitute for a tobacco product, including flavoring or
additives to tobacco.
   TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS LICENSE: A business license issued by the City which
permits the licensee to sell tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia from
its validly licensed business. (Ord. 2017-17)
5.10.030: TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Tobacco Products And Tobacco Paraphernalia: No individual, entity,
organization, or business shall sell tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia
unless it has obtained a tobacco sales business license. A tobacco sales
business license shall only be issued as a secondary license to a business
license for one of the following:
      1.   A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of food and
beverage products and is located in a building which is ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or larger;
      2.   A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of gasoline or
diesel fuel and is located in a building which is two thousand (2,000) square
feet or larger;
      3.   An on-premises alcoholic beverage sales license;
      4.   A business license for a pharmacy under Utah Code and is located in
a building which is ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger; or
      5.   A business license for any business that was lawfully selling
tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia under that license prior to August
1, 2017.
   B.   Application For License: An application for a license shall be made in
writing on the form provided by the licensing officer. The form must be
completed in its entirety. The application must be accompanied by:
      1.   The primary business license required in this chapter (or a
completed application for such primary business license, if being sought in
conjunction with the tobacco sales business license);
      2.   The required licensing fee as may be determined by the City Council
from time to time;
      3.   Proof of Utah State Tax Commission license and State bond (if
required by Utah Code);
      4.   Documentation showing the square footage of the building;
      5.   Proof of the operation of a business specified in subsection A1 or
A2 of this section, if the application is to qualify as such a business; and
      6.   If seeking to qualify under subsection A5 of this section, proof of:
         a.   The lawful sales of tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia
prior to August 1, 2017; and
         b.   The percentage of tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia sold
as compared to the total annual gross receipts for the business.
   C.   Issuance And Renewal Of License:
      1.   Upon receipt of a completed application as set forth in subsection B
of this section, and qualification for issuance of the appropriate primary
business license described in subsection A of this section, the licensing
officer shall issue the tobacco sales business license to the applicant.
      2.   The tobacco sales business license may be issued as a separate
certificate, or may be indicated by an appropriate notation on the primary
business license certificate, in the discretion of the licensing officer.
      3.   The tobacco sales business license shall be renewed annually in
conjunction with the applicant's primary business license, provided the
business license or tobacco sales business license is not otherwise suspended,
revoked, or terminated. (Ord. 2017-17)
5.10.040: RETAIL TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS NOT PERMITTED:
The operation of a retail tobacco specialty business is prohibited. (Ord. 2017-
17)
5.10.050: REVOCATION OF A TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS LICENSE:
   A.   The City may suspend, revoke, or terminate the business license of a
business which is operating as a tobacco sales business if:
      1.   The licensee, owner, or operator:
         a.   Engages in a pattern of unlawful activity as outlined in Utah
Code section 76-10-1601 et seq., or its amendment; or
         b.   Violates any alcohol or drug related offenses, regulations
restricting the sale and distribution of tobacco products or tobacco
paraphernalia, or any felony offenses under any provision of Federal, State, or
local law.
      2.   While on the business premises, an employee violates:
         a.   Any laws or regulations related to alcohol or controlled
substances;
         b.   Any laws or regulations restricting the sale and distribution of
tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia; or
         c.   Any provision of Federal, State, or local law which would be a
felony level offense.
      3.   The tobacco sales business does not maintain the right to operate
under the terms of other applicable laws, including zoning ordinances, building
codes, and the primary business license.
   B.   In addition to the provisions outlined in subsection A of this section,
a business licensed under section
5.10.030 of this chapter may have their tobacco sales business license
permanently revoked if:
      1.   The tobacco sales business license is not renewed continuously
without lapse or revocation;
      2.   The tobacco sales business is closed for business or otherwise
suspends the sale of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia for more than
sixty (60) consecutive days; or
      3.   The tobacco sales business substantially changes the character of
its business premises or business operation. (Ord. 2017-17)
5.10.060: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor and punishable by a fine
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), not including any mandatory fees and
surcharges imposed by law or a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2017-17)
CHAPTER 5.12
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
5.12.010: Purpose
5.12.020: Definition
5.12.030: Doing Business Without Registration And A License Unlawful
5.12.040: Annual Registration
5.12.050: Job License For Each Contract
5.12.060: Job License Fee
5.12.070: Records; Inspection
5.12.080: Regulations
5.12.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of imposing license fees
upon persons engaging in business within the limits of the city as contractors.
The licenses are designed to be determined upon the basis of each contract or
job being performed. It is the opinion of the city council that this method of
determining the amount of fee will result in fair taxation and will not
discriminate against the contractor who performs only a few jobs within the
city limits as distinguished from the contractor who performs many. (Prior code
§ 9-431)
5.12.020: DEFINITION:
   A.   "Contractor" means any person, firm, copartnership, corporation,
association, or other organization, or any combination thereof, who for a fixed
sum, price, fee, percentage, or other compensation other than wages, undertakes
any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project,
development, or improvement, other than to personality, or any part thereof;
provided, however, that the term "contractor" shall not include:
      1.   Anyone who merely furnishes material or supplies without fabricating
the same into, or consuming the same in, the performance of the work of the
contractors as herein defined.
      2.   Anyone who builds not more than one structure on property titled in
his or her name (as owner of not less than 50 percent thereof) during any three
hundred sixty five (365) day period, and who signs before a notary public at
the city office an affidavit, under oath, by which said owner states he or she
is constructing said building as his or her own personal residence, and that he
or she intends to reside therein and occupy said structure as his or her
principal place of residence for a period of not less than one year following
completion of construction, and who, when requested, signs a similar affidavit
that he or she has actually resided in said structure as that person's
principal place of residence.
   B.   Types Of Contractors: As an illustrative list of contractors subject to
the provisions of this chapter, but not in limitation thereof, the following
occupations are subject to this chapter; general contractors, specialty
contractors of all kinds, such as, but not limited to, those engaged in the
business of installing, repairing or otherwise performing services in
connection with: acoustical the and roof decking; awnings, storm doors, and
windows; air conditioning, dry heating, sheet metal; boilers, steamfitting;
carpentry; cement and concrete; ceramic file; cabinet and millwork; composition
floor, countertops, tile; carpet; drywall; elevator installation; electrical;
excavating and grading; fencing; floor coverings; fire prevention (structural);
furnaces and burners; glazing; industrial piping; iron and bronze (ornamental);
insulation; landscaping; lathing; lawn sprinklers; masonry; mosaic the and
terrazzo; overhead doors; painting and paper hanging; pest control
(structural); plastering; plumbing and wet heating; roofing and siding;
swimming pool; signs, stone masonry; sewer installation; steel reinforcing and
erection; tanks (structural); waterproofing; weatherstripping; welding;
wrecking and demolition; wood floor laying and finishing. (Ord. 93-98 § 1:
prior code § 9-432)
5.12.030: DOING BUSINESS WITHOUT REGISTRATION AND A LICENSE UNLAWFUL:
Any person desiring to engage in business as a contractor within the corporate
limits of this city must comply with the two (2) following requirements:
   A.   Prior to engaging in any subject business activity during any calendar
year, he or she must register for the calendar year as a contractor by
completing and filing a registration form in the office of the recorder.
   B.   Prior to the performance of any services in connection with any
specific contract or job, the person shall secure a license to engage in the
performance of service connected with said specific job or contract from the
office of the recorder. (Prior code § 9-433)
5.12.040: ANNUAL REGISTRATION:
   A.   Any person desiring to engage in business as a contractor shall
complete and file in the office of the recorder a registration form provided to
him or her by the city which shall show:
      1.   The name of the contractor.
      2.   The address and telephone number of the contractor.
      3.   The type of organization, e.g., corporation, partnership or sole
proprietor.
      4.   If a partnership or a corporation or other artificial person, the
name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for the functions
of the organization:
         a.   Whether or not licensed under the contractor's license law of the
state of Utah; if so, the license number of the contractor.
         b.   Type of business in which registrant seeks to engage, e.g.,
general contractor or one of the specialty contractors.
         c.   Such other information as the city council may by regulation
require.
   B.   Any person seeking to register for the privilege of doing business as a
contractor within the limits of this city for any calendar year, or any part
thereof, shall pay an annual registration fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
(Prior code § 9-434)
5.12.050: JOB LICENSE FOR EACH CONTRACT:
   A.   Any person desiring to perform services as a contractor shall, in
addition to registering, as above required, secure a job license granting to
him or her the privilege of performing the services required of him or her for
each contract or job which he or she proposes to complete.
   B.   Any person seeking said job license for a contract or job shall
complete an application therefor, on forms provided him or her by the city. The
application shall set forth:
      1.   The name and address of the contractor;
      2.   The applicant's city registration number;
      3.   The number of the applicant's state contractor's license;
      4.   The person by whom the applicant is engaged to perform services as a
contractor;
      5.   The address of the person;
      6.   The location at which the contractor's services are to be performed;
      7.   The type of services that are to be performed, e.g., as a general
contractor, as one of the specialty contractors;
      8.   The contract amount. (Prior code § 9-435)
5.12.060: JOB LICENSE FEE:
Every contractor, for the privilege of engaging in the business of performing
the services, shall pay the amount set forth in the appropriate appendix to
this code. (Prior code § 9-436)
5.12.070: RECORDS; INSPECTION:
All persons registered pursuant to this chapter for the privilege of doing
business as contractors, and all persons who engage in doing business as
contractors, shall maintain records of all services performed by them as
contractors within the corporate limits of this city. The records shall
disclose the person for whom the services are performed and the contract price
or charge made for the services and such other information as the city council
may, by regulation, require. The persons shall maintain such records at their
office or principal place of business and shall permit officials or agents of
the city to inspect said records for the purpose of determining whether or not
said persons have complied with the requirements of this license chapter.
(Prior code § 9-437)
5.12.080: REGULATIONS:
The city council may adopt such regulations as in its opinion are necessary to
implement this part of the objectives thereof. (Prior code § 9-438)
CHAPTER 5.16
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
5.16.010: Purpose And Intent
5.16.020: Definitions
5.16.030: Establishment And Classification Of Businesses Regulated
5.16.040: Measurement Of Distance
5.16.050: Location Of Sexually Oriented Businesses
5.16.060: Regulations Governing Existing Sexually Oriented Businesses
5.16.070: Injunction
5.16.080: Permit Required
5.16.090: Investigation And Application
5.16.100: Issuance Of Permit
5.16.110: Annual Permit Fee
5.16.120: Inspection
5.16.130: Expiration Of Permit
5.16.140: Suspension Of Permit
5.16.150: Revocation Of Permit
5.16.160: Judicial Review Of Permit Denial, Suspension, Or Revocation
5.16.170: Transfer Of Permit
5.16.180: Sexually Oriented Business Employee License
5.16.190: Regulations Pertaining To Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films Or
Videos In Video Booths
5.16.200: Prohibitions Regarding Minors And Sexually Oriented Businesses
5.16.210: Advertising And Lighting Regulations
5.16.220: Hours Of Operation
5.16.230: Nudity At Sexually Oriented Businesses Not Offering For Sale
Alcoholic Beverages Subject To Prohibition
5.16.240: Additional Criminal Prohibitions For The Operation Of A Sexually
Oriented Business Without A Valid Permit
5.16.250: Prohibition Of Distribution Of Sexual Devices
5.16.260: Exemptions
5.16.270: Criminal Penalties And Additional Legal, Equitable, And Injunctive
Relief
5.16.280: Immunity From Prosecution
5.16.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse
secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of
this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this chapter
to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected
by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent or effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene materials or materials harmful to minors. (Ord. 95-176 § 1)
5.16.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as
follows:
   EMPLOYEE: A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage, or
other compensation by the operator of said business.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter;
   C.   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
   NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: A. The appearance of human bare buttocks, anus,
male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast;
or
   B.   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human
buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or areola or nipple of
the female breast.
   OPERATOR: Means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager,
operator, or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
   PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES: Any premises that requires a license and/or
permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
   PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE: A person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
   PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
   PUBLIC BUILDING: Any building owned, leased, or held by the United States,
the state, the county, the city, any special district, school district, or any
other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which
building is used for governmental purposes.
   PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA: Public land which has been designated for
park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or
similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or
management of the city park and recreation authorities.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building
which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE: A single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple-
family, or mobile park or subdivision and campground as defined in this code.
   SCHOOL: Any public or private educational facility, including, but not
limited to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, and universities. "School" includes the school grounds, but does not
include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally
as a school.
   SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort
agency, or seminude model studio.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES: Those businesses defined as follows:
Adult Arcade: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or
more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines,
or other image producing machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons
each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store, Or Adult Video Store: A commercial
establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or
more of the following:
   A.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual representations
which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
   B.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or
marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.
   C.   An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", and
still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
if offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified
materials which depict or describe "specified anatomical areas" or "specified
sexual activities".
Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, "bottle club", or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
regularly features: a) persons who appear seminude or in a state of seminudity;
b) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Motel: A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which: a)
offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which provides
patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas" and which advertises the availability of this
sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public
right of way, or by means of any off premises advertising, including, but not
limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, or leaflets, radio or television,
or b) allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a time
period of less than ten (10) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which
are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown for any form of
consideration.
Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons
who appear in a state of seminudity or live performances which are
characterized by exposure of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
Escort: A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as
a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
Escort Agency: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
Massage Parlor: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity,
massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic
treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body which occurs
as a part of or in connection with "specified sexual activities", or where any
person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service related thereto,
exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas". The definition of sexually
oriented businesses shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed
hospital, or by a licensed hospital, or by a licensed physician, surgeon,
chiropractor or osteopath, or by any nurse or technician working under the
supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, or by
trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic
team or school athletic program.
Seminude Model Studio: Any place where a person who regularly appears in a
state of seminudity is provided for money or any form of consideration to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons.
Sexual Encounter Establishment: A business or commercial establishment that, as
one of its primary business purposes, offers, for any form of consideration, a
place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of "specified sexual activities" when one or more of the persons is
seminude. The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include an
establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or
similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved
and recognized sexual therapy.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: As used in this chapter means and includes any
of the following:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areolae; or
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: As used in this chapter means and includes any
of the following:
   A.   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
   B.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
   C.   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
   D.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or
tumescence; or
   E.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections A through D of this definition.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Increase in the
floor areas occupied by the business by more than fifteen percent (15%), as the
floor areas exist on the effective date hereof.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means and
includes any of the following:
   A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devise which
transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest
or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership
or control. (Ord. 95-176 § 2)
5.16.030: ESTABLISHMENT AND CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES REGULATED:
The establishment of a sexual oriented business shall be permitted only in the
specified commercial zoning and shall be subject to the following restriction:
   A.   No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any of the
following sexually oriented businesses, are defined above, within one thousand
feet (1,000') of another such business or within one thousand feet (1,000') of
any religious institution, school, boys club, girls club, or similar existing
youth organization, or public park or public building, or within one thousand
feet (1,000') of any property zoned for residential use or used for residential
purposes and are classified as follows:
      1.   Adult arcade;
      2.   Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store;
      3.   Adult cabaret;
      4.   Adult motel;
      5.   Adult motion picture theater;
      6.   Adult theater;
      7.   Massage parlor;
      8.   Sexual encounter establishment;
      9.   Escort agency;
      10.   Nude model studio. (Ord. 95-176 § 3)
5.16.040: MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE:
As regarding subsection
5.16.030A of this chapter, distance between any two (2) sexually oriented
businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The
distance between any sexually oriented business and any religious institution,
public or private elementary or secondary school, boys club, girls club, or
similar existing youth organization, or public park or building, or any
properties zoned for residential use or used for residential purposes shall
also be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or objects from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part
of the premises where the sexually oriented business is conducted, to the
nearest property line of the premises of a religious institution, public or
private elementary or secondary school, boys club, girls club, or similar
existing youth organization, or public park or public building, or any
properties zoned for residential use or used for residential purposes. (Ord.
95-176 § 4)
5.16.050: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
The city of Santa Clara's zoning ordinance requires that sexually oriented
businesses shall be permitted only in commercial zoning as provided in section
5.16.030 of this chapter. Permits for sexually oriented businesses shall be
required and governed by the procedures and policies specified in section
 5.16.080 of this chapter. In addition, any sexually oriented business shall be
subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   The person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business except as provided in section
 5.16.030 of this chapter.
   B.   The person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of: a)
any religious institution; b) any school; c) the boundary of any residential
district; d) a public park adjacent to any residential district; e) a property
line of a lot devoted to residential use; or f) a boys club, girls club, or
similar existing youth organization.
   C.   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of
another such business, which will include any adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater,
adult theater, massage parlor, or any sexual encounter establishment.
   D.   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she causes or permits the
operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business within the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or causes the
substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business in any building,
structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
   E.   It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a person appearing
in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      1.   By a proprietary school, licensed by the state of Utah, a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
      2.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      3.   In a structure:
         a.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
         b.   Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll
at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
         c.   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time. (Ord. 95-176 § 5)
5.16.060: REGULATIONS GOVERNING EXISTING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
   A.   Any sexually oriented businesses lawfully operating on the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this chapter that is in violation of sections
5.16.030 and
5.16.050 of this chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming
use will be permitted to continue for a period of one year, with a possible
extension of one year to be granted by the city council only upon a convincing
showing of extreme financial hardship, which is defined as the recovery of the
initial financial investment in the nonconforming use, unless sooner terminated
for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or
more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or
altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or
more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand feet (1,000') of one
another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business
which was first established and continually operating at the particular
location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is
nonconforming.
   B.   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of a sexually oriented business permit and/or license, of a church,
public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, public building,
residential district, or residential lot within one thousand feet (1,000') of
the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a
valid permit and/or license and does not apply when an application for a permit
and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has
been revoked.
   C.   Any establishment subject to the provisions of this section shall apply
for the permit provided for by section
5.16.080 of this chapter within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter. Any establishment existing prior to the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall comply with the
regulations pertaining to sections
5.16.190,
5.16.210 and
5.16.250 of this chapter within sixty (60) days of the effective date hereof,
and all other applicable permit regulations within thirty (30) days of the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 95-176 § 6)
5.16.070: INJUNCTION:
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without having a valid permit due to locational restrictions is subject to a
suit for injunction as well as prosecution for the criminal violation. Such
violation shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
and/or thirty (30) days imprisonment, and if an injunction must be sought,
attorney fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against
the sexually oriented business. (Ord. 95-176 § 7)
5.16.080: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a
valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city for the particular
type of business. It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or
she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without said
permit.
   B.   The city administrator or his or her designee is responsible for
granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling sexually
oriented business permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented
businesses. The city administrator or his or her designee is also responsible
for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a
permit is being applied for complies with all locational requirements of
sections
 5.16.030,
5.16.050 and
5.16.060 of this chapter, all applicable zoning laws, and/or regulations now in
effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date hereof in the
city and the city comprehensive plan.
The city marshal's office is responsible for providing information on whether
an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time
period set forth.
The city marshal's office is responsible for inspecting a proposed, permitted,
or nonpermitted sexually oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is
in compliance with applicable statutes and ordinances.
   C.   An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the
city. Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file
with the city an original and two (2) copies of a sworn permit application on
the standard application form supplied by the city or designee.
   D.   The completed application shall contain the following information and
shall be accompanied by the following documents:
      1.   If the applicant is:
         a.   An individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name
and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he or she is eighteen (18)
years of age,
         b.   A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and
the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any, or
         c.   A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the
date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing
under the laws of and authorized to do business in this state, the names and
capacity of all officers, directors, and principal stockholders, and the name
of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for
service of process;
      2.   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state: a) the
sexually oriented business's fictitious name, and b) submit the required Utah
registration documents;
      3.   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed
pursuant to this section has, within the two (2) or five (5) year period as
specified in section
5.16.100 of this chapter immediately preceding the date of the application,
been convicted of a specified criminal act and, if so, the specified criminal
act involved, the date of conviction, and the place of conviction;
      4.   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals pursuant to
section
5.16.080 of this chapter and/or licenses of this chapter has had a previous
permit under ordinance or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances
from another city or county denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name
and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension, or
revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant
to section
5.16.080 of this chapter has been a partner in a partnership or an officer,
director, or principal stockholder of a corporation that is permitted under
this chapter whose permit has previously been denied, suspended, or revoked,
including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the
permit was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of denial,
suspension, or revocation;
      5.   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to
section
5.16.080 of this chapter holds any other permits and/or licenses under this
chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city
or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted
businesses;
      6.   The single classification of permit for which the applicant is
filing;
      7.   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if
any;
      8.   The applicant's mailing addresses and residential address;
      9.   A recent photograph of the applicant(s);
      10.   The applicant's driver's permit number, social security number,
and/or his or her state or federally issued tax identification number;
      11.   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior off the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6");
      12.   A current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within
thirty (30) days prior to application by a Utah registered land surveyor
depicting the property lines and the structures containing any established
existing uses regulated by this chapter within one thousand feet (1,000') of
the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious
institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within one
thousand feet (1,000') of the property to be certified; and the property lines
of any residentially zoned area or residential property within one thousand
feet (1,000') of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a
use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the
time an application is submitted;
      13.   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
an individual, he or she must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity
which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten percent
(10%) or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a
permit as applicant;
      14.   If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business which
shall exhibit on the premises films, videocassettes, or other video
reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, then said person shall comply with the application requirements stated
at section
5.16.180 of this chapter.
   E.   Applicants for a permit under this section shall have a continuing duty
to promptly supplement application information required by this section in the
event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the
application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty (30)
days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file
with the city administrator or his or her designee, shall be grounds for
suspension of a permit.
   F.   In the event that the city administrator or his or her designee
determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed
the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he or she shall
promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten (10)
days to properly complete the application. (The time period for granting or
denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is
allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.)
   G.   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
health, fire, and building codes and laws.
   H.   The applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable application fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) at the time of filing an application under
this section.
   I.   Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any sexually
oriented business defined in this chapter, and as part of any application for a
permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain from the city or its
designee a certification that the proposed location of such business complies
with the locational requirements of sections
5.16.030,
5.16.050 and
5.16.060 of this chapter.
   J.   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits
and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business permit.
   K.   By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be
deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise
by the city administrator or his or her designee, the city marshal's office,
and all other city agencies charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances, and
codes applicable in the city of their respective responsibilities under this
chapter.
   L.   The applicant shall be required to provide the city with the names of
any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to section
5.16.180 of this chapter. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a
permit is granted or renewed. (Ord. 95-176 § 8)
5.16.090: INVESTIGATION AND APPLICATION:
   A.   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city and upon
payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the city or its designee shall
immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter
send photocopies of the application to the city marshal's office and any other
city agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire, and building codes
and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of
the applicant, the application, and the proposed sexually oriented business in
accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this
chapter. Said investigation shall be completed within twenty (20) days of
receipt of the application by the city or its designee. At the conclusion of
its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of
the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign
it and, in the event it disapproves, state the reasons therefor. The city
marshal's office shall only be required to certify the NCIC records request
check mentioned at section
5.16.110 of this chapter. The city marshal's office shall not be required to
approve or disapprove applications.
   B.   A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that
the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of any provision
of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation, or other laws in effect in the
city. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or
agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the city or
its designee. (Ord. 95-176 § 9)
5.16.100: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   A.   Grant Or Deny Application: The city administrator or his or her
designee shall grant or deny an application for a permit within thirty (30)
days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the thirtieth
day, unless the applicant requests and is granted a reasonable extension of
time, the applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the business for
which the permit is sought, unless and until the city or its designee notifies
the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reason(s) for that
denial.
   B.   Grant Of Application For Permit:
      1.   The city administrator or his or her designee shall grant the
application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection C of
this section is present.
      2.   The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address
of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall also indicate that the
sexually oriented business, whether permitted or not, may be subject to
indecency pursuant to the United States supreme court decision in Barnes v.
Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S., 111 S.Ct. 2456 (June 21, 1991). The permit shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time.
   C.   Denial Of Application For Permit:
      1.   The city administrator or his or her designee shall deny the
application for any of the following reasons:
         a.   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
         b.   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue on his or her
payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him or
her or imposed upon him or her in relation to a sexually oriented business.
         c.   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
permit by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding
twelve (12) months, or residing with a person whose permit to operate a
sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12)
months.
         d.   An applicant has failed to provide information required by this
section or permit application for the issuance of the permit or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form.
         e.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have
not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire, and building codes
by the department or agency responsible under law for investigating said
compliance.
         f.   The application or permit fees required by this chapter have not
been paid.
         g.   An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is
not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, the zoning locational requirements for a sexually oriented
business under sections
 5.16.030,
5.16.050 and
5.16.060 of this chapter.
         h.   The granting of the application would violate a statute,
ordinance, or court order.
         i.   The applicant has a permit under this chapter which has been
suspended or revoked.
         j.   An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" for
which:
            (1)   Fewer than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the "specified criminal
acts" which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, or crimes
connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited
to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution,
pandering, or tax violations;
            (2)   Fewer than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for the "specified criminal
acts" which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, or crimes
connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but not limited
to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution,
pandering, or tax violations;
            (3)   Fewer than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses for
"specified criminal acts" which are sexual crimes against children, sexual
abuse, rape, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business,
including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or materials harmful
to minors, prostitution, pandering, or tax violations, or offenses occurring
within any twenty four (24) month period;
            (4)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on disqualification of the applicant; or
            (5)   An applicant who has been convicted of the above described
"specified criminal acts" may qualify for a sexually oriented business permit
only when the time period required in subsection C1j of this section has
elapsed.
         k.   An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an employee who
does not have a valid license as required in section
5.16.180 of this chapter.
         l.   If the city administrator or his or her designee denies the
application, he or she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the
reason(s) for the denial.
         m.   If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within
a period of twelve (12) months from the date of denial of a previous
application for a permit at the location, and there has not been an intervening
change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a
different decision regarding the former reason(s) for denial, the application
shall be denied. (Ord. 95-176 § 10)
5.16.110: ANNUAL PERMIT FEE:
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is eight hundred fifty
dollars ($850.00). (Ord. 95-176 § 11)
5.16.120: INSPECTION:
Subject to the provisions of section 2.20.120 of this code, an applicant or
permittee shall permit representatives of any city office, the county health
department, and the department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented
business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied or open for business. (Ord. 98-08 § 2: Ord. 95-176 § 12)
5.16.130: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in section
 5.16.100 of this chapter (for renewals, filing of original survey shall be
sufficient). Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days
before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected.
   B.   When the city administrator or his or her designee denies renewal of
the permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this chapter for
one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city or its
designee finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has been
corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days
have elapsed since the date denial became final. (Ord. 95-176 § 13)
5.16.140: SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
   A.   The city administrator or his or her designee shall suspend a permit
for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he or she determines that a
permittee, or an employee of a permittee, has:
      1.   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
      2.   Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages while working in the
sexually oriented business premises;
      3.   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises;
      4.   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building,
fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, or regulation, whether
federal, state, or local, said determination being based on investigation by
the division, department, or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws.
In the event of such statute, code, ordinance, or regulation violation, the
city or its designee shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and
shall allow the permittee a seven (7) day period in which to correct the
violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before the
expiration of the seven (7) day period, the city or its designee shall
forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of the suspension;
      5.   Engaged in permit transfer contrary to section
5.16.170 of this chapter. In the event the city of its designee suspends a
permit on the ground that a permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to
section
5.16.170 of this chapter, the city administrator or his/her designee shall
forthwith notify the permittee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain
in effect until the applicable section of this chapter has been satisfied;
      6.   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of
operation outlined in section
5.16.220 of this chapter;
      7.   Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid license as
required in section
5.16.180 of this chapter.
   B.   The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the
statute, code ordinance, or regulation in question has been corrected. (Ord.
98-08 § 2: Ord. 95-176 § 14)
5.16.150: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   The city administrator or his or her designee shall revoke a permit if
a cause of suspension in section
5.16.140 of this chapter occurs and the permit has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months.
   B.   The city administrator or his or her designee shall revoke a permit
upon determining that:
      1.   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant's
opportunity for obtaining a permit;
      2.   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances in or on the premises;
      3.   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;
      4.   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was suspended;
      5.   A permittee has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" for
which the time period required in section
5.16.100 of this chapter has not elapsed;
      6.   On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a
person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted
premises, constituting a "specified criminal act" for which a conviction has
been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually
oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the
permit;
      7.   A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or fees
related to a sexually oriented business;
      8.   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or any other specified
sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
      9.   A permittee has been operating more than one sexually oriented
business under a single roof.
   C.   When the city administrator or his or her designee revokes a permit,
the revocation shall continue for one year and the permittee shall not be
issued a sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city
administrator or his or her designee finds that the basis for revocation under
this section has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at
least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date revocation became effective.
If the permit was revoked under this section, an applicant may not be granted
another permit until the number of years required under this section have
elapsed. (Ord. 95-176 § 15)
5.16.160: JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION:
After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or
suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek
prompt review of such administrative action through the city council. If the
denial, suspension, or revocation is affirmed upon review, the administrative
action may be promptly reviewed by the court upon the application of the
aggrieved party. (Ord. 95-176 § 16)
5.16.170: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
   A.   A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the
authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the
application for permit.
   B.   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another person
unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements:
      1.   Obtains an amendment to the permit from the city administrator or
his or her designee which provides that he or she is now the permittee, which
amendment may be obtained only if he or she has completed and properly filed an
application with the city administrator or his or her designee setting forth
the information called for under section
5.16.100 of this chapter in the application; and
      2.   Pays a transfer fee of twenty percent (20%) of the annual permit fee
set by this chapter.
   C.   No permit may be transferred when the city administrator or his or her
designee has notified the permittee that suspension or revocation proceedings
have been or will be brought against the permittee.
   D.   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another location.
   E.   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in
violation of this section is declared void and the permit shall be deemed
revoked. (Ord. 95-176 § 17)
5.16.180: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE:
   A.   License Required: Each individual to be employed in a sexually oriented
business, as defined in section
5.16.020 of this chapter, who engages in the services rendered by a seminude
model studio, escort or escort agency, sexual encounter establishment, massage
parlor, or a live performer or entertainer shall be required to obtain a
sexually oriented business employee license. Each applicant shall pay a permit
fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). Said fee is to cover reasonable
administrative costs of the licensing application process.
   B.   Application For License:
      1.   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the
city administrator or his or her designee the following information:
         a.   The applicant's name or any other names (including "stage" names)
or aliases used by the individual;
         b.   Age, date, and place of birth;
         c.   Height, weight, hair, and eye color;
         d.   Present residence address and telephone number;
         e.   Present business address and telephone number;
         f.   State driver's license or identification number;
         g.   Social security number; and
      2.   Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least eighteen
(18) years of age.
      3.   Attached to the application form as provided above, a color
photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the
applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the city marshal's office. Any
fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
      4.   A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant
for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant previously operating or seeking
to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country, has ever had
a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or
suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or
suspension, state the date and the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction,
and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A
copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the
application.
      5.   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal
act" as defined in section
5.16.100 of this chapter. This information shall include the date, place,
nature of each conviction or pleas of nolo contendere, and identify the
convicting jurisdiction.
      6.   The city administrator or his or her designee shall refer the
sexually oriented business employee license application to the city marshal's
office for an investigation to be made of such information as is contained on
the application. The application process shall be completed within fifteen (15)
working days from the date the completed application is filed. After the
investigation, the city administrator or his or her designee shall issue a
license unless the report from the city marshal's office finds that one or more
of the following finds is true:
         a.   That the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in
any report or record required to be filed with the city marshal's office or
other department of the city;
         b.   That the applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
         c.   That the applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal
act" as defined in section
5.16.100 of this chapter;
         d.   That the sexually oriented business employee license is to be
used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute,
rule, or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this chapter; or
         e.   That the applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee
license revoked by the city within two (2) years of the date of the current
application.
   C.   Renewal Of License:
      1.   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to
annual renewal by the city administrator or his or her designee upon the
written application of the applicant and a finding by the city administrator or
his or her designee and the city marshal's office that the applicant has not
been convicted of any "specified criminal act" as defined in section
5.16.100 of this chapter or committed any act during the existence of the
previous license period which would be grounds to deny the initial permit
application.
      2.   The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment of a fee as
set by a resolution of the city council. (Ord. 95-176 § 18)
5.16.190: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR
VIDEOS IN VIDEO BOOTHS:
   A.   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel and regardless of whether
or not a permit has been issued to said business under this chapter, which
exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction
which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the
premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not
exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than
eight feet (8'). The diagram shall also designate the place at which this
permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimension of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches (±6"). The city administrator or his or her designee may waive the
foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram
that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
      2.   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      3.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the city or its designee.
      4.   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      5.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises have two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior
of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view
required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's
station.
      6.   It shall be the duty of the owners and operation, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in subsection A5 of this section remains unobstructed
by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials or persons
at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application.
      7.   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one
time. No holes, commonly known as "glory holes", shall be permitted in the
walls or partition separating each viewing room from an adjoining viewing room,
restroom, or any other room on the premises. No door may be attached or
installed on any viewing room.
      8.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access and an illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles as measured at
the floor level.
      9.   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
   B.   A person having a duty under subsections A1 through A9 of this section
commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. (Ord.
95-176 § 19)
5.16.200: PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued for said business under this chapter, and knowingly or with reasonable
cause to know, permits, suffers, or allows:
   A.   Admittance of a person under eighteen (18) years of age to the business
premises unless accompanied by a parent or guardian;
   B.   A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the business
premises unless accompanied by a parent or guardian;
   C.   A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or services
at the business premises without the specific consent of a parent or guardian;
or
   D.   A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to work at the
business premises as an employee. (Ord. 95-176 § 20)
5.16.210: ADVERTISING AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates
or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or
not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, and
advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable state
statute or local ordinance.
   B.   It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates
or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or
not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, and displays
or otherwise exhibits the materials and/or performances at such sexually
oriented business in any advertising which is visible outside the premises.
This prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence or location
of such sexually oriented business.
   C.   The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior premises to
be visible from outside the premises.
   D.   All off street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually
oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation
with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal
illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or
walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually
oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to
reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be
shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
   E.   Nothing contained in this section of the chapter shall relieve the
operator(s) of a sexually oriented business from complying with the ordinances
and resolutions of the city, as they may be amended from time to time, or any
subsequently enacted city ordinances or resolutions. (Ord. 95-176 § 21)
5.16.220: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   A.   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for said business under this chapter, and allows such business
to remain open for business, or permits any employee to engage in a
performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a
service, or solicit a service between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day.
   B.   A person commits a misdemeanor if, working as an employee of a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for
said business under this chapter, said employee engages in a performance,
solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a service, or
solicits a service between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. of any particular day. (Ord. 95-176 § 22)
5.16.230: NUDITY AT SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES NOT OFFERING FOR SALE
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SUBJECT TO PROHIBITION:
The United States supreme court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501
U.S., 111 S.Ct. 2456 (June 21, 1991) which upheld the rights of cities to
prohibit live public exposure of a person's private parts, specifically applies
to sexually oriented businesses (regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued to said businesses under this chapter), including said businesses where
no alcoholic beverages are sold, served, or consumed at the premises.
Public nudity is prohibited within the city, including any sexually oriented
business. Any sexually oriented business which is found in violation of this
section shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of section
5.16.140 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-176 § 23)
5.16.240: ADDITIONAL CRIMINAL PROHIBITIONS FOR THE OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS WITHOUT A VALID PERMIT:
In addition to the criminal provisions found at other sections this chapter,
the following additional criminal provisions shall also apply to sexually
oriented businesses.
A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be operated a
sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued for said business under this chapter, and said person knows or should
know that:
   A.   The business does not have a sexually oriented business permit under
this chapter for any applicable classification;
   B.   The business has a permit which is under suspension;
   C.   The business has a permit which has been revoked; or
   D.   The business has a permit which has expired. (Ord. 95-176 § 24)
5.16.250: PROHIBITION OF DISTRIBUTION OF SEXUAL DEVICES:
   A.   It is unlawful for anyone to distribute, for commercial purposes, sell,
or offer for sale any device, instrument, or paraphernalia designed or marketed
primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or
abuse of themselves or others.
   B.   Such devices, instrument, or paraphernalia include, but are not limited
to, phallic shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains, bather
restraints, racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing implements (excluding
earrings or other decorative jewelry), or other tools of sadomasochistic abuse.
   C.   A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor punishable by a
fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and six (6) months incarceration
or both. (Ord. 95-176 § 25)
5.16.260: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter that a
person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      1.   By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
      2.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      3.   In a structure:
         a.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing,
         b.   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three (3) days in advance of the class, and
         c.   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
   B.   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter that an
employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is
permitted under this chapter, exposed any specified anatomical area during the
employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to
employees. (Ord. 95-176 § 26)
5.16.270: CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND ADDITIONAL LEGAL, EQUITABLE, AND INJUNCTIVE
RELIEF:
In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the Utah code, if any
person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of the criminal
provisions of this chapter, such person upon conviction of such offense shall
be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six
(6) months in the county jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each
violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
Further, each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall be considered
as a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the city from taking such
other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Such other lawful actions
shall include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable action for injunctive
relief or an action at law for damages.
All remedies and penalties provided for in this section shall be cumulative and
independently available to the city, and the city shall be authorized to pursue
any and all remedies set forth this section to the full extent allowed by law.
(Ord. 95-176 § 27)
5.16.280: IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION:
The city and its designee, the city marshal's office, and all other departments
and agencies, and all other city officers, agents, and employees, charged with
enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be immune from prosecution,
civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon a sexually oriented
business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this chapter.
(Ord. 95-176 § 28)
TITLE 6
ANIMALS
CHAPTER 6.01
GENERAL
SECTION:
6.01.010: Policy
6.01.020: Definitions
6.01.030: Division Of Animal Control
6.01.040: Policies And Procedures
6.01.010: POLICY:
It is the philosophy and policy of the city of Santa Clara that no adoptable
animal be euthanized if it can be adopted into a suitable home or transferred
to a qualified rescue organization.
The Santa Clara Municipal Animal Shelter, or its designee, operates as a no-
kill facility within the parameters of and lawful constraints imposed by virtue
of its municipal status. As such, the no-kill designation does not preclude the
euthanization of any animal when such action is necessary to ensure the public
health, safety and welfare, nor does it prohibit the euthanization of sick or
injured animals when no viable humane alternative remains. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.01.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
   ABANDONED OR STRAYED: An animal whose owner cannot be immediately identified
through reasonable diligence.
   ADEQUATE HOME: Existing facilities to meet the physical and emotional needs
of the adopted animal, including food, water, shelter, medical care, protection
from extreme weather conditions and companionship.
   ADOPTABLE: Those animals six (6) weeks of age or older that, at or
subsequent to the time the animal is impounded or otherwise taken into
possession, have manifested no sign of disease, injury, congenital/hereditary
defect or behavioral condition that could pose a health or safety risk or
otherwise make the animal unsuitable for placement as a pet. Animals exhibiting
any of the above mentioned conditions may become adoptable through medical
treatment or rehabilitation.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: The director, peace officers and other employees and
volunteers of the public safety department who have been designated by the
director to perform the duties of animal control officers and who have been
authorized to enforce the provisions of this title.
   ANIMAL SHELTER: The Santa Clara Municipal Animal Shelter (the "animal
shelter" or "shelter") is used for the care and custody of seized, stray,
homeless, quarantined, abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or other small
domesticated animals in Santa Clara City, except as follows:
      A.   The shelter may assist neighboring jurisdictions, at the approval of
the director during times of disaster and/or exigent circumstances in placing
animals in safe environments, including the shelter if space is available, and
in attempting to find foster homes for such animals.
      B.   The shelter may take animals from relinquishing owners living in
neighboring jurisdictions if all of the following are met:
         1.   The owner pays twice the fee charged to Santa Clara City
residents;
         2.   The animal is spayed or neutered;
         3.   The animal has complete current vaccinations, including against
bordetella;
         4.   The animal is in good health and adoptable; and
         5.   At the discretion of the director.
      C.   The shelter may also engage in cooperative efforts with other
shelters and qualified rescue groups in placing animals for adoption or foster
care.
   AT LARGE: All wild animals and any livestock or domesticated animals, except
cats, off the premises of the owner or custodian of the animal and not under
immediate control of the owner or custodian are considered at large. In the
case of a dog, "immediate control" shall mean on a leash, or confined within a
vehicle or pet carrier/cage.
   BITE: An actual puncture, tear or abrasion of the skin inflicted by the
teeth of an animal.
   CATTERY: An establishment for boarding, breeding, buying, grooming or
selling cats on a nonprofit or commercial basis.
   CLAIMANT: An owner claiming an animal upon the animal's second impound
within a twelve (12) month period and upon any subsequent impound of that
animal.
   COMMERCIAL KENNEL: Any premises or establishment where four (4) or more
dogs, older than four (4) months, are kept for the purpose of boarding,
breeding, raising or training dogs for a fee or on a nonprofit or commercial
basis.
   DIRECTOR: The Santa Clara - Ivins public safety director.
   DISPOSITION: The adoption, transfer, owner return or euthanasia of an
animal.
   DIVISION: The division of animal control, which is within the public safety
department.
   DOMESTICATED ANIMALS: Animals accustomed to living in or about the
habitation of man that are not included in the definition of livestock or wild
animals.
   FERAL CAT: A cat usually born in the wild with no human contact before four
(4) to six (6) weeks of age, and/or a cat without owner identification of any
kind whose usual and consistent temperament is extreme fear of and resistance
to contact with people.
   GROOMING SALON: Any commercial establishment maintained for the purpose of
offering cosmetic services for animals.
   HOARDING: The accumulation of numerous animals which overwhelms the owner's
ability to provide even minimal standards of nutrition, sanitation and
veterinary care.
   LICENSE REQUIREMENTS: No person or persons at any one dwelling unit, as
defined in the zoning ordinance of the city, shall at any one time own or
license more than four (4) dogs in any combination, except as otherwise
provided herein.
   The sole exception shall apply where the person occupies a dwelling unit:
      A.   Located on one acre or more of land, or
      B.   Where the property adjoins private open space or agricultural zone
on at least one side.
   The purpose of this subsection is to minimize health risks and nuisance
issues for neighbors due to the keeping of dogs. This ordinance does not waive
compliance with any other provisions of this chapter or the city's nuisance
ordinances.
   Due to the difficulty in tracking ownership, the issuance of a dog license
by the city for more than the permitted number of dogs shall not be considered
a waiver of these limits, and full compliance with this section may still be
enforced.
   LIVESTOCK: Cattle, domesticated elk, bison, sheep, swine, goats, poultry,
llamas, alpacas, horses, mules, or other equines.
   NONREHABILITATABLE: Animals that are neither adoptable nor treatable,
vicious animals, or animals for whom euthanasia would be the most humane
alternative due to disease, injury or suffering that cannot reasonably be
alleviated.
   ORDINANCES: Santa Clara city ordinances.
   PERSON: An individual, an entity or a representative of an entity.
   PET SHOP: Any establishment selling pet supplies and/or accessories, not
part of a kennel or cattery, wherein dogs, cats, birds or other pets for sale
are kept or displayed.
   PROOF OF STERILIZATION: A written document signed by a veterinarian licensed
under Utah Code Annotated title 58, chapter 28, the Utah veterinary practice
act, stating:
   A.   A specified animal has been sterilized;
   B.   The date on which the sterilization was performed; and
   C.   The location where the sterilization was performed.
   PROVOCATION: Any deliberate act by a person toward a dog or other animal
done with the intent to tease, torment, abuse, assault or otherwise cause a
reaction by the dog or other animal; provided, however, that any act by a
person done with the intent to discourage or prevent a dog or other animal from
attacking shall not be considered provocation.
   QUALIFIED RESCUE ORGANIZATION: A nonprofit, as defined in section 501(c)(3)
of the internal revenue code. An organization founded to rescue homeless pets.
The organization must have the ability to provide reasonable care, medical
care, rehabilitation, lifetime care, and/or the possibility of future adoption.
   QUARANTINE: The isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that
the animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized
persons.
   RECIPIENT: The person to whom the animal shelter transfers an animal for
adoption.
   REHABILITATABLE: Those animals six (6) weeks of age or older that, at or
subsequent to the time the animal is impounded or otherwise taken into
possession, have manifested signs of behavioral or temperamental challenges but
may be retrained by a qualified rescue organization/trainer and may be adopted
with signed waiver/disclosure or transferred to a qualified rescue
organization.
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A person eighteen (18) years of age or older, who is
employed or otherwise capable of providing the physical, medical and emotional
needs of the adopted animal. A person found guilty or who pled no contest to
violating the provisions of this title or any other federal, state or local law
concerning the abuse of or cruelty to animals, within five (5) years of the
animal adoption application, is not a "responsible adult" for the purposes of
this title.
   REVIEW PANEL: The Review Panel shall be composed of a minimum of three (3)
individuals and may include the Director, one or more Animal Control Officers
as appointed by the Director, a representative from a recognized animal shelter
support group, and/or any other person(s) selected by the Director who possess
specific knowledge, expertise, or training relevant to the case under review.
The panel shall serve in an advisory capacity to assist in making informed
decisions regarding the disposition of animals. The Director shall consider the
input and recommendations of the Review Panel but shall retain final authority
and make the final determination in each case.
   RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE: An establishment which offers boarding and/or
riding instruction for any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro, or which offers
such animals for hire.
   STERILIZATION AGREEMENT: A written animal sterilization agreement between
the city and a citizen.
   STERILIZATION DEPOSIT: The portion of a fee charged by the animal shelter to
a recipient or claimant of an unsterilized animal to ensure the animal is
timely sterilized in accordance with a sterilization agreement between the
recipient or the claimant and the animal shelter.
   STERILIZED: An animal has been surgically altered, either by the spaying of
a female animal or by the neutering of a male animal, so it is unable to
reproduce.
   TRANSFER: The animal shelter, gives away, places for adoption or otherwise
transfers an animal to a recipient.
   TREATABLE: Any dog or cat that is not adoptable but that could become
adoptable with reasonable efforts.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal which has bitten a person or other animal without
provocation, or has a known propensity to attack or bite human beings or other
animals, or approaches any person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public
grounds or place in a threatening and terrorizing manner in an apparent
attitude of attack.
   WILD ANIMAL: Any animal that is not livestock or a domesticated animal and
shall specifically include, no matter how domesticated: all alligators and
crocodiles; all bears; all cats other than the commonly accepted domesticated
cats, including, but not limited to, cheetah, leopard, lion, lynx, panther,
cougar, mountain lion, bobcat, and tiger; all dogs other than domesticated
dogs, including, but not limited to, wolf, part wolf, fox, part fox, coyote,
and part coyote; all porcupines; all nonhuman primates; all raccoons; all
skunks; all venomous fish and piranha; all venomous snakes and lizards; and all
weasels other than ferrets.
(Ord. 2025-15: Ord. 2015-16)
6.01.030: DIVISION OF ANIMAL CONTROL:
There is hereby established a division of animal control (the "division")
within the Santa Clara - Ivins public safety department with power to cite
owners of, apprehend, and/or impound animals found in violation of this title,
and to otherwise carry out and enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord.
2015-16)
6.01.040: POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   The director, or his designee, shall establish and update, from time to
time, written policies and procedures which implement the provisions of this
title and which govern the administration of the animal shelter.
   B.   The director, or his designee, shall also establish and update, from
time to time, written guidelines concerning volunteer opportunities available
at or through the animal shelter. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.01.050: ANIMALS AT LARGE:
No animals shall be allowed to run at large or to be herded, tethered or staked
out upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city and all
such animals so found may be impounded and/or the owner of the animal cited.
(Ord. 2015-16)
CHAPTER 6.02
DOG LICENSING
SECTION:
6.02.010: License Requirements; Fees
6.02.020: License Tag
6.02.030: Exemptions
6.02.010: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS; FEES:
   A.   License Required: All dogs must be licensed each calendar year, except
as otherwise provided herein, to a responsible adult of the age of eighteen
(18) years or older.
   B.   Time Limit: Any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog shall
obtain a license for such animal within thirty (30) days after the age of six
(6) months; or in the case of a dog over six (6) months, within ten (10) days
after acquisition of the dog or locating within the Santa Clara City limits.
   C.   Application: License applications must be submitted on a standard form
which requests name, address and telephone number of the applicant; breed, sex,
color and age of the animal; whether the animal has been sterilized, including
proof of sterilization; and rabies information, including vaccination date and
expiration. The application shall be accompanied by the prescribed license fee
and by a current rabies vaccination certificate. Rabies vaccinations shall be
given by a licensed veterinarian and comply with the requirements of chapter
6.03 of this title.
   D.   Fee For License: The license fees shall be in such amounts as
established by resolution of the city council from time to time.
   E.   Term Of License: The license shall be effective from the date of
purchase through the expiration date set forth on the rabies vaccination
certificate presented at the time of initial licensing or renewal. Failure to
renew the license by submitting a new rabies vaccination certificate and
renewal fee prior to the license expiring will result in the automatic
revocation thereof. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.02.020: LICENSE TAG:
   A.   Required Attachment: Upon payment of the license fee, the city shall
issue to the owner a certificate and a tag for each animal licensed. The tag
shall have stamped thereon the license number corresponding with the tag number
on the certificate. The owner shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of
the animal and see that the collar and the tag are constantly worn. Failure to
attach the tag as required shall be in violation of this chapter, except that
animals which are kept primarily for show purposes are exempt from wearing the
tag.
   B.   Transferability; Lost Tags: Dog tags are not transferable from one
animal to another. No refunds shall be made on any animal license fee for any
reason whatsoever. Replacements for lost or destroyed tags shall be issued upon
payment of a fee to the city in such amount as established by resolution of the
city council.
   C.   Removal Prohibited: Any person removing or causing to be removed the
collar, harness or tag from any licensed dog without the consent of the owner
or keeper thereof, except a licensed veterinarian or officer who removes such
for medical and other reasons, shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord.
2015-16)
6.02.030: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The licensing requirements of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Dogs licensed elsewhere whose owners are nonresidents and are
temporarily (up to 30 days) within the jurisdiction; and
      2.   Individual dogs within a properly licensed kennel or other such
establishment when such dogs are held for resale.
   B.   The fee provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Service dogs properly trained and certified to assist disabled
persons if such dogs are actually being used for assistance by disabled
persons;
      2.   Dogs specially trained to assist officials of government agencies in
the performance of their duties and which are owned by such agencies.
      3.   Exceptions for animals in other specific circumstances that may be
approved by the director on a case by case basis, for good cause shown.
Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to exempt any dog from having
a current rabies vaccination. (Ord. 2015-16)
CHAPTER 6.03
RABIES CONTROL
SECTION:
6.03.010: Duty To Report Bites
6.03.020: Vaccination
6.03.030: Boarding At Commercial Kennels
6.03.040: Quarantine
6.03.010: DUTY TO REPORT BITES:
Any person having knowledge of any individual or animal having been bitten by
an animal of a species subject to rabies shall report the incident immediately
to the division, giving the name and address of the person bitten, or whose
animal was bitten, and of the owner or custodian of the biting animal, if
available. Failure to provide such information or otherwise assist the division
in discovering possible exposure to rabies or in ascertaining the immunization
status of an animal shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.03.020: VACCINATION:
   A.   Rabies vaccination is required for dogs. The owner or custodian of a
dog shall have said animal vaccinated within thirty (30) days after it reaches
the age of six (6) months. Unvaccinated dogs over six (6) months of age
acquired by the owner or brought into Santa Clara must be vaccinated within
thirty (30) days. All adult dogs shall be revaccinated thereafter every thirty
six (36) months. This provision shall not apply to veterinarian or kennel
operators temporarily maintaining on their premises animals owned by others.
   B.   Each veterinarian, when vaccinating any animal for rabies, shall
complete a certificate of rabies vaccination (in duplicate) which includes the
following information:
      1.   Owner's name and address;
      2.   A description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name);
      3.   The date of vaccination;
      4.   The rabies vaccination tag number;
      5.   The type of rabies vaccine administered; and
      6.   The manufacturer's serial number of vaccine.
   C.   A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the owner and
original retained by the issuing veterinarian. Any unvaccinated animal shall be
impounded but may be reclaimed prior to disposition by payment of impound fees
and by obtaining a rabies vaccination within seventy two (72) hours of release.
Any adoptable animal not reclaimed within the minimum impound period shall be
subject to "disposition" as defined and set forth herein. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.03.030: BOARDING AT COMMERCIAL KENNELS:
Commercial kennel operators within Santa Clara City must be shown proof of
current vaccination before accepting an animal for boarding. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.03.040: QUARANTINE:
   A.   An animal that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies, and every
animal bitten by another animal afflicted with rabies or that has been exposed
to rabies, shall be reported by the owner, as set forth above, and shall
immediately be confined in a secure place by the owner. The owner shall turn
over the animal to the division upon demand, whereupon the division shall
quarantine the animal for observation for a period of not less than ten (10)
days. The owner of the animal shall bear all costs of quarantining the animal.
Although the animal shelter or a veterinary kennel shall be the normal place
for quarantine, other arrangements, including confinement by the owner, may be
made by the director or his designee if the animal had a current rabies
vaccination at the time the bite was inflicted or if there are other special
circumstances justifying an exception. A person who has custody of an animal
under quarantine shall immediately notify the division if the animal shows any
signs of sickness or abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement.
It shall be unlawful for any person who has custody of a quarantined animal to
fail or refuse to allow a health or animal control officer to make an
inspection or examination during the period of quarantine. If the animal dies
within ten (10) days from the date of the bite, the person having custody shall
immediately notify the division who shall immediately remove and deliver the
head of such animal to the state health laboratory to be examined for rabies.
If, at the end of the ten (10) day period, the director or his designee
examines the animal and finds no sign of rabies, the animal may be released to
the owner, or in the case of a stray, it shall be placed for adoption or
otherwise disposed of as provided in this title.
   B.   In the case of an unvaccinated animal species subject to rabies which
is known to have been bitten by a known rabid animal, said bitten or exposed
animal should be immediately euthanized. If the owner is unwilling to euthanize
the bitten or exposed animal, the animal shall be immediately isolated and
quarantined for six (6) months under veterinary supervision, the cost of such
confinement to be paid in advance by the owner. The animal shall be euthanized
if the owner does not comply herewith. (Ord. 2015-16)
CHAPTER 6.05
PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
SECTION:
6.05.010: Harboring Stray Animals
6.05.020: Animals At Large (Prohibited Acts)
6.05.030: Tethering
6.05.040: Female Animal In Heat
6.05.050: Places Prohibited To Animals
6.05.060: Attacking Dogs
6.05.070: Vicious Animals
6.05.080: Animal Waste Disposal
6.05.090: Carcass Disposal
6.05.100: Cruelty To Animals
6.05.110: Dogs And Cats Disturbing Neighborhood
6.05.010: HARBORING STRAY ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except an animal shelter, to harbor or
keep any lost, abandoned or strayed animal. Whenever any animal shall be found
which appears to be lost, abandoned or strayed, it shall be the duty of the
finder, within forty eight (48) hours, to either return the animal to its
owner, if known, or to notify the division so the animal can be impounded as
provided in this title. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.05.020: ANIMALS AT LARGE (PROHIBITED ACTS):
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to allow such
animal, other than domestic cats, to run at large or to be herded, tethered or
staked out upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city. All
such animals so found may be impounded and/or the owner of the animal cited.
The owner or person charged with responsibility for an animal found running at
large shall be strictly liable for a violation of this section regardless of
the precautions taken to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of
whether or not they knows that the animal is running at large.
(Ord. 2025-15: Ord. 2015-16)
6.05.030: TETHERING:
   A.   Tethering may be allowed up to a maximum of ten (10) hours per day with
adequate food, water and shelter from extreme temperatures (cold or hot).
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to chain, stake out, tether or
otherwise confine any animal in such a manner that may be dangerous to the
animal or that would allow the animal to go beyond the owner's property line.
(Ord. 2015-16)
6.05.040: FEMALE ANIMAL IN HEAT:
   It shall be unlawful for the custodian of any female animal in heat to fail
to confine such animal in a secure area or enclosure so as to prevent it from
coming into contact with other animals and creating a nuisance.
(Ord. 2025-15: Ord. 2015-16)
6.05.050: PLACES PROHIBITED TO ANIMALS:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit any animal in or about
any establishment or place of business where food or food products are sold or
displayed, regardless of how the animal may be restrained, except for certified
service dogs actually being used to assist disabled persons, and dogs assisting
governmental officials. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.05.060: ATTACKING DOGS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to allow the
dog to attack, bite or chase any person, or any domesticated animal. The
harming or killing of a dog by any person while the dog is engaged in any act
prohibited by this subsection, if reasonably necessary to stop the dog's
actions, shall not be a violation of any other provision of this title,
provided such killing in no way endangers another's safety or property.
   B.   When there have been two (2) reported attacks by the same dog, a review
panel will be convened where the dog may be deemed vicious. Regardless of
number of attacks or bites, a review panel may be convened on a case by case
basis as determined by the director. The officer may impound the dog pending a
final determination and shall give written notice to the owner that the dog may
be euthanized.
      1.   The offending dog's actions shall be scrutinized by the review
panel.
      2.   After review by the review panel the director shall render a final
decision whether or not the dog has been determined to be vicious. The director
shall then cause to be mailed or hand delivered to the owner written notice of
his decision.
   C.   If a dog is determined to be vicious, the owner may oppose the dog
being euthanized by making a written request for a hearing to the city
recorder's office within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the notice. If
mailed, the notice shall be deemed received five (5) calendar days after the
date of mailing. Upon receiving a written request for a hearing, a hearing
shall be scheduled before the city's administrative law judge as soon as
reasonably possible.
      1.   At the hearing, the administrative law judge shall allow the
director and the owner, or the representative of either, to present any
relevant evidence, including reliable hearsay evidence, and shall then, based
on the evidence presented, affirm or overturn the decision to euthanize the
dog.
      2.   If the administrative law judge affirms the decision, the director
or his designee shall euthanize the dog as soon as possible. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.05.070: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a vicious animal within
the city.
   A.   Any person may petition to have an animal classified as vicious by
filing with the division a written "petition to classify an animal as vicious"
on a form provided by the division.
      1.   Upon receipt of a properly executed petition, the director shall
cause a copy thereof to be mailed or hand delivered to the animal's owner. The
owner shall then have ten (10) calendar days from the date of receipt to submit
a written response to the allegations of the petition. If mailed, the petition
shall be deemed received five (5) calendar days after the date of mailing.
      2.   Upon receipt of the owner's written response, if any, the review
panel shall review the case to recommend if the animal is in fact vicious.
After review by the review panel, the director shall decide whether the animal
is to be classified as vicious.
      3.   The director shall then cause to be mailed or hand delivered to the
owner written notice of his decision.
      4.   If an animal is determined to be vicious, the owner may oppose the
animal being euthanized by making a written request for a hearing to the city
recorder's office within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the notice. If
mailed, the notice shall be deemed received five (5) calendar days after the
date of mailing. Upon receiving a written request for a hearing, a hearing
shall be scheduled before the city's administrative law judge as soon as
reasonably possible.
      5.   At the hearing, the administrative law judge shall allow the animal
control officer, the petitioner and the owner, or their representatives, and
other witnesses where applicable, to present any relevant evidence, including
reliable hearsay evidence, and shall then, based on the evidence presented,
affirm or overturn the decision of the director.
      6.   If the administrative law judge overturns the decision, the animal
will be returned to the owner.
      7.   If the administrative law judge affirms the decision, the director
or his designee shall euthanize the animal as soon as possible. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.05.080: ANIMAL WASTE DISPOSAL:
It shall be considered an infraction for the owner or custodian of an animal to
permit the animal to defecate upon a public street, sidewalk, park or other
area, or upon the property of another unless the owner or custodian removes and
properly disposes of all animal waste that may result. In the case of farm/
recreational animals such as a horse, the owner should dismount and remove the
waste or return as soon as practical and reasonable to remove the waste. (Ord.
2015-16)
6.05.090: CARCASS DISPOSAL:
   A.   General: It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian, or if
ownership cannot be ascertained, for any person causing the death of an animal,
to allow the carcass of a dead animal to remain anywhere in the city, whether
interred or otherwise, and whether on private or public property. Disposal
shall be at the county sanitary landfill by arrangement directly with the
operator thereof who shall effect an appropriate interment at the landfill
site. This subsection shall have no application to animals killed for
consumption purposes, although unused portions of the carcass must be disposed
of in accordance herewith.
   B.   Exception For Agricultural Properties: An owner of property upon which
at least two (2) contiguous acres is used for agricultural purposes, and which
is located in either the RA or OS zone of the city, may by sanitary interment
upon that property dispose of the carcass of an animal which has died upon the
same property. Said interment shall be completed within one day of discovery of
the animal's death.
   C.   Domesticated Animals: The foregoing notwithstanding, upon the death of
a domesticated animal, the owner thereof may bury the animal on his/her private
property within one day of the animal's death. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.05.100: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Cruelty to animals is prohibited. Cruelty shall consist of those acts
designated in Utah Code Annotated sections 76-9-301 and 76-9-301.1 through 76-
9-301.8, together with injurious hobbling and malicious impounding. The
penalties prescribed by the Utah code shall apply.
   B.   The operator of a motor vehicle that strikes and injures any domestic
animal shall comply with the state law requirements as defined in Utah Code
Annotated 41-6a-401.7. For the purpose of this section an animal will be
considered private property.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to take or kill any birds, or to
rob or destroy any nest, eggs or young of any bird, other than fowl qualifying
as a domesticated animal if allowed within the applicable zoning district.
(Ord. 2015-16)
6.05.110: DOGS AND CATS DISTURBING NEIGHBORHOOD:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any dog or cat which by
loud, continued or frequent barking, howling, yelping, meowing, screeching or
by noxious or offensive odors shall annoy, disturb or endanger the health and
welfare of any person or neighborhood. This section shall not apply to the city
animal shelter or veterinary hospitals. (Ord. 2015-16)
CHAPTER 6.06
IMPOUNDING AND ADOPTION
SECTION:
6.06.010: Authority; Applicable Animals
6.06.020: Information Required
6.06.030: Period Of Impound
6.06.040: Impound Fees; Waiver
6.06.050: Redemption
6.06.060: Adoption
6.06.010: AUTHORITY; APPLICABLE ANIMALS:
Animal control officers shall place animals taken into custody in the animal
shelter. The following animals may be taken into custody and impounded:
   A.   Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
title;
   B.   Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this title;
   C.   Any animal which is by this title required to be licensed and is not
licensed or is not wearing a tag, which shall be presumed to be unlicensed for
purposes of this section;
   D.   Any abandoned or stray animal;
   E.   Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the
requirements of this title; and
   F.   Any vicious animal. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.06.020: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
The impounding of any animal shall require the following information to be kept
by the division:
   A.   A complete description of the animal, including tag numbers if any;
   B.   The manner and date of impound;
   C.   The location of the pick up and name of the officer picking up the
animal;
   D.   The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the
animal shelter facility;
   E.   The name and address of the redeemer, adopter or qualified rescue
organization the animal is released to, and the date thereof;
   F.   All applicable violations of this title;
   G.   All applicable fees and penalties; and
   H.   All expenses accrued during impoundment. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.06.030: PERIOD OF IMPOUND:
   Domesticated animals shall be impounded for a minimum period of five (5)
working days before further disposition, unless voluntarily relinquished by the
owner or custodian in which case there shall be no minimum period of impound.
Notice shall be deemed given when sent to the last known address of the listed
owner. All adoptable dogs and cats, except for those quarantined or confined by
court order, that have not been reclaimed by their owners within the minimum
impound period are then eligible for adoption, placement with a qualified
rescue organization or placement into foster care.
   A.   After one hundred twenty (120) days an animal, not adopted or placed,
may have its status evaluated by the review panel.
   B.   Regardless of length of time in the shelter, an animal who begins to
manifest aberrant or aggressive behavior or whose health is deteriorating may
be evaluated by the review panel.
   C.   If determined that an animal is no longer adoptable, transferable or
capable of rehabilitation, the animal may be euthanized as approved by the
director. This paragraph shall be entirely subject to, and may be modified or
terminated pursuant to, the terms of any written agreement entered between the
city.
(Ord. 2025-15: Ord. 2015-16)
6.06.040: IMPOUND FEES; WAIVER:
   A.   Impound fees shall be in such amounts as established by resolution of
the city council from time to time.
   B.   The director or his designee may waive an impound fee under appropriate
circumstances for animals quarantined for possible rabies, but boarding charges
shall be paid in any event. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.06.050: REDEMPTION:
The owner of any impounded animal, who is a responsible adult, may redeem his/
her impounded animal before disposition, upon payment of the following:
   A.   The impound fees;
   B.   The daily board charges;
   C.   Veterinary costs incurred during the impound period, including rabies
vaccination;
   D.   License fees, if required; and
   E.   Any penalties imposed for violation of this title. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.06.060: ADOPTION:
   A.   The director or his designee shall establish written placement
guidelines for the adoption of impounded animals which are in accordance with
this title.
   B.   Upon the expiration of the minimum period of impound, adoptable animals
may be given up for adoption to responsible adults, upon a showing that they
can provide an adequate home for the animal. Disposition by adoption shall
relieve the city of further responsibility to any party for the animal. The
city reserves the right to refuse any adoption. No warranty of any type may be
given as to the health, temperament or suitability of the animal so adopted.
   C.   Records shall be kept of any person to whom an animal is given. No
animal shall be given to a former owner, directly or indirectly, without
payment by the recipient of all impound and other fees applicable to
redemption.
   D.   Adoption fees shall be in such amounts as established by resolution of
the city council. However, the director may reduce or waive such adoption fees
under appropriate circumstances, such as special animal adoption events or when
the animal shelter is full.
   E.   Any person denied the right to adopt an animal may appeal the denial by
filing a written notice of appeal with the director within five (5) working
days of the denial. The written notice of appeal shall contain the applicant's
name, mailing address, daytime telephone number, and the relief sought. Upon
receipt of the notice of appeal, a hearing shall be scheduled before the city's
administrative law judge as soon as possible. At the hearing, the
administrative law judge shall allow the officer and the petitioner, or the
representative of either, to present any relevant evidence, including reliable
hearsay evidence, and shall then, based on the evidence presented, affirm or
overturn the decision to deny the adoption. During the appeal process, the
adoptee animal shall be retained by the shelter. If the administrative law
judge affirms the denial, the adoptee animal shall be treated as any other
animal. If the administrative law judge overturns the denial, the adoptee
animal shall be adopted to the petitioner as soon as reasonably practical.
(Ord. 2015-16)
CHAPTER 6.07
STERILIZATION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
6.07.010: Sterilization Required; Written Sterilization Agreement
6.07.020: Sterilization Deposit
6.07.030: Failure To Comply With Sterilization Agreement
6.07.040: Deposit; When Required For Redemption By Claimant
6.07.050: Penalty; Appeal
6.07.010: STERILIZATION REQUIRED; WRITTEN STERILIZATION AGREEMENT:
   A.   The animal shelter may not transfer an animal that has not been
sterilized, except as provided below.
   B.   The animal shelter may transfer an animal for adoption that has not
been sterilized only if:
      1.   Recipient signs the animal shelter's written sterilization agreement
which states that the animal is not sterilized and the recipient agrees to be
responsible for ensuring the animal is sterilized:
         a.   Within thirty (30) days after the sterilization agreement is
signed, if the animal is six (6) months of age or older; or
         b.   If the animal is younger than six (6) months of age, within
thirty (30) days after the animal becomes six (6) months of age; and
      2.   The animal shelter receives from the recipient a sterilization
deposit as provided under the terms of the written sterilization agreement
executed by the recipient under this section. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.07.020: STERILIZATION DEPOSIT:
   A.   Sterilization deposits shall reflect the average reduced cost of a
sterilization of an animal, based on the gender and weight of the animal, but
the deposit may not be less than twenty five dollars ($25.00). The amount of
the sterilization deposit shall be set by resolution of the city council from
time to time.
   B.   The sterilization deposit shall be refundable to the recipient if proof
of sterilization of the animal within the appropriate time limits is presented
to the animal shelter not more than three (3) months after the date the animal
is sterilized.
   C.   The sterilization deposit shall be forfeited to the animal shelter if
proof of sterilization is not presented to the animal shelter in compliance
with this section.
   D.   If a female dog or cat and her litter are transferred to one person, a
sterilization deposit is required only for the female dog or cat.
   E.   All sterilization deposits forfeited or unclaimed under this section
shall be retained by the animal shelter and shall be used by the animal shelter
only for:
      1.   A program to sterilize animals, which may include a sliding scale
fee program;
      2.   A public education program to reduce and prevent overpopulation of
animals and the related costs to the city;
      3.   A follow up program to assure that animals transferred by the animal
shelter are sterilized in accordance with the sterilization agreement; and
      4.   Any additional costs incurred by the animal shelter in the
administration of the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.07.030: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH STERILIZATION AGREEMENT:
If a recipient or claimant fails to comply with the sterilization agreement:
   A.   The failure is grounds for seizure and impoundment of the animal by the
animal shelter;
   B.   The recipient relinquishes all ownership rights regarding the animal
and any claim to expenses incurred in maintenance and care of the animal; and
   C.   The recipient forfeits the sterilization deposit. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.07.040: DEPOSIT; WHEN REQUIRED FOR REDEMPTION BY CLAIMANT:
   A.   Upon the second impound within a twelve (12) month period, and upon any
subsequent impound of an animal that is claimed by its owner, the animal
shelter may release the impounded animal to its owner only upon payment of all
impound fees required by the shelter and:
      1.   Receipt of proof the animal has been sterilized; or
      2.   A sterilization deposit.
   B.   The sterilization deposit shall be refunded to the claimant only if the
claimant provides proof of sterilization to the animal shelter within thirty
(30) days of release of the animal to the claimant. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.07.050: PENALTY; APPEAL:
   A.   Penalty:
      1.   A person who knowingly commits any of the violations set forth in
this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) on a first violation, and a civil penalty of not less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) on any second or subsequent violation.
      2.   The director or designee shall impose the civil penalties under this
section.
   B.   Persons Subject: A person is subject to the civil penalties under this
section who:
      1.   Falsifies any proof of sterilization submitted for the purpose of
compliance with this chapter;
      2.   Provides to the animal shelter or a licensed veterinarian inaccurate
information regarding ownership of any animal required to be submitted for
sterilization under this chapter;
      3.   Submits to the animal shelter false information regarding
sterilization fees or fee schedules; or
      4.   Issues a check for insufficient funds for any sterilization deposit
required of the person or claimant under this chapter.
   C.   Appeal: Any person or claimant who contests a civil penalty imposed
under this section may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the city
recorder's office within ten (10) days of the imposition of the penalty. The
notice of appeal shall contain the person's or claimant's name, mailing
address, daytime telephone number, and the relief sought. Upon receipt of the
notice of appeal, the matter shall be scheduled for a hearing before the city's
administrative law judge as soon as possible. At the hearing, the
administrative law judge shall allow the animal control officer and the person
or claimant, or a representative of either, to present any relevant evidence,
including reliable hearsay evidence, and shall then, based on the evidence
presented, affirm, modify or overturn the imposition of penalty. (Ord. 2015-16)
CHAPTER 6.08
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
6.08.010: Enforcement Authority
6.08.020: Powers And Duties
6.08.030: Right Of Entry For Enforcement
6.08.040: Interfering With Officers Prohibited
6.08.050: Penalties
6.08.010: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The director, his/her authorized designees, and animal control officers are
empowered to apprehend, transport and impound any animal found in violation of
this title, including licensable animals for which no license has been procured
in accordance with this title, or any licensed or unlicensed animals for any
other violation of this title, and are empowered to issue criminal citations
and/or notices of violation for any violations of this title. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.08.020: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The director shall employ and designate those employees and volunteers within
the public safety department who shall perform the duties of animal control
officers. Animal control officers shall be authorized to enforce the provisions
of this title in all respects, including, but not limited to, the apprehension
and impoundment of animals found in violation of this title and to issue
criminal citations and/or notices of violation for any violations of this
title. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.08.030: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR ENFORCEMENT:
In the enforcement of this title, any peace officer or animal control officer
is hereby authorized to enter into the open yard of any person to secure or
take possession of any animal which is reasonably believed by such officer to
then and there, in the presence and plain view of such officer, be in violation
of this title. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.08.040: INTERFERING WITH OFFICERS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally interfere with the
director or any officer in the lawful discharge of his/her duties as prescribed
in this title. For purposes of this title, the term "interfere" shall include,
without limitation: failing to hand over to, or release to, an officer an
identifiable animal which has been pursued but not captured by such officer;
failing to make payment of agreed upon fees that have been deferred by the
director; failing to meet the agreed upon conditions of a fee waiver, reduction
or deferment; failing to comply with an abatement order lawfully issued by the
director; or failing to meet the conditions imposed by a notice of violation
and stipulation. (Ord. 2015-16)
6.08.050: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person violating the provisions of this title, either by failing to
do those acts required herein or by doing any act prohibited herein, shall be
subject to the following:
      1.   A class C infraction, unless expressly stated otherwise herein;
      2.   Restitution of the cost of all damages incurred by anyone whose
person, property or animal has been injured or destroyed by a dog or other
animal.
   B.   In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, penalties
for violations of this title may be pursued under the city's administrative
code enforcement program.
   C.   Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2015-16)
CHAPTER 6.09
EXOTIC ANIMALS
SECTION:
6.09.010: Exotic Animals Prohibited
6.09.010: EXOTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Every person who harbors and/or maintains any exotic animals inside the
city limits of the city of Santa Clara, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
   B.   Exotic animals shall include wild animals as defined in this title, as
well as those categories of animals, reptiles, insects or birds as defined in
the city's zoning ordinance in section
17.08.010 of this code. (Ord. 2015-16)
TITLE 7
RESERVED
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
CHAPTER 8.04
NUISANCES
SECTION:
Article I. Nuisances Generally
8.04.010: Nuisances Defined
8.04.020: Author Of Nuisance Defined
8.04.030: Declaration Of Nuisance
8.04.040: Enumeration Of Nuisances
8.04.050: Toilet Or Sewer Facilities
8.04.060: Restrictions On Blocking Water
Article II. Nuisances On Property
8.04.070: Definition Of Nuisance
8.04.080: Duty Of Maintenance Of Private Property
8.04.090: Storage Of Personal Property
8.04.100: Abatement Of Nuisance By Owners
Article III. Administrative Notices; Hearings;
Disposal Of Nuisance; Lien; Penalty For Violation
8.04.110: Appointment And Duties Of Inspector
8.04.120: Hearing
8.04.130: Failure To Comply
8.04.140: Itemized Statement
8.04.150: Failure To Make Payment
8.04.160: Collection By Lawsuit
8.04.170: Collection Through Taxes
8.04.180: Criminal Proceeding
8.04.190: Penalty For Failure To Comply
ARTICLE I. NUISANCES GENERALLY
8.04.010: NUISANCES DEFINED:
Whatever is dangerous to human life or health and whatever renders soil, air,
water, or food impure or unwholesome is declared to be a nuisance and unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person either as an owner, agent, or occupant to create,
or aid in creating or contributing to or maintaining nuisance. (Prior code §
10-311)
8.04.020: AUTHOR OF NUISANCE DEFINED:
Where a nuisance exists upon property and is the outgrowth of the usual,
natural, or necessary use of the property, the landlord or his or her agent,
the tenant or his or her agent, and all other persons having control of the
property on which such nuisance exists shall be deemed to be the authors
thereof and shall be equally liable and responsible. Where any such nuisance
shall arise from the unusual or unnecessary use of such property or from the
business thereon conducted, then the occupants and all other persons
contributing to the continuance of such nuisance shall be deemed the authors.
(Prior code § 10-312)
8.04.030: DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
   A.   Every act or condition made, permitted, allowed or continued in
violation of section
8.04.010 of this article, is declared to be a nuisance and may be abated and
punished as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Nuisances include:
      1.   Befouling water in any spring, stream, well, or water source
supplying water for culinary purposes;
      2.   Allowing any privy, vault or cesspool or other individual wastewater
disposal system to become a menace to health or a source of odors to air or
water;
      3.   Permitting any garbage container to remain on premises when it has
become unclean and offensive;
      4.   Allowing vegetable waste, garbage, litter, filth or refuse of any
nature to accumulate within or upon any private alley, yard or area except when
it is temporarily deposited for immediate removal;
      5.   Permitting the accumulation of manure in any stable, stall, feed
yard, yard, or in any other building or area in which any animals are kept;
      6.   Permitting any slaughter house, market, meat shop, stable, feed
yard, or other place or building wherein any animals are slaughtered, kept,
fed, or sold to remain unclean or in any state or condition detrimental to
health or creating a nuisance because of odors, or in which flies or rodents
breed;
      7.   Discharging or placing any offensive water, liquid waste, or refuse
of any kind into any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash, natural
watercourse, ditch, canal, or any vacant lot or which as the result of
continued discharge will tender the place of discharge offensive or likely to
become so;
      8.   Keeping or collecting any stale or putrid grease or other offensive
matter;
      9.   Having or permitting upon any premises any fly or mosquito producing
condition;
      10.   Keeping any drinking vessel for public use without providing a
method of decontamination between uses;
      11.   Permitting or performing any ablutions in or near any public
drinking fountain;
      12.   Failing to furnish any dwelling house, boarding house, or factory
or other place of employment with such privy vaults, water closets, sinks or
other facilities as may be required to maintain the same in sanitary condition;
      13.   Neglecting or refusing to discontinue use of, clean out, disinfect,
and fill up all privy vaults and cesspools or other individual waste water
disposal systems within twenty (20) days after notice from any enforcement
officer or employee of the city;
      14.   Permitting any lot or excavation to become the repository of
stagnant water or any decaying or offensive substances;
      15.   Obstructing or tending to obstruct or interfere with or render
dangerous for passage any street or sidewalks, lake, stream, drainage, canal or
basin, or any public park without first obtaining the written permission of the
city council. (Prior code § 10-313)
8.04.040: ENUMERATION OF NUISANCES:
The types of nuisances above stated shall be deemed in addition to and in no
way a limitation of the nuisances subject to this chapter. (Prior code § 10-
314)
8.04.050: TOILET OR SEWER FACILITIES:
All toilet or sewer facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the ordinances of the city. All such facilities that do not
comply with such provisions are declared to be a nuisance and are subject to
abatement as herein prescribed. (Prior code § 10-315)
8.04.060: RESTRICTIONS ON BLOCKING WATER:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or persons to permit any drainage system,
canal, ditch, conduit or other watercourse of any kind or nature, natural or
artificial, to become so obstructed as to cause the water to back up and
overflow therefrom, or to become unsanitary.
   B.   Maintenance of any such watercourse in such condition shall constitute
a nuisance and the same shall be subject to abatement. (Prior code § 10-316)
ARTICLE II. NUISANCES ON PROPERTY
8.04.070: DEFINITION OF NUISANCE:
For the purpose of this article the term "nuisance" is defined to mean any
condition of use of premises or of building exteriors which are deleterious or
injurious, noxious or unsightly which includes, but is not limited to, keeping
or depositing on, or scattering over the premises any of the following:
   A.   Lumber, junk, trash, or debris;
   B.   Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as furniture,
stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers. (Prior code § 10-331)
8.04.080: DUTY OF MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall
maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or
maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in the value
of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located.
(Prior code § 10-332)
8.04.090: STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped and junked machinery,
implements, equipment or personal property of any kind which is no longer
safely usable for the purpose for which it was manufactured, for a period of
thirty (30) days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within this city, is
declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public safety.
   B.   No vacant lot platted R-1-10 shall be used for the storage of any item;
or as a dumping ground for rubbish, garbage, inoperable vehicles or equipment
or other waste. Violation of this provision is declared a nuisance. (Ord. 2010-
06: prior code § 10-333)
8.04.100: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY OWNERS:
The owner, owners, tenants, lessees or occupants of any lot within this city on
which such storage as defined in section
8.04.090 of this article is made, and also the owner, owners or lessees of the
above described personal property involved in such storage shall jointly and
severally abate such nuisance by its prompt removal into completely enclosed
and secured buildings to be used for such purposes, or otherwise to remove such
property from the city. (Prior code § 10-334)
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICES; HEARINGS;
DISPOSAL OF NUISANCE; LIEN; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION
8.04.110: APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF INSPECTOR:
   A.   There is established the position of nuisance inspector whose duties it
shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Until another person is
designated, the chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
More than one person may be appointed to act as inspector under this section.
   B.   The nuisance inspector is authorized to:
      1.   Perform all functions necessary to enforce the provisions of this
chapter;
      2.   Inspect or cause to be inspected, as often as needed, all buildings,
structures, lots or places for the purpose of determining whether such are in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   If he or she concludes there exists an objectionable condition in
violation of this chapter, the inspector shall:
      1.   Ascertain the names of the owners and occupants and descriptions of
the premises where such objects and conditions exist;
      2.   Serve notice in writing upon the owner and occupant of such
premises, either personally or by mailing notice, postage prepaid, addressed to
the owner and occupant at their last known post office addresses as disclosed
by the records of the county assessor or as otherwise ascertained, requiring
such owner or occupant, or both, as the case may be, to eradicate or destroy
and remove the same within such time as the inspector may designate, provided
that any person notified pursuant to this subsection shall be given at least
ten (10) but not more than twenty (20) days, as determined by the inspector
following the date of service of such notice, to correct the objectionable
condition. The notice shall:
         a.   Contain a specific statement of the nature of the violation and
generally describe the premises on which the violation exists,
         b.   Inform the owner, occupant or other person that in the event he
or she disagrees with the determination of the inspector and does not comply
with the provisions of the notice or that he or she objects to the factual or
legal basis for the notice, he or she may request in writing a hearing before
the city council at a time and place to be set by the city council. A written
application for a hearing shall state the time within which the person must
conform to the provisions of the notice,
         c.   Inform the person that in the event he or she fails or neglects
to correct the objectionable condition, the city will correct the objectionable
condition and will collect the costs of so correcting the objectionable
condition by either a court action, in which case he will be assessed such
costs together with reasonable attorney fees and court costs, or will charge
the cost of correcting the violation against the property as a tax;
      3.   In the event the owner or occupant makes such request for a hearing,
the city council shall set the time and place for hearing objections and the
recorder shall notify the owner, occupant, or other persons in writing of the
time and place at which they may appear and be heard. The hearing shall not be
heard within less than five (5) days from the date of service or mailing of the
notice of hearing. (Prior code § 10-351)
8.04.120: HEARING:
   A.   At the written request of an owner, occupant or other person having an
interest in property which is the subject of notice to remove or abate weeds,
objectionable conditions, or objects from the property, the city council shall
conduct an informal hearing (which need not be reported) wherein such persons
may present such evidence and argument as is pertinent to the question of
whether or not the removal or abatement of the objects or conditions is
properly within the purview of this chapter. The city council shall also permit
the presentation of evidence and argument by the inspector and other interested
parties. Thereafter within not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days,
the city council shall over the signature of the mayor or such other member of
the city council as it may designate render its written decision, a copy of
which shall be mailed to be served upon the owner or other person to whom
original notice was given by the inspector.
   B.   In the event the decision of the city council upholds the determination
of the inspector, the notice originally given by the inspector as above
provided shall be deemed to be sufficient to require the owner or occupant to
remove or abate the objectionable objects or conditions, and he or she shall
have up to ten (10) days from the date of notice of the decision within which
to conform thereto, unless additional time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, is
authorized by the inspector.
   C.   In the event that the decision of the city council either overrules or
modifies the determination of the inspector, the city council shall apprise the
owner or occupant of that fact and set forth the details and extent to which
the owner or occupant must make removal or other abatement of the objectionable
objects or conditions, if any. The owner or occupant shall be required to
conform to the decision of the city council within ten (10) days after service
or mailing of a copy of the decision, and the decision shall be deemed to be
the modified decision of the inspector unless additional time is authorized by
the city council.
   D.   The inspector shall file an amended notice and proof of service of
notice and file the same in the office of the county treasurer. (Prior code §
10-352)
8.04.130: FAILURE TO COMPLY:
In any owner, occupant or other person having an interest in land described in
such notice or decision to whom the notice was given shall fail or neglect to
conform to the requirements thereof relating to the eradication, destruction or
removal of such weeds, garbage, refuse, objects, or structures, the inspector
shall employ all necessary assistance to cause such objectionable objects or
condition to be removed or destroyed at the expense of the city. (Prior code §
10-353)
8.04.140: ITEMIZED STATEMENT:
The inspector shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in
the removal and destruction of nuisances, and shall mail a copy thereof to the
owner or occupant or both or to persons having an interest in the property,
demanding payment within twenty (20) days of the date of mailing. The notice
shall be deemed delivered when mailed by registered mail addressed to the last
known address of the property owner, occupant, or person having an interest in
the property. (Prior code § 10-354)
8.04.150: FAILURE TO MAKE PAYMENT:
In the event the owner, occupant or person having an interest in the property,
fails to make payment of the amount set forth in the statement to the city
treasurer within the twenty (20) days, the inspector either may cause suit to
be brought in an appropriate court of law or may refer the matter to the county
treasurer as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 10-355)
8.04.160: COLLECTION BY LAWSUIT:
In the event collection of expenses of destruction and removal are pursued
through the courts, the city shall sue for and receive judgment for all of said
expenses of destruction and removal, together with reasonable attorney fees,
interest and court costs, and shall execute upon such judgment in the manner
provided by law. (Prior code § 10-356)
8.04.170: COLLECTION THROUGH TAXES:
In the event that the inspector elects to refer the expenses of destruction or
removal to the county treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of the property
owner, he or she shall make in triplicate an itemized statement of all expenses
incurred in the destruction and removal of the same, and shall deliver the
three (3) copies of the statement to the county treasurer within ten (10) days
after the completion of the work of destroying or removing such weeds, refuse,
garbage, objects or structures. Thereupon, the cost of the work shall be
pursued by the county treasurer in accordance with the provisions of section
10-11-4, Utah Code Annotated 1953, and the recalcitrant owner shall have such
rights and shall be subject to such powers as are thereby granted. (Prior code
§ 10-357)
8.04.180: CRIMINAL PROCEEDING:
The commencement of criminal proceedings for the purpose of imposing penalties
for violations of this chapter shall not be conditioned upon prior issuance or
the granting to the defendant of an opportunity to abate or remove the
nuisance. The provisions of this chapter relating to notice and abatement shall
be deemed merely alternative and additional methods of securing conformity to
the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 10-358)
8.04.190: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY:
   A.   Any owner, occupant or person having an interest in the property
subject to this chapter who shall fail to comply with the notice or order given
pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor for each
offense and may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each and
every day such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for
compliance.
   B.   Compliance by any owner, occupant or person to whom a notice has been
given as provided in this chapter shall not be admissible in any criminal
proceeding brought pursuant to this section. (Ord. 98-08 § 2: prior code § 10-
359)
CHAPTER 8.08
FOOD
SECTION:
8.08.010: Unwholesome Food
8.08.010: UNWHOLESOME FOOD:
It is a class B misdemeanor for any person to sell or offer for sale any
unwholesome food or beverage which has been condemned by any government food
inspector. (Prior code § 10-223)
CHAPTER 8.12
LITTER AND HANDBILLS
SECTION:
8.12.010: Definitions
8.12.020: Litter In Public Places
8.12.030: Placement Of Litter In Receptacles To Prevent Scattering
8.12.040: Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited
8.12.050: Merchant's Duty To Keep Sidewalks Free Of Litter
8.12.060: Litter Thrown By Persons In Vehicles
8.12.070: Truck Loads Causing Litter
8.12.080: Litter In Parks
8.12.090: Litter In Lakes And Fountains
8.12.100: Throwing Or Distributing Commercial Handbills In Public Places
8.12.110: Placing Commercial And Noncommercial Handbills On Vehicles
8.12.120: Depositing Commercial And Noncommercial Handbills On Uninhabited Or
Vacant Premises
8.12.130: Prohibited Distribution Of Handbills Where Properly Posted
8.12.140: Distributing Commercial And Noncommercial Handbills At Inhabited
Private Premises
8.12.150: Exemption For Mail And Newspapers
8.12.160: Posting Notice Prohibited
8.12.170: Litter On Occupied Private Property
8.12.180: Litter On Vacant Lots
8.12.190: Handbills And Posters
8.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
   AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE: A public or private litter storage and collection
receptacle.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:
   A.   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or
thing;
   B.   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest in sales thereof;
   C.   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. However, the terms of this
clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either the same
is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety and good order, provided that nothing contained in
this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of
any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind without a
license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or
under any ordinance of this city; or
   D.   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any
person so engaged as advertiser, or distribution.
   GARBAGE: Waste from preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, condemned
food products and all refuse and waste from the handling, storage, preparation
and sale of produce. Garbage originates primarily in kitchens, stores, markets,
restaurants, hotels and other places where food is handled, stored, sold,
cooked or consumed.
   LITTER: "Garbage", "refuse", and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety, welfare or appearance of the city.
   NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general or local circulation or any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per
year, and sold to the public.
   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample, or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial
handbill or newspaper.
   PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other
public area in the city, owned or used by the city.
   REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and
solid market and industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
   VEHICLE: Every device in, on, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively on
stationary rails or tracks. (Prior code § 10-431)
8.12.020: LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or on any street, sidewalk or other
public place except:
   A.   In authorized receptacles for collection or in official municipal
garbage dumps; or
   B.   For collection as authorized by the city council. (Prior code § 10-432)
8.12.030: PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES TO PREVENT SCATTERING:
Persons placing litter in an authorized receptacle shall do so in such a manner
as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street,
sidewalk or other public place or on private property. (Prior code § 10-433)
8.12.040: SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep
the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (Prior code § 10-434)
8.12.050: MERCHANT'S DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS FREE OF LITTER:
No person owning or occupying any place of business shall sweep into or deposit
in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying places of business shall keep the sidewalk in front of
their business premises free of litter. (Prior code § 10-435)
8.12.060: LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES:
No person, while a driver of passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter on any street or other public place, or on private property. (Prior code
§ 10-436)
8.12.070: TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER:
No person shall drive move any truck or other vehicle unless such vehicle is
constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being
blown or deposited on any street, alley or other public place, nor shall any
person drive or move any vehicle or truck, the wheels or tires of which carry
onto or deposit on any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky
substances, litter or foreign matters of any kind. (Prior code § 10-437)
8.12.080: LITTER IN PARKS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park except in authorized
receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the park or on any street
or other public place. Where authorized receptacles are not provided, all such
litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. (Prior code §
10-438)
8.12.090: LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere. (Prior code § 10-439)
8.12.100: THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
on any sidewalk, street or other public place. Unless otherwise authorized by
the city council, it is an infraction for any person to hand out, distribute or
sell any commercial handbill in any public place, provided, however, that it
shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place for any
person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (Prior code § 10-
440)
8.12.110: PLACING COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES:
Unless otherwise authorized by the city council, no person shall throw or
deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any vehicle,
provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a
person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof a
noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept
it. (Prior code § 10-441)
8.12.120: DEPOSITING COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR
VACANT PREMISES:
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or
on any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant. (Prior code § 10-442)
8.12.130: PROHIBITED DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS WHERE PROPERLY POSTED:
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill on any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so
or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the
entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers or
Agents", "No Advertisement", or any similar notice, indicating any manner that
the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right
of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left on such premises.
(Prior code § 10-443)
8.12.140: DISTRIBUTING COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILLS AT INHABITED
PRIVATE PREMISES:
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or on private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or
transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, other person
then present in or on such private premises. However, in case of inhabited
private premises which are not posted, as provided in this part, such person,
unless requested by anyone on such premises not to do so, may place or deposit
any such handbill in or on such inhabited private premises if such handbill is
so place or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or
drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, and
except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law
or regulations. (Prior code § 10-444)
8.12.150: EXEMPTION FOR MAIL AND NEWSPAPERS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the distribution of mail by
the United States, nor to newspapers except that newspapers shall be placed on
private property in such a manner so as to prevent their being carried or
deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk, or other public place or on
private property. (Prior code § 10-445)
8.12.160: POSTING NOTICE PROHIBITED:
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamp post, public
utility pole or shade tree, or on any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law. (Prior code § 10-446)
8.12.170: LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property,
whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control
of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection
in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited
by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place or on any private
property. (Prior code § 10-447)
8.12.180: LITTER ON VACANT LOTS:
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property
whether or not owned by such person. (Prior code § 10-448)
8.12.190: HANDBILLS AND POSTERS:
   A.   No person or business shall post, stick, paint or otherwise fix, or
cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card,
poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the
attention of the public, upon any sidewalk, curb, or any other portion or part
of any public way or public place or any lamp post, electric light, telegraph,
telephone or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or upon the
columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any bridge or
other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of the
fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be authorized or
required by the laws of the United States, or state, the ordinances of this
city.
   B.   It is unlawful to distribute indiscriminately to the public by leaving
at houses or residences in the city any cards, circulars, handbills, samples of
merchandise, or any advertising matter whatsoever without having first secured
a permit therefor. This section shall not be construed to apply to the sale of
articles by licensed peddlers.
   C.   Applications for such permit shall be made to the recorder and shall
contain a statement of the nature of the article, cards or advertisement to be
distributed, the name of the applicant and the name of the manufacturer or
distributor of such article or service advertised.
   D.   Licenses shall be issued only to persons of good character. The chief
of police shall make or cause to be made an investigation into the character of
each applicant and shall report the results thereof to the recorder before any
such license is issued. (Prior code § 10-449)
CHAPTER 8.16
OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
8.16.010: Commencement Of Offensive Business
8.16.020: Issuance Of Permits
8.16.030: Existing Offensive Business And Facilities
8.16.040: Control Of Animal And Foul Facilities
8.16.010: COMMENCEMENT OF OFFENSIVE BUSINESS:
   A.   No person shall commence or change the location of any offensive
business or establishment in or within one mile of the limits of this city
without first filing an application for a permit to do so with the recorder.
   B.   Offensive businesses, within the meaning of this part, shall include,
but not be limited to, packinghouses, dairies, tanneries, canneries, renderies,
junk or salvage yards, bone factories, slaughterhouse, butcher shops, soap
factories, foundries, breweries, distilleries, livery stables, blacksmith
shops, or any other enterprise or establishment which creates excessive odors,
fumes, smoke, gases, or noises.
   C.   The application for a permit shall specify the location at which the
business or establishment is to be operated and maintained or the new location
to which it is to be moved. The application shall describe the type of activity
which will be conducted and describe the manner in which the business or
establishment shall eliminate, control or modify the emission by the business
of the undesirable odors, fumes, noises, and other noisome features and the
manner in which it shall be screened from public view, if its appearance is
offensive. (Prior code § 10-241)
8.16.020: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
   A.   The recorder shall cause a study to be made of the proposed business or
relocation of any offensive business or establishment by city designee and by
personnel engaged in the inspection of buildings and other facilities. A report
and recommendation shall be made to the city council. The city council, after
review, may grant to the applicant an opportunity to be heard and present
additional facts. Thereafter the city council may:
      1.   Deny the application;
      2.   Recommend a modification thereof;
      3.   Grant a limited permit to enter into the business or make the change
of location subject to the requirement that the business facility conform to
standards established by the city council with reference to controlling the
offensive features of the business.
   B.   In the event a permit is granted, it shall be subject to revocation
either upon failure of the operator or owner to conduct his or her business in
the manner specified by the city council at the time of granting of the permit,
or because a change of circumstances makes the continued operation or
maintenance of the business or facility a public nuisance.
   C.   The city council shall have power to revoke or modify the permission to
operate and maintain the business in such manner as it deems necessary for the
public good. (Ord. 2010-16: prior code § 10-242)
8.16.030: EXISTING OFFENSIVE BUSINESS AND FACILITIES:
   A.   The city council may require an investigation of any existing offensive
business or facility to determine whether or not it should be permitted to
remain in existence in or within one mile of the city limits. If the city
council determines that the continuation of the business or facility has become
a nuisance to persons situated within the city limits or that ample control is
not being exercised to minimize the creation of excessive odors, fumes, smoke,
gases, and noise, it shall notify the owner or operator thereof that the city
council is considering revoking or modifying the operator's license.
   B.   If the city council decides to require a modification of the manner in
which the business or facility is to be maintained, it shall specify the
standards or specification to which the enterprise must conform or otherwise
lose its license to engage thereafter in the business or activity. (Prior code
§ 10-243)
8.16.040: CONTROL OF ANIMAL AND FOUL FACILITIES:
   A.   The city council shall have the power to prohibit or control the
location and management of any offensive, unwholesome business or establishment
in or within one mile of the municipality and may compel the owner of any
pigsty, privy, barn corral, furbearing animal farm, feed yard, poultry farm, or
other unwholesome or nauseous house or place to cleanse, abate or remove the
same.
   B.   The city council may on its own initiative and shall, on complaint of a
member of the public, examine the operation, control or location of any
business or facility for the purpose of determining whether or not the
operation of such business or facility should be improved so as to minimize the
offensive and unwholesome characteristics or whether the business or activity
should be moved or abated.
   C.   In the event that the city council decides that the business or
facility should be abated, removed, or controlled, it shall notify the owner or
operator of the business or facility of such fact.
   D.   After a hearing, the city council may issue a limited license wherein
it may prescribe the specification and standard which must be followed by the
business or facility in order to be permitted to continue in operation.
   E.   Upon a determination by the city council that the business or facility
is a nuisance, it shall have power to order the abatement or removal of the
facility or establishment. If the owner fails to conform to such order, the
city council shall have power to bring all necessary legal proceeding to force
removal, abatement, or adherence to standards. (Prior code § 10-244)
CHAPTER 8.20
POLLUTION PREVENTION
SECTION:
8.20.010: Discharge Of Sewage Pollution
8.20.010: DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE POLLUTION:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to discharge or permit the discharge of
any sewage or filth from any premises into and upon any public highway, stream,
watercourse, or public place, or into any drain, cesspool, or private
wastewater disposal system which does not conform to standards established by
the state division of health or by this city.
   B.   The health director may order a connection for sewage disposal to be
made with the public sewer system provided by the municipality if such is
available, provided that the public sewer system is within three hundred feet
(300') of the premises.
   C.   The health director shall use all due measures to prevent the fouling
of any streams, watercourses, reservoirs, or any source furnishing water to any
of the inhabitants of this city. (Prior code § 10-225)
CHAPTER 8.24
VACATING PREMISES
SECTION:
8.24.010: Generally
8.24.010: GENERALLY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, upon vacating or moving from any
dwelling, storeroom, or other building, to fail to remove all garbage, rubbish,
or ashes from such building or premises and the grounds appurtenant thereto, or
to fail place the same in a thoroughly sanitary condition within twenty four
(24) hours after the premises are vacated.
   B.   In situations where rental property is so vacated, the owner of the
property shall be concurrently responsible with the tenant thereof for
compliance with this section. (Prior code § 10-224)
CHAPTER 8.28
WEEDS AND DELETERIOUS OBJECTS
SECTION:
8.28.010: Real Property To Be Kept Clean
8.28.020: Weeds; Defined
8.28.030: Standards Of Weed Control
8.28.010: REAL PROPERTY TO BE KEPT CLEAN:
It shall be an infraction for any person owning or occupying real property, to
allow weeds to grow higher on such property than is permitted by this chapter
or not to remove from any such property any cuttings of such weeds or any
refuse, unsightly or deleterious objects after having been given notice by the
designated city official. (Ord. 2010-06)
8.28.020: WEEDS; DEFINED:
"Weeds" means and includes any vegetation commonly referred to as a weed, or
which shall have been designated a noxious weed by the Utah commissioner of
agriculture. (Prior code § 10-322)
8.28.030: STANDARDS OF WEED CONTROL:
   A.   It is declared that the above stated weeds constitute nuisance when
they:
      1.   Create a fire hazard, a source of contamination, or pollution of the
water, air or property, a danger to health, a breeding place or habitation for
insects or rodents or other forms of life deleterious to humans or are
unsightly or deleterious to humans or are unsightly or deleterious to their
surroundings.
   B.   The cut weeds shall be removed from the premises within seven (7) days
after cutting, unless waived by the fire chief. (Ord. 2010-06: prior code § 10-
323)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
CHAPTER 9.04
UTAH CRIMINAL AND TRAFFIC CODE
SECTION:
9.04.010: Adopted
9.04.020: Off Highway Vehicles
9.04.030: Golf Carts
9.04.010: ADOPTED:
That certain publication titled "Utah criminal and traffic code", prepared and
published in book form by the Utah safety council and as updated from time to
time by the Utah safety council, copies of which have been filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the city recorder, is hereby
approved as the criminal and traffic code of the city insofar as the city has
jurisdictional authority to enforce them. (Ord. 2010-13)
9.04.020: OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES:
Off highway vehicles, as hereinafter defined, and subject to the restrictions
and requirements of this section, may be operated within the limits of the
boundaries of the city of Santa Clara, as follows:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
   ALL-TERRAIN TYPE I VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle fifty two inches (52") or less
in width having an unladen dry weight of eight hundred (800) pounds or less,
traveling on three (3) or more low pressure tires, having a seat designed to be
straddled by the operator or designed for or capable of travel over unimproved
roads.
   ALL-TERRAIN TYPE II VEHICLE: Any other motor vehicle not defined herein as
an "all-terrain type I vehicle" designed for or capable of travel over
unimproved terrain. This term does not include golf carts, any vehicle designed
to carry a disabled person, any vehicle not specifically designed for
recreational use, or farm tractors as defined under section 41-1a-102 of the
Utah code.
   MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the operator
and designed to travel on not more than two (2) tires.
   OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE: All all-terrain type I and type II vehicles, but shall
not include snowmobiles and motorcycles.
   B.   Registration Of Vehicle: Unless exempted under section 41-22-9 of the
Utah code, a person may not operate or transport and an owner may not give
another person permission to operate and transport, any off highway vehicle on
any public land, trail, street, or highway within the city of Santa Clara
unless the off highway vehicle has been registered in accordance with the
requirements of title 41, chapter 22 of the Utah code for the current year.
   C.   Equipment Requirements: All off highway vehicles, as defined herein,
shall be equipped with:
      1.   Brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the
vehicle under normal operating conditions; and
      2.   Headlights and taillights when operated between sunset and sunrise;
and
      3.   A noise control device.
   D.   Protective Headgear:
      1.   A person under the age of eighteen (18) may not operate or ride on
an all-terrain type I vehicle or motorcycle on any public land, trail, street,
or highway within the city of Santa Clara unless the person is wearing properly
fitted and fastened, United States department of transportation safety rated
protective headgear designed for motorized vehicle use.
      2.   The owner of an off highway vehicle or any other person may not give
permission to a person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years to operate
or ride on an off highway vehicle in violation of this subsection D.
   E.   Restrictions On Privately Owned Lands:
      1.   No person shall operate or accompany a person operating an off
highway vehicle upon privately owned land of any other person, firm or
corporation without permission from the owner or person in charge.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person operating or accompanying a
person operating an off highway vehicle to refuse to immediately leave private
land upon request of the owner or person in charge of such land.
      3.   Subsections E1 and E2 of this section shall not apply to
prescriptive easements on privately owned land.
      4.   No person operating or accompanying a person operating an off
highway vehicle shall obstruct any entrance or exit to private property without
the owner's permission.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, mutilate, or
destroy any sign, signboards, or other notice which regulates trespassing for
purposes of operating an off highway vehicle on privately owned land, or to
tear down, deface, or destroy any fence or other enclosure or any gate or bars
belonging to any such fence or enclosure.
   F.   Prohibited Uses: No person may operate an off highway vehicle in
connection with acts of vandalism, harassment of wildlife or domestic animals,
burglaries or other crimes, or damage to the environment which includes
excessive pollution of air, water, or land, abuse of the watershed, impairment
of plant or animal life, or excessive mechanical noise.
   G.   Supervision, Safety Certificate Or Driver's License Required: A person
may not operate and an owner may not give that person permission to operate an
off highway vehicle on any public land, trail, street, or highway within the
city of Santa Clara unless the person:
      1.   Has in his possession a valid motor vehicle operator's license, and
the operator is at least sixteen (16) years of age.
   H.   Designation Of Routes:
      1.   Within the city of Santa Clara, the following streets are designated
as the only off highway vehicle routes within the city of Santa Clara for the
specific purpose of allowing off highway vehicle operators to gain access to or
from a private or public area open for off highway vehicle use:
The streets which may be used as an off highway vehicle route shall meet all of
the following requirements:
         a.   Shall be used for purposes of gaining access to the South Hills.
         b.   Streets shall include streets with a speed limit of twenty five
(25) miles per hour or less.
      2.   Except for off highway implements of husbandry used in accordance
with section 41-22-5.5 of Utah Code Annotated, a person may not operate an off
highway vehicle on any street within the city of Santa Clara for any purpose
other than to gain direct access to or from a private or public area open for
off highway vehicles.
   I.   Speed Regulations: Any person operating an off highway vehicle is
subject to the provisions of title 41, chapter 6 of the Utah code and shall not
exceed the ATV speed of fifteen (15) miles per hour. (Ord. 2009-15)
9.04.030: GOLF CARTS:
   A.   Authorization of Golf Carts: Subject to the restrictions and
regulations of this chapter, golf carts may be operated by persons on public
streets, roadways, and highways under the jurisdiction of the city of Santa
Clara.
   B.   Restrictions on Operations:
      1.   Only persons sixteen (16) years of age or older may operate a golf
cart on any public street, roadway, or highway within the city.
      2.   Golf carts shall not be operated on any public trail or path, or
within a city-designated park.
      3.   Golf carts shall not be operated at a speed of more than twenty-five
(25) miles per hour.
      4.   A golf cart shall not be operated after civil twilight at sunset or
before civil twilight at sunrise on any public street, roadway, trail, public,
or quasi-public area unless it is equipped with headlights, taillights, and
safety reflectors on the sides and rear of the golf cart.
      5.   Golf carts shall not carry any more than the number of individuals
for which the golf cart was originally manufactured, with only one (1) person
per seat. Allowing more passengers to ride than there are seats on the golf
cart is prohibited.
   C.   Restrictions on Areas of Use: Golf carts shall not be operated on any
public street or highway where the posted speed limit is greater than twenty-
five (25) miles per hour, unless expressly authorized by the city through a
written agreement. Golf carts may cross a street or highway with a speed limit
greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour when the operator comes to a
complete stop before crossing, proceeding only after yielding the right of way
to oncoming traffic, and crosses at a right angle. A golf cart may, when it is
safe to do so, be operated on a street with a speed limit above twenty-five
(25) miles per hour, for a distance of no more than five hundred feet (500')
from the nearest crossing, for the purpose of accessing a property on that
roadway.
   D.   Traffic Regulations:
      1.   Golf carts are subject to alcohol, driving under the influence, and
open container laws of Utah, Code Annotated section 41-6a-526.
      2.   Golf carts shall not be operated on a roadway two or more abreast
with other golf carts.
      3.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, golf carts shall
comply with the same requirements as a bicycle for traffic rules pursuant to
Utah, Code Annotated section 41-6a-1105, Traffic Code.
   E.   Violation by Persons Under the Age of Sixteen (16): A person under the
age of sixteen (16) who violates this chapter shall not be cited for such
violation. However, in the event of such a violation by a person under the age
of sixteen (16), a parent or guardian of that person, or any adult individual
who allows that person to operate a golf cart, shall be considered to have
violated this chapter.
   F.   Penalty for Violation: It is unlawful for a person to violate this
chapter and a person violating this chapter may be cited in writing. The first
offense shall be an infraction, and any subsequent cited offense within twenty-
four (24) months shall be a class B misdemeanor. An officer shall use
discretion when issuing verbal warnings. (Ord. 2025-03, 2-26-2025)
CHAPTER 9.08
OFFENSES AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT
SECTION:
9.08.010: Public Property
9.08.020: Unlawful Acts
9.08.010: PUBLIC PROPERTY:
For the purpose of this chapter, "public property" means any publicly owned
property except the traveled portion of public streets, and includes any park,
sidewalk, curb or any part of any public right of way devoted to any planting
or park like use. (Ord. 98-08 § 2: prior code § 13-30-4-01)
9.08.020: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
On any public property it is unlawful for any person to:
   A.   Wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any building, railing, bench, paving, paving material, water line or any
facilities or property and equipment of any public utilities or parts or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or
permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, wall or rock
border, or other structures or equipment, facilities or public property or
appurtenances whatever, either real or personal;
   B.   Soil or litter public restrooms and washrooms;
   C.   Dig and remove any sand, soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs, or plants,
down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency, unless permission is obtained;
   D.   Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary in character, any tent, fly or windbreak, or run or
string any rope, cord or wire into, upon or across any public property, except
with special permit;
   E.   Urinate or defecate, except in the public restroom in receptacles
placed there for such purpose;
   F.   Damage, cut, carve, burn, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant. No person
shall attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. No
person shall dig in or otherwise disturb, or in any other way injure or impair
the natural beauty or usefulness of any park area, this subsection shall not
apply to any person authorized to perform the act proscribed;
   G.   Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit on monuments, fountains, railings,
fences, planted areas or upon any other property not designed or customarily
used for such purposes or to intentionally stand, sit or lie in or upon any
street, sidewalk, stairway or crosswalk so as to prevent free passage of
persons or vehicles passing over, along or across any street, sidewalk,
stairway or crosswalk;
   H.   Drop, throw, place, discard, dump, leave or otherwise deposit any
bottles, broken glass, garbage, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
refuse or other trash on any public property except in waste containers
provided therefor. No such refuse or trash shall be place in any waters
contiguous to any park or planted area or left anywhere on the grounds thereof;
   I.   Sleep on seats, benches, sidewalks, curbs, planters, wall or other
areas;
   J.   Expose or offer for sale any article or thing or station or place any
stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such
article or thing, without first obtaining a license, except that the city
council may exempt designated areas from this subsection by resolution on such
terms and conditions as it may prescribe;
   K.   To beg or to go from door to door of private homes or commercial and
business establishments or place himself or herself in or upon any public way
or public place to beg or to receive money other things of value. (Ord. 98-08 §
2: prior code § 13-30-4-02)
CHAPTER 9.12
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY
SECTION:
9.12.010: Fighting; Threatening
9.12.020: Excessive Noise Prohibited; Generally
9.12.021: Excessive Noise Prohibited; Specifically
9.12.022: Exceptions To Section 9.12.021
9.12.023: Special Permit
9.12.024: Violation; Penalty
9.12.025: Additional Remedy; Abatement
9.12.030: Throwing Objects Prohibited
9.12.040: Indecent Exposure
9.12.050: Obscene Entertainment
9.12.060: Window Peeping
9.12.070: Lookouts For Illegal Acts
9.12.080: Unlawful Use Of Restrooms
9.12.090: Sound Amplifiers And Speakers
9.12.100: Curfew
9.12.110: Fireworks
9.12.120: Discharge Of Firearms And Trapping
9.12.010: FIGHTING; THREATENING:
It is a class C misdemeanor for any person to threaten physical force against
another person or to challenge, invite or engage in a fight. (Prior code § 13-
30-3-02)
9.12.020: EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED; GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued in excess, unnecessary or unusual loud noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others within the limits of the city. (Ord. 99-12 § 1: prior
code § 13-30-3-03)
9.12.021: EXCESSIVE NOISE PROHIBITED; SPECIFICALLY:
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, or
unnecessary noises in violation of this section.
   A.   The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, or other vehicle, except as a danger warning; the creation by means
of any such signaling device of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound; the
sounding of any such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time,
the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust.
   B.   The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated in
residential areas of any television, radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or
chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are volunteer
listeners thereto shall not exceed sixty decibels. The operation of any such
set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or device before 7:00 AM or after 11:00
PM in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of thirty feet (30')
from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. At other times, the operation
of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or device as to be plainly
audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the building, structure, or
vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this subsection.
   C.   The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of
any radio receiving set, musical instruments, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound
amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound
upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting
attention of the public to any building or structure shall not exceed sixty
decibels. without or in violation of a permit issued pursuant to section
9.12.023 of this chapter.
   D.   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public
streets, particularly before 7:00 AM or after 11:00 PM or at any time or place
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office,
or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the
vicinity.
   E.   The keeping of any dog which by causing frequent or long continued
noise disturbs the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
   F.   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
   G.   The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle which due to a
lack of repair or improper loading creates loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise.
   H.   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading and
unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates,
and other containers.
   I.   The erection, (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair
of any building before 6:00 AM or after 9:00 PM except in case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a
permit from the city manager as authorized under section
9.12.023 of this chapter.
   J.   The creation of any excessive noise adjacent to any school, institution
of learning, church, or court while the same is in use; or adjacent to any
hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution,
or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; or in any park,
which unreasonably disturbs the users thereof.
   K.   The operation before 6:00 AM or after 9:00 PM of any pile driver, steam
shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliances,
the use of which is usually attended by loud or unusual noise.
   L.   The operation of garbage pickup, in any area zoned residential before
6:00 AM or after 9:00 PM.
   M.   The operation of any power mower, cultivator, or the like or related
device in areas zoned residential before 6:00 AM or after 9:00 PM.
   N.   The use of a drive-up or drive-thru pickup window service before 5:30
AM or after 12:00 AM daily for commercial businesses within one hundred feet
(100') of residential property which may also include a menu board and speaker
system.
   O.   The use of a drive-up or drive-thru speaker system shall emit no more
than sixty decibels when measured at four feet directly in front of the speaker
and shall not be audible above daytime ambient noise levels beyond the property
boundaries.
   P.   The use of a food truck/trailer with or without a generator within
seventy-five feet (75') of residential property. Use of a food truck/trailer
with or without a generator within this distance is prohibited. The noise
levels associated with such use beyond this distance shall emit no more than
sixty decibels as measured at the property boundary. (Ord. 2024-05: Ord. 2001-
11 § 1: Ord. 99-12 § 1)
9.12.022: EXCEPTIONS TO SECTION 9.12.021:
   A.   Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure
relief valves.
   B.   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency.
   C.   Noises resulting from emergency work.
   D.   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration
permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by
the city.
   E.   Any aircraft or railroad equipment operated in conformity with, or
pursuant to, state statute, federal law, or federal regulations. (Ord. 99-12 §
1)
9.12.023: SPECIAL PERMIT:
Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this
chapter on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the city manager or his
or her duly authorized representative. Any permit granted by the city manager
under this section shall contain all conditions upon which said permit has been
granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective.
The city manager may grant the relief as applied for if it is found that:
   A.   Additionally time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the
activity or operation to comply with this section; or
   B.   The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary duration,
and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this section; and
   C.   That no other reasonable recourse or alternative is available to the
applicant. The city manager in granting such a special permit, may prescribe
any conditions or requirements that are deemed necessary to minimize adverse
effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 99-12 § 1)
9.12.024: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of sections
9.12.020 through
9.12.023 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined as determined by the justice court, but
shall not exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as a separate offense. (Ord. 99-12 § 1)
9.12.025: ADDITIONAL REMEDY; ABATEMENT:
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of this section, or which causes
discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which
endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace or residents in the area shall
be deemed, and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to
abatement as prescribed in chapter 8.04 of this code. (Ord. 99-12 § 1)
9.12.030: THROWING OBJECTS PROHIBITED:
Every person who wilfully or carelessly throws any stone, stick, snowball or
other missile whereby any person is hit or any window broken or other property
injured or destroyed, in such manner as to render travel upon the public
streets and places dangerous, or in such manner as to frighten or annoy any
traveler, is guilty of an infraction. (Prior code § 13-30-3-04)
9.12.040: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
   A.   It shall be a class B misdemeanor for any person over five (5) years of
age to indecently expose his or her body in public.
   B.   For the purpose of this section:
      1.   Indecent exposure means:
         a.   The exposed male genital or the covered male genital shown in a
discernible turgid state;
         b.   The exposed female genital or female breasts which are not
covered with an opaque covering below a point immediately above the top of the
nipple (or the breast with only the nipple covered).
      2.   "Public" means any place open to or frequented by the public or
which may be seen from any place open to or frequented by the public and
includes private clubs, associations or other places where the public
frequents. (Prior code § 13-30-3-06)
9.12.050: OBSCENE ENTERTAINMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to hold, conduct or carry on, or to cause or
permit to be held, conducted or caused any motion pictures, exhibition or
entertainment of any sort which is of an obscene nature. (Ord. 98-08 § 2: prior
code § 13-30-3-07)
9.12.060: WINDOW PEEPING:
It shall be a class C misdemeanor for any person to look, peer, or peep into or
be found loitering around or within view of any window within a building
occupied as residence of another with the intent of watching or looking through
the window to observe any person undressed, or in the act of dressing or
undressing. (Prior code § 13-30-3-09)
9.12.070: LOOKOUTS FOR ILLEGAL ACTS:
It shall be a class C misdemeanor for any person to act as a guard or lookout
for any building, premises, or establishment used for gambling, for illegal
sale or purchase of intoxicating liquors, or for any person soliciting,
offering or engaging in prostitution, gambling or any other form of vice, or
illegal act, or any prostitute, on any street or sidewalk. Nor shall any person
give any signal intended to, or calculated to warn, or give warning of the
approach of any peace officer to any person in or about such building or
premises or place mentioned herein. (Prior code § 13-30-3-10)
9.12.080: UNLAWFUL USE OF RESTROOMS:
No person over the age of five (5) years shall use the restroom and washrooms
designated for the opposite sex. (Prior code § 13-30-3-11)
9.12.090: SOUND AMPLIFIERS AND SPEAKERS:
   A.   Prohibited Conduct: It is unlawful for any person on or adjacent to a
city street or road to operate a sound amplifier or speaker which emits sound
that can be heard more than two hundred feet (200') from the sound amplifier or
speaker.
   B.   Exemptions: This section does not apply to: 1) the operation of sound
amplifiers or speakers used by law enforcement or emergency personnel in the
performance of their official duties; 2) the operation of horns or other
warning devices used by emergency vehicles or by public agencies in an official
capacity; or 3) public and special events approved by the city.
   C.   Penalty: A violation of this section is an infraction. (Ord. 98-23 §2)
9.12.100: CURFEW:
   A.   Curfew Hours For Minors Under Sixteen: It is unlawful for any person
under the age of sixteen (16) years to be or remain upon any sidewalk, street,
or public place in the city between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the day immediately following.
   B.   Curfew Hours For Minors Under Eighteen: It is unlawful for any minor
under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain upon any sidewalk, street
or public place in the city between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of the day immediately following.
   C.   Parent Or Guardian's Responsibility: It is unlawful for any parent,
guardian or other person having legal care and custody of any minor dealt with
respectively in subsections A and B of this section to allow or permit any such
minor to be or remain upon any sidewalk, street, or public place in the city
within the times provided in subsections A and B, respectively, of this
section, except as provided in subsection D of this section.
   D.   Exceptions: The provisions of subsections A, B and C of this section
shall not apply where the minors dealt with respectively in subsections A and B
of this section are:
      1.   Married;
      2.   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
care and custody of such minor;
      3.   Returning home from going to or being in attendance at any religious
or school function, organized dance, theater, sports event or other such
associational activity; provided, however, that going to or from such activity
shall be by a direct route and within a reasonable time of the commencement or
termination of such event;
      4.   Engaged in legitimate employment and can produce evidence of such
employment;
      5.   In a motor vehicle engaged in normal travel while traveling to, from
or through the city on an interstate trip; or
      6.   Within the immediate vicinity of the minor's residence.
   E.   Penalty: The effect of this section shall apply to youth driving or
passengers in a motor vehicle of any type as well as on foot, and a law
enforcement officer may require any companion claiming to be a guardian to so
demonstrate by legal document, if felt to be reasonably necessary. Any person
violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
may be dealt with in the manner provided elsewhere or may be referred to the
state juvenile system for further handling at the option of the city marshal
and the city attorney. (Ord. 98-28 § 2: prior code §§ 13-30-1-02, 13-30-1-03)
9.12.110: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Purpose: This section authorizes the local fire official for this
municipality to limit or prohibit fireworks when hazardous environmental
conditions necessitate controlling the use thereof.
   B.   Definitions:
   FIREWORKS: Shall have the same meaning as found in title 53, chapter 7 of
the Utah code.
   HAZARDOUS ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS: Extreme dryness or lack of moisture,
windy conditions, the presence of dry weeds and other vegetation and any
combination thereof.
   ZONE 1: Shall represent all areas within the city limits that are developed
(e.g., paved streets and neighborhoods with multiple homes).
   ZONE 2: Shall represent all areas in the city that do not fall within zone 1
(e.g., gullies, ravines, washes, the south hills and all other undeveloped
areas).
   C.   Authority Of Local Fire Official To Issue Orders: The local fire
official is hereby authorized to issue orders limiting or prohibiting fireworks
in any area of the municipality when the local fire official determines that
hazardous environmental conditions necessitate controlling or prohibiting the
use thereof.
   D.   Zones Affected: The local fire official shall determine what zone is
subject to limitation and/or prohibition and the extent thereof and shall
identify the same in a written order. The order may also include a map
outlining affected areas.
   E.   Public Notice: The municipality shall immediately post copies of the
written order of the local fire official in at least three (3) public places
within the city; post a copy of the order on the official municipal website;
inform all local news media outlets of the order and provide a copy of the
order thereto.
   F.   Penalty: Any person who intentionally or knowing violates an order of
the fire chief issued pursuant to this section is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.
   G.   Enforcement: Every officer charged with enforcement of state and
municipal laws within the jurisdiction of Santa Clara City, including the fire
chief is hereby charged with the responsibility to enforce this section. (Ord.
2012-15)
9.12.120: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND TRAPPING:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this chapter, these terms shall be defined
as follows:
 
          A pistol, revolver, shotgun, short barreled shotgun, rifle or short
FIREARM:  barreled rifle, or a device that could be used as a dangerous weapon
          from which is expelled a projectile by action of an explosive.
TRAPPING: The use of any "body gripping" device which entraps, snares or snaps
          closed on any animal, excluding the trapping of rodents.
 
   B.   Discharge Of Firearms Prohibited; Exceptions: It is unlawful for any
person to discharge any firearm within, from, or into Santa Clara City limits,
except under the following circumstances:
      1.   In the use of force in defense of self, others, habitation, or
property which is justified under any provision of Utah Code Title 76, Chapter
2, Part 4;
      2.   In any case of any law enforcement officer in the discharge of his/
her duty;
      3.   When discharged at a city approved shooting range or gallery;
      4.   When discharged for the purpose of nuisance wildlife control;
      5.   When used for the slaughter of an animal lawfully trapped under
subsection C. below; or
      6.   When used for the slaughter of domestic livestock.
   C.   Trapping Prohibited; Exceptions: It is unlawful for any person to trap,
set a trap, or engage in trapping in Santa Clara City, except for the
following:
      1.   Any trapping deemed necessary and performed by either the Utah
Division of Wildlife Resources or the Santa Clara City public safety
department;
      2.   When using live box or cage traps;
      3.   When performed by a licensed trapper in accordance with Utah law;
provided, that no lethal conibear type traps are used; or
      4.   When performed on private property in accordance with Utah law by a
person having legal ownership of or right to use the property.
   D.   Penalty: Violations of this chapter may be enforced either criminally
as a class C misdemeanor or civilly by imposing a monetary penalty under
section
1.16.010, "General Penalty," of this code. (Ord. 2022-01, 1-12-2022)
TITLE 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 10.04
UTAH CRIMINAL AND TRAFFIC CODE
SECTION:
10.04.010: Adopted
10.04.010: ADOPTED:
That certain publication entitled "Utah criminal and traffic code", prepared
and published in book form by the Utah safety council, copies of which have
been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city
recorder, and as updated from time to time by the Utah safety council, is
hereby approved as the criminal and traffic code of the city insofar as the
city has the jurisdictional authority to enforce them. (Ord. 2010-06)
CHAPTER 10.08
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10.08.010: Parking Or Blocking Streets Or Highways
10.08.020: Signs
10.08.030: No Parking
10.08.040: Unlawful Parking
10.08.010: PARKING OR BLOCKING STREETS OR HIGHWAYS:
In addition to the parking provisions contained in the Utah traffic code, as
adopted by this city, it shall be a class B misdemeanor for any person to:
   A.   Remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in such a
manner as to obstruct the free passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
thereon.
   B.   Wilfully remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in
such manner for more than one minute after being requested to move by any
police officer.
   C.   Wilfully remain on such street or highway in such manner as to obstruct
the free passage of any person or vehicle into or out of any property abutting
upon the street or highway or any property having access to such street or
highway. (Prior code § 11-341)
10.08.020: SIGNS:
The city council may authorize or direct any person employed by the city to
erect or install any sign or traffic control device required to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 11-342)
10.08.030: NO PARKING:
It shall be a class B misdemeanor to park or leave standing at any time and in
such a manner as to block or in any way interfere with the traffic flow on any
public street, alley or highway; a motor vehicle, as defined in the "Utah
criminal and traffic code", as adopted by this city, except when necessary to
avoid interference with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
policeman or traffic control device. (Ord. 2010-13)
10.08.040: UNLAWFUL PARKING:
   A.   Parking At Curb: No motor vehicle shall be parked with the left side of
the vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets. It is unlawful to
stand or park any motor vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb
and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of
the regularly established curb line except on those streets which have been
marked for angle parking; then vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the
curb indicated by such marks.
   B.   Vehicles For Sale: It is unlawful to park any vehicle on any street for
the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle from which
merchandise is peddled on any business street.
   C.   Loading Zone: When so posted, it is unlawful for the driver of a
passenger vehicle to stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer
than is permitted by the posted sign for the loading or unloading of
passengers, of for the driver to stand or park any freight carrying motor
vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and
deliver materials in any place designated as a loading zone and marked as such.
   D.   Parking Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person, except physicians on
emergency calls or designated emergency vehicles when properly posted, to park
any motor vehicle on any street in violation of the posted restrictions.
   E.   Alleys: No person shall park a motor vehicle within an alley in such
manner or under such conditions as to leave less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No
person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position
as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
   F.   Cab Stands; Bus Stands: No motor vehicle other than a licensed taxicab
shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a taxicab stand and no
vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus
loading zone.
   G.   Parking Prohibited: It shall be an infraction for any person to park or
leave standing on any public road, street, alley or city property any motor
vehicle, trailer, or vehicle used for carrying or conveying persons, animals,
or objects for seventy two (72) or more consecutive hours, and any such vehicle
so parked or left standing may be impounded or removed by the city marshal. For
purposes of impoundment and removal, the chief of police may impound and remove
any vehicle which reasonably appears to have remained unmoved for seventy two
(72) or more consecutive hours. The cost of impoundment and removal shall be
charged to the owner or any person who claims the impounded vehicle.
   H.   Commercial Vehicle Parking: It shall be an infraction, and punishable
as set forth in these ordinances, for any person to park any vehicle which is
normally used for commercial purposes on any public road, street, or alley
within the limits of the city, and to leave the same unattended for a period of
more than five (5) hours from the time said vehicle was parked. (Ord. 2015-06:
Ord. 98-08 § 2: Ord. 92-100 § 1: prior code § 11-344)
CHAPTER 10.12
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND TRICYCLES
SECTION:
10.12.010: Prohibited Uses
10.12.010: PROHIBITED USES:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or ride upon any skateboard, tricycle,
or nonmotorized bicycle at any time upon the following designated streets which
are deemed to be hazardous when used for such purposes: on Truman Drive from
Snow Canyon Drive to Chapel Street; and on Santa Clara View Drive from Circle
Drive to Santa Clara Drive. (Ord. 91-32 § 1: prior code § 11-328)
TITLE 11
RESERVED
TITLE 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 12.04
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
12.04.010: Adoption Of Booklet
12.04.020: Construction By Persons
12.04.030: Permit Required; Supervision
12.04.040: Construction Of Driveways Or Changes Of Construction
12.04.050: Building Materials In Street; Permit
12.04.060: Placing Or Mixing Sand Or Gravel On Paved Street Or Sidewalk
12.04.070: Overflowing Of Water On Public Property
12.04.080: Irrigation Ditches Across Sidewalks
12.04.090: Discharge Of Debris
12.04.100: Load Limitation
12.04.010: ADOPTION OF BOOKLET:
That certain booklet entitled "Santa Clara City Construction Design Standards",
prepared and published in book form by the city of Santa Clara and as amended
from time to time, a copy of which has been filed for use and examination by
the public in the office of the city recorder, is approved and adopted as the
minimum specifications and standards for the city. (Ord. 2010-06)
12.04.020: CONSTRUCTION BY PERSONS:
It is unlawful for any person either as owner, agent, servant, contractor, or
employee to construct a street or sidewalk which does not conform to
specification established by the city engineer or other authorized
representative of the city, unless special permission to deviate from such
specification is first obtained from the city council. (Prior code § 11-351)
12.04.030: PERMIT REQUIRED; SUPERVISION:
   A.   No person, either as owner, agent, servant, contractor, or employee,
shall construct any permanent sidewalk without first obtaining from the
recorder a permit so to do. The permit shall specify that the sidewalk be
constructed of cement, the character and quality of the cement, the consistent
parts of the mixture, and the thickness of the walk.
   B.   It is unlawful to construct a sidewalk in violation of the
specifications given by a proper city official.
   C.   All sidewalks shall be constructed under the inspection of the streets
supervisor or his or her duly authorized representative. (Ord. 2010-13: prior
code § 11-352)
12.04.040: CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAYS OR CHANGES OF CONSTRUCTION:
It is unlawful for any person to construct a driveway across a sidewalk, or cut
or change the construction of sidewalk, curb, or gutter without first making
written application and obtaining from the city council a permit to do so. The
acceptance of such permit shall be deemed an agreement on the part of such
person to construct said driveway in accordance with specification furnished by
the city. (Prior code § 11-353)
12.04.050: BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREET; PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to occupy or use any portion of the public
streets when erecting or repairing any building upon land abutting thereon,
without first making application to and receiving from the city council a
permit for the occupation or use of such portions of streets for such periods
of time and under such limitations and restrictions as may be required by the
city council. Any such permit may be revoked by the city council at any time
when the holder thereof fails to comply with any rule or regulation under which
it is granted, or when, in the opinion of the city council, the public interest
requires such revocation. (Prior code § 11-354)
12.04.060: PLACING OR MIXING SAND OR GRAVEL ON PAVED STREET OR SIDEWALK:
Unless a permit from the superintendent has been obtained, it is unlawful to:
   A.   Place or pile, or permit to be placed or piled, any sand, gravel, lime,
cement, mortar, plaster, concrete, or any like substance or mixture, or allow
the same to remain on any portion of any paved street or sidewalk;
   B.   Make or mix or permit to be made or mixed any mortar, plaster, concrete
or any like substance or mixture on any portion of any paved street or
sidewalk. (Prior code § 11-355)
12.04.070: OVERFLOWING OF WATER ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to allow water to overflow from any ditch, canal,
well, or irrigation stream onto the streets, sidewalks or property of the city.
(Prior code § 11-356)
12.04.080: IRRIGATION DITCHES ACROSS SIDEWALKS:
All owners or occupants of lots in this city who require water from a main
ditch for irrigation or other purposes shall dig ditches, erect flumes, lay
pipes and install culverts, as needed, and maintain the same to convey water
under sidewalks to or from their respective lots. All culverts, ditches, pipes
and flumes conveying water under sidewalks shall meet such reasonable standards
and specifications as may be established by the superintendent of streets.
(Prior code § 11-357)
12.04.090: DISCHARGE OF DEBRIS:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or load, or cause to be operated or
loaded, a vehicle upon any public highway within the jurisdiction of the city
from which any kind of debris, trash, building materials, garbage, sand,
gravel, rocks, mud, and all other types of material falls, discharges, escapes,
or is otherwise tracked therefrom upon the streets, sidewalks, and gutters of
the city. This section shall not apply to official street maintenance,
construction, or snow removal operations. (Ord. 96-10 § 1: prior code § 11-358
(A))
12.04.100: LOAD LIMITATION:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or load, or cause to be operated or
loaded, any vehicle upon any public highway within the jurisdiction of the city
in which the contact points of the material being hauled are less than six
inches (6") from the top of the bed, unless the vehicle is sufficiently covered
or tied down so as to prevent such materials from littering, spilling, falling,
discharging, or otherwise escaping therefrom upon the streets, sidewalks, and
gutters of the city. This section shall not apply to official street
maintenance, construction, or snow removal crews. (Ord. 96-10 § 1: prior code §
11-358(B))
CHAPTER 12.08
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12.08.010: Removal Of Snow
12.08.020: Placing Trash Or Other Obstruction In Streets, Gutters, Sidewalks
12.08.030: Openings In Street
12.08.040: Doors Opening Into Streets
12.08.050: Discharge Of Water On Street
12.08.060: Crossing At Intersections
12.08.070: Business To Keep Sidewalk Clean
12.08.080: Placing Goods On Sidewalks For Sale Or Show
12.08.090: Placing Goods On Sidewalks For Receipt Or Delivery
12.08.100: Congregating On Sidewalks
12.08.010: REMOVAL OF SNOW:
It is unlawful for the owner, occupant, lessor, or agent of any property,
abutting on a paved sidewalk to fail to remove, or have removed from such paved
sidewalk, all hail, snow, or sleet thereon within a reasonable time after such
snow, hail, or sleet has fallen. (Prior code § 11-361; amd. Ord. 2022-18, 8-10-
2022)
12.08.020: PLACING TRASH OR OTHER OBSTRUCTION IN STREETS, GUTTERS, SIDEWALKS:
It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying, or having control of any
premises to place, or permit to be placed upon or in the sidewalk, parking
area, gutter, or on the half of the street next to such premises:
   A.   Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, sweepings, refuse matter, ice,
snow, water, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substances.
   B.   Any wagons, lumber, wood boxes, fencing, building material, dead trees,
tree stumps, merchandise or other thing which shall obstruct such public
street, gutter, parking area or sidewalk, or any part thereof, for more than
twenty-four (24) hours without first obtaining an appropriate permit from the
City public works department.
   C.   Any permanent or temporary structure, mechanism, device, or other thing
of any kind or character except trees planted pursuant to the provisions of
applicable ordinance. (Prior code § 11-362; amd. Ord. 2022-18, 8-10-2022)
12.08.030: OPENINGS IN STREET:
   A.   It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building having a
cellar which opens upon any street or sidewalk to fail to keep the door or
other covering in good repair and safe for the passage of the customary traffic
on the street or sidewalk. If the owner or occupant of any such building shall
neglect or refuse to repair properly any such door or covering within twenty-
four (24) hours after notice for the superintendent of streets to do so, the
superintendent shall forthwith cause such repairs to be made at the expense of
the owner or occupant.
   B.   It is unlawful to construct or maintain core holes or other openings in
streets or sidewalks, except with the special permission of the city council,
and under the direction and supervision of the superintendent of streets.
(Prior code § 11-363; amd. Ord. 2022-18, 8-10-2022)
12.08.040: DOORS OPENING INTO STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation owning or having the
control or management of any alley, road, or passageway to construct or hang
gates or doors to such alley, road, or passageway so that gates or doors
thereto, when open, shall project outwardly more than two feet (2') over or
upon the sidewalk or beyond the property line. (Prior code § 11-364; amd. Ord.
2022-18, 8-10-2022)
12.08.050: DISCHARGE OF WATER ON STREET:
It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying, or having control of any
premises to fail, refuse or neglect to prevent water from the roof or eaves of
any house, building, or other structure, or from any other source under the
control of such person to be discharged upon the surface of any sidewalk.
(Prior code § 11-365; amd. Ord. 2022-18, 8-10-2022)
12.08.060: CROSSING AT INTERSECTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or park a self-propelled vehicle or
lead, drive, or ride any animal upon any sidewalk except across a sidewalk at
established crossings. Except for electric bicycles, scooters, and skateboards.
(Prior code § 11-366; amd. Ord. 2022-18, 8-10-2022)
12.08.070: BUSINESS TO KEEP SIDEWALK CLEAN:
It is unlawful for any owners or occupants of any place of business to refuse,
neglect or fail to cause the sidewalk abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned
as needed. (Prior code § 11-367; amd. Ord. 2022-18, 8-10-2022)
12.08.080: PLACING GOODS ON SIDEWALKS FOR SALE OR SHOW:
No goods, wares, or merchandise shall be placed, maintained, or permitted for
sale or show in or on any parking area, street, or sidewalk beyond two feet
(2') from the front line of the lot, without first obtaining an appropriate
permit from the City public works department. Such approval shall be granted
only when such sale or show shall be a promotional activity not exceeding
forty-eight (48) hours and when participated in by a majority of firms seeking
approval in their business areas. The permit shall specifically provide that no
goods, wares, or merchandise shall be placed in such a manner as to leave less
than a six-foot (6') passageway for pedestrians. (Prior code § 11-368; amd.
Ord. 2022-18, 8-10-2022)
12.08.090: PLACING GOODS ON SIDEWALKS FOR RECEIPT OR DELIVERY:
It is unlawful for any person to place or suffer to be placed or kept upon any
sidewalk, any goods, wares, or merchandise which he or she may be receiving or
delivering, without leaving a foot passageway upon such sidewalk. It is
unlawful for any person receiving or delivering such goods, wares, or
merchandise to suffer the same to be or remain on such sidewalk for a longer
period than twenty-four (24) hours. (Prior code § 11-369; amd. Ord. 2022-18, 8-
10-2022)
12.08.100: CONGREGATING ON SIDEWALKS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person or persons to congregate about or upon
any sidewalks, stairway, doorway, window or in front of any commercial business
or office, civic use, or dwelling unit to obstruct or interfere with the free
passage of persons entering, leaving, or occupying such building or premises.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person removing snow from the sidewalk to
deposit snow, dirt, leaves, or any other material in the gutter to clog or
prevent the free flow of water therein. (Prior code §§ 11-370 and 11-371; amd.
Ord. 2022-18, 8-10-2022)
CHAPTER 12.12
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
12.12.010: Permit Franchise Required
12.12.020: Excluded Excavation
12.12.030: Subject Excavations
12.12.040: Preparation
12.12.050: Backfill
12.12.060: Restoration Of Surfaces
12.12.070: Restoring Bituminous, Concrete Or Asphalt Street Surfaces
12.12.080: Concrete Surfaces
12.12.090: Concrete Base, Bituminous Wearing Surfaces
12.12.100: Gravel Surfaces
12.12.110: Protection Of Public During Excavation Project
12.12.120: Relocation And Protection Of Utilities
12.12.130: Jetting Pipe
12.12.140: Inspection And Acceptance
12.12.150: Application For Street Excavation Permit
12.12.010: PERMIT FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall make an excavation in any street, lane, or alley, or
remove any pavement or other material from any street or improvement thereon
without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent of streets or other
authorized representative of the city.
   B.   No person shall excavate any sidewalk without first obtaining a permit
from the superintendent of streets or other authorized personnel.
   C.   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to waive the
franchise required for any person by the ordinances of this city or laws of
Utah. (Prior code § 11-381)
12.12.020: EXCLUDED EXCAVATION:
Excavations of any kind in city streets in projects designed, contracted for,
and inspected by the city engineer or other authorized personnel of the city,
do not come within the scope of this chapter. (Prior code § 11-382)
12.12.030: SUBJECT EXCAVATIONS:
Excavations for installation or repair of water lines, sewer lines, gas lines,
electrical cable and conduits, telephone cable and conduits, and all other
excavations for any other purpose within the street rights of way of the city
or in other public places, are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior code § 11-383)
12.12.040: PREPARATION:
The pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surface shall be cut vertically
along the lines forming the trench in such a manner as to not damage the
adjoining pavement or hard surfacing. An undercut bevel at the rate of one inch
(1") per foot of thickness will be provided at the proposed junction between
the old and new surfaces. The portion to be removed shall be broken up in a
manner that will not cause damage to the pavement outside the limits of the
trench. However, any pavement damaged by operations outside the limits of the
trench shall be removed immediately from the site of the work. (Prior code §
11-384)
12.12.050: BACKFILL:
   A.   Materials for backfill will be of select nature. All broken concrete,
peat, decomposed vegetable matter and similar materials obtained from
excavation will be removed from the site prior to beginning of backfilling. All
backfill will be placed in layers not over eight inches (8") loose measure in
thickness. Compaction will be obtained by mechanical rollers, mechanical
tampers or similar means. Material for backfilling will have optimum moisture
to ensure compaction to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground
in which the trench was dug. Jetting or internal vibrating methods of
compacting sand fill or similar methods of compacting sand or similar granular
free draining materials will be permitted.
   B.   The density (dry) of the backfill under pavements, sidewalks, curbs, or
other structures will be not less than that existing prior to excavation. The
fill shall be restored and placed in a good condition which will prevent
settling. (Prior code § 11-385)
12.12.060: RESTORATION OF SURFACES:
   A.   General: All street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, or
other hard surfaces falling in the line of the excavation which must be removed
in performance of the work shall be restored in kind by the excavator, unless
otherwise directed by the city council, in accordance with the specifications
contained herein governing the various types of surfaces involved.
   B.   Protection Of Paved Surfaces: In order to avoid unnecessary damage to
paved surfaces, track equipment shall use pavement pads when operating on or
crossing paved surfaces.
   C.   Time: In traffic lanes of paved streets, the excavator shall provide
temporary gravel surfaces or cold mulch in good condition immediately after
backfill has been placed, and shall complete permanent repairs on the street,
sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway and other surfaces, within five (5) days from
the date of completion of the backfill except for periods:
      1.   When permanent paving material is not available;
      2.   When weather conditions prevent permanent replacement;
      3.   When an extension of time is granted by the superintendent of
streets.
   D.   Temporary Repair: If temporary repair has been made on paved street
with gravel and a permanent repair cannot be made within the time specified
above due to any of the above mentioned conditions, then the excavator shall be
required to replace the gravel with cold mulch as soon as possible. (Prior code
§ 11-386)
12.12.070: RESTORING BITUMINOUS, CONCRETE OR ASPHALT STREET SURFACES:
   A.   Temporary Grade Surface: Where excavations are made in paved areas, the
surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface. The gravel shall be
placed deep enough to provide a minimum of six inches (6") below the bottom of
the bituminous or concrete surface. Normally, this will require nine inches
(9") of gravel for bituminous surfaces, twelve inches (12") of gravel for
concrete, and concrete base for asphalt wearing surfaces. The gravel shall be
placed in the trench at the time it is backfilled. The temporary gravel surface
shall be maintained by blading, sprinkling, rolling, adding gravel, to maintain
a safe, uniform surface satisfactory to the inspector until the final surface
is laid. Excess material shall be removed from the premises immediately.
Material for use on temporary gravel surfaces shall be obtained from sound,
tough, durable gravel or rock meeting the following requirements for gradings:
   Passing 1 inch sieve      100 percent
   Passing 3/4 inch sieve   85 percent   –   100 percent
   Passing No. 4 sieve      45 percent   –   65 percent
   Passing No. 10 sieve      30 percent   –   50 percent
   Passing No. 200 sieve   5 percent   –   10 percent
   B.   Bituminous Surface: The exposed edges of existing pavement shall be
primed with type MC-1 bituminous material. The type, grade, and mixture of the
asphalt to be used for street surface replacement shall be approved by the
superintendent of streets. The thickness shall be equal to the adjacent surface
thickness but not less than three inches (3"). The complete surface shall not
deviate more than one-half inch (1/2") between old and new work. (Prior code §
11-387)
12.12.080: CONCRETE SURFACES:
The subbase for concrete surfaces shall be sprinkled just before placing the
concrete. Joints and surfaces shall be made to match the original surfaces. The
thickness of concrete shall be equal to the adjacent concrete but in no case
less than six inches (6") thick. The mixing, cement, water content, proportion,
placement, and curing of the concrete will be approved by the superintendent of
streets. In no case shall the concrete have less comprehensive strength than
three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch at the end of twenty eight (28)
days. (Prior code § 11-388)
12.12.090: CONCRETE BASE, BITUMINOUS WEARING SURFACES:
This type of surfacing shall be constructed as above described. (Prior code §
11-389)
12.12.100: GRAVEL SURFACES:
Trenches excavated through gravel surfaced area, such as gravel roads and
shoulders and unpaved driveways, shall have the gravel restored and maintained
as described in section
12.12.080 of this chapter, except that the gravel shall be a minimum of one
inch (1") more than the thickness of the existing gravel. (Prior code § 11-390)
12.12.110: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC DURING EXCAVATION PROJECT:
Excavation operations shall be conducted in such a manner that a minimum amount
of interference or interruption of street traffic will result. Inconvenience to
residents and businesses fronting on public streets shall be minimized.
Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades shall be available and used where
necessary to prevent accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must
be in place until all the excavator's equipment is removed from the site and
excavation has been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface is in place.
From sunset to sunrise all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined
by acceptable warning lights, lanterns, flares, and other devices. Police and
fire departments shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours in advance
of any planned excavation requiring street closures or detour. (Prior code §
11-391)
12.12.120: RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES:
An excavator shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written
consent of the city council and without advance notice to the owner of the
utility. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing utility, it shall be
done by its owner unless the owner otherwise directs. No utility, whether owned
by city or private enterprise, shall be moved to accommodate the permittee
unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee or an expressly written
agreement is made whereby the utility owner and the excavator make other
arrangements relating to such cost. The permittee shall support and protect by
timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus
which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and shall do
everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along,
or across the work. In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or
apparatus should be damaged (and for this purpose pipe coating or other
encasement or devices are considered as part of a substructure), they shall be
repaired by the agency or person owning them, but the utility owner shall be
reimbursed for the expense of such repairs by the permittee. It is the intent
of this chapter that the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to
substructures, and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such
substructure damage and such assumption of liability shall be deemed a
contractual obligation which the permittee accepts upon acceptance of an
excavation permit. The city need not be made a party to any action because of
this chapter. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and
location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage.
(Prior code § 11-392)
12.12.130: JETTING PIPE:
Jetting pipe by means of water under pressure, or compressed air, is permitted
only when approved by the city. (Prior code § 11-393)
12.12.140: INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE:
   A.   In order to ensure proper backfill and restoration of surface, the
permittee shall deposit a surety bond or cash deposit with the recorder payable
to the city, except that a public utility operating or using any of the streets
under a franchise from the city will not be required to furnish such bond,
providing such franchise obligates the holder thereof to restore the streets
and to hold the city harmless in the event of any injury to any person or
damage to any property due to negligence of such holder in conducting
excavation and restoration operations under such franchise. The required surety
bond must be:
      1.   With good and sufficient surety;
      2.   By a surety company authorized to transact business in the state;
      3.   Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance;
      4.   Conditions upon the permittee's compliance with this chapter in
order to secure and hold the city and its officers harmless against any and all
claims, judgments, or other costs arising from the excavation and other work
covered by the excavation permit or for which the city, the city council or any
city office may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to any
person or property through the fault of the permittee arising out of failure to
properly guard the excavation or for any other negligence of the permittee;
      5.   Conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe
condition, as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction
of the city, all opening and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any
street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of twenty
four (24) months after the work shall be done, usual wear and tear excepted, as
it was before the work shall have been done.
   B.   The amount of the surety bond or cash deposit shall be established by
resolution and may be changed from time to time, but until such resolution is
passed the amount of surety or cash deposit shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each foot of street the
permittee shall excavate. (Prior code § 11-394)
12.12.150: APPLICATION FOR STREET EXCAVATION PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, or in any
manner affect the surface or base of any street or to place, deposit or leave
upon any street any earth or any other excavated material obstructing or
tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such persons shall
first have obtained an excavation permit therefor from the recorder. Any public
utility regulated by the state of Utah or holding a franchise from the city
which in the pursuit of its calling has frequent occasion to open or make
excavations in streets, may, upon application, receive a general permit from
the city to cover all excavations such utilities may make within the streets of
the city. All permits shall be subject to revocation and the city may refuse to
issue a permit for failure of the permittee or applicant to abide by the terms
and conditions of this part. Excavation permits will not be requested prior to
excavation in case of emergency endangering life or property, providing the
city is notified as soon as practicable and a permit is applied for upon the
next working day following the emergency. (Prior code § 11-395)
CHAPTER 12.16
CITY PROPERTY
SECTION:
12.16.010: Unlawful Use
12.16.020: Repair Or Restoration
12.16.030: Franchise
12.16.040: Acts Exempted
12.16.010: UNLAWFUL USE:
Unless authorized by permit or other written authorization issued by the city
or unless authority is granted by provisions of this code or other ordinance of
the municipality now or hereafter enacted, it shall be a class B misdemeanor
for any person to:
   A.   Construct, lay, excavate, erect, operate or maintain over, under,
across, in or through any property owned or controlled by this city or utility,
canal, ditch, construction or building;
   B.   Enter upon any property of this city contrary to posting or marking
restricting or prohibiting use of the area;
   C.   Intentionally use or perform acts upon property of the city which
materially impairs, alters, or damages the property. (Prior code § 8-111)
12.16.020: REPAIR OR RESTORATION:
The city council, in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, may
order any person who has damaged, altered or changed any property of this city
to repair or restore the property to its original condition prior to the
damage, alteration or change. (Prior code § 8-112)
12.16.030: FRANCHISE:
   A.   The city council may grant any person a franchise or easement on such
terms and conditions as it deems reasonable, for the purpose of entering upon,
constructing, building, operating and maintaining any business or for other use
of the property of this city, and the provisions of sections
12.16.010 and
12.16.020 of this chapter shall not apply to the extent such provisions are
waived, qualified or made inapplicable to the rights or privileges granted in
the franchise ordinance or easement.
   B.   Any franchise or easement granted by this city shall be in writing and
any franchise or easement not in writing shall be void. (Prior code § 8-113)
12.16.040: ACTS EXEMPTED:
It shall not be a violation of this chapter where any person uses the public
property of this city in the manner or for the purpose or purposes for which
such property has been made available for public use. (Prior code § 8-114)
CHAPTER 12.20
PARK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12.20.010: Generally
12.20.010: GENERALLY:
   A.   In any park or trail owned or operated by the City, it is unlawful to
cut, break, move, take or otherwise injure, destroy or deface any trees,
shrubs, plants, turf, rock or any building, fence, bridge, sign or other
structure, or foul any spring or stream or leave waste items or rubbish of any
kind. No person shall dump any earth, rubbish or other substance or material in
or upon any park or trail without written permission of the City.
   B.   The sale, consumption or possession of intoxicating liquors or
beverages and dangerous or narcotic drugs, or gambling of any kind is
prohibited in any and all parks, trails and recreation facilities and areas.
   C.   No person shall make or kindle any open fire except in fireplaces and
grills provided for this purpose or in private portable commercially
manufactured grills or grills approved safe by the City. Coals and ashes from
private grills should be dumped in existing fire pit or taken home. Grills
provided for public use shall be on a first come, first served basis.
   D.   No person shall discharge or set off in parks, trails or recreation
facilities or areas, any firecrackers, rockets, or explosives without advance
written consent of the City. If allowed in a designated area, fireworks may be
discharged July 2nd - July 5th, and July 22nd - July 25th (both until
midnight), December 31st/January 1st (until 1:00 AM), and January 31st/February
1st (until 1:00 AM), Chinese New Year's Eve.
   E.   No person shall, in any park or trail, set a trap or snare, or shoot,
injure, annoy, disturb, or poison any wild animal or bird, or injure or destroy
any nest.
   F.   It is unlawful for any person to use threatening, abusive, insulting,
or indecent language, to commit any obscene or indecent act, to fight or to
create a public disturbance or nuisance in any park or trail. Any person who
loiters in any park or trail under the influence of alcohol or drugs or who
otherwise disturbs the peace of park or trail users by begging, soliciting,
making undue noise, or engaging in disruptive activities shall be deemed to
create a nuisance.
   G.   Except for City employees in City-owned vehicles, or others authorized
by the City such as City contractors, no person shall ride in or drive any
motor vehicle which is self-propelled upon any park land or trail except upon
designated roads. It is prohibited for any person to commit any act, by use or
operation, of any motor vehicle on any park land or trail, which if committed
upon a public highway or street, in the State of Utah, would be prohibited and
unlawful. Speed limits within all parks and upon trails shall be fifteen (15)
miles per hour unless otherwise posted. No one shall test or repair any vehicle
or mechanical device on any park or trail property except for electric
bicycles, scooters, and skateboards. There shall be no parking at any time
except in areas designated for such purposes. Abandoned vehicles shall be towed
at owner's expense.
   H.   No person shall, without written permission of the City, erect, paint,
paste or otherwise affix or distribute any signs, advertisement, or circulars
on park or trail property. The sale of anything or the solicitation of funds or
donation within any park or trail is forbidden, except upon written permission
of the City.
   I.   Horses, cattle, livestock, and domestic animals of any kind are
prohibited in any park or trail, except a dog or cat on a leash. It is the duty
of the person who owns or possesses a dog or cat on any park or trail property
to always keep the animal under control, and to immediately remove and dispose
of animal feces or other waste. No animals of any kind are allowed on any
fenced sports field except any registered service animal, or as may otherwise
be authorized in writing by the city.
   J.   Practicing, playing, or using parks or trails for golf and archery is
prohibited.
   K.   Upon park or trail property, no person shall carry a knife upon their
person having a blade of three inches (3") or longer in length except in
conjunction with food preparation at a designated picnic area or pavilion, or
discharge a BB gun, air rifle, pistol, firearm, bow and arrow, or any other
type of dangerous weapon.
   L.   Permits for playing league or casual athletic games in parks on sports
fields or courts may be secured from the city on a first come, first served
basis, provided the same are not otherwise previously scheduled for organized
league or tournament play. A valid permit shall be displayed upon request in
order to avoid conflicts in the use of facilities. Persons failing to honor a
valid permit may be denied future permits to use the facilities.
   M.   No person or group may utilize any park area, trail, or facility for
the purpose of teaching an individual or group any recreational skill for
personal profits or financial gain without written permission of the City.
   N.   No persons are permitted in any park during the hours of darkness,
except in those areas designated for extended use activities, or unless written
permission is attained from the city for after dark programs. The City shall
reserve the right to lock any gate, chain, or door offering access to any park,
facility or building in order to restrict nighttime usage thereof.
   O.   The City Manager or his or her designee may temporarily close or
curtail activities upon any lands or water, or any portions thereof, when it
has been deemed to be in the best interest of public safety, conduct, health,
or order.
   P.   No entertainment, demonstration, exhibition, meeting, concert, or
tournament, whether public or private, shall be given in any park or on any
trail without having obtained the written permission of the City no less than
fourteen (14) days prior to usage.
   Q.   No group of twenty-five (25) or more persons shall use a park or trail
area without first applying for and obtaining a Special Event Permit from the
City. Group usage shall be limited to designated areas. Permission shall be
obtained no less than three (3) days prior to usage. No person shall use
loudspeakers, amplifiers, or public address systems in park without written
permission.
   R.   Camping or sleeping overnight in City parks or on any trail is
prohibited without advance written permission from the city.
   S.   No person or persons shall willingly encroach upon lands administered
by the City.
   T.   All the aforementioned rules requiring written permission contemplate
that such permits must be carried and produced upon demand.
   U.   Any person violating any of these rules and regulations shall be guilty
of an infraction. Each violation shall be a separate offense.
   V.   Seeds or nuts still in the hull or shell, such as pistachios, peanuts,
and sunflower seeds, are not permitted in any City Park or trail, except at a
designated picnic area or pavilion. Spitting or otherwise disposing of hulls or
shells anywhere other than an authorized receptacle for collection shall be
considered littering under title 8,
chapter 8.12 of this Code, and the additional penalties applicable to that
chapter. (Ord. 2017-08; amd. Ord. 2022-19, 8-10-2022)
CHAPTER 12.22
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
12.22.010: Definitions
12.22.020: Permit Required
12.22.030: Application Requirements And Procedures
12.22.040: Insurance Requirement
12.22.050: Fees
12.22.060: Application Review, Approval, And Issuance
12.22.070: Grounds For Denial
12.22.080: Appeal Procedures
12.22.090: Violation
12.22.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
following meanings:
APPLICANT: The individual event organizer or organization for the event and the payment of
           fees.
           An organized competitive or recreational event in which a group of people
ATHLETIC   collectively engage in a non-field sport or form of physical exercise,
EVENT:     including, but not limited to, running, jogging, walking, bicycling, or skating,
           held on any public or private property.
CITY       A special event that is organized and operated by the City, whether directly or
EVENT:     by contract with a third-party operator.
FILMING    Filming of a media broadcast (other than for news purposes), filming of a motion
EVENT:     picture, or television broadcast and digital media production.
OUTDOOR    An organized event in which a group of people or an organization engages in the
SALES      sale of product including, but not limited to, displays and exhibitions,
EVENT:     farmer's markets, craft fairs, outdoor sales, tent sales, and other similar
           activities.
           An organized event, not including an athletic or entertainment event, having as
POLITICAL  its primary purpose the exercise of expressive activities of a political nature,
EVENT:     including but not limited to speech making, picketing, protecting, marching,
           demonstrating, or debating public issues.
SINGLE     A liquor license associated with a special event that includes the sale of beer,
EVENT      heavy beer, wine, flavored malt beverages, and liquor for a period not to exceed
LIQUOR     seven (7) consecutive or non-consecutive days.
LICENSE:
           A.   A temporary event of any of the following or a combination of the following
           acts with a gathering of more than 200 people: Any athletic event, entertainment
           event, parade, carnival, circus, dance, musical event, rodeo event, fighting
           event, racing event, live shows, fairs, concerts, block parties, filming event,
           political event or outdoor sales event, whether held for profit, nonprofit or
           charitable purposes held on private or public property within the City, unless
           otherwise exempted under paragraph D below.
           B.   Any organized assemblage at any public park, public square or other City
           property which gathers for a common purpose or event under the direction and
           control of a person or entity, and which uses more services, amusement devices
SPECIAL    such as stages, inflatable devices or temporary structures, or equipment,
EVENT:     whether provided by the City or a third party, than normally provided to groups
           which reserve park facilities or other City-owned facilities.
           C.   Large filming events that are professional in nature.
           D.   The following are not special events under this chapter:
           1.   Events held exclusively on private property that do not require use of city
           resources;
           2.   City organized events are not special events, however, events sponsored by
           the city are special events if not organized by the city; and
           3.   Events for which a city facility has been rented or reserved in advance
           shall not be considered special events unless at the time of application city
           staff determines that a special event permit is required, based on special needs
           for city resources. (Ord. 2024-16: Ord. 2023-06)
 
12.22.020: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association, or other
entity, public or private, to promote, advertise or hold a special event
without first obtaining a special event permit. The issuance of a permit under
this chapter does not relieve the applicant of the obligation to comply with
any other applicable licensing or permit requirements under Title 5 of city
code. (Ord. 2023-06)
12.22.030: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Submission: A completed application on City forms shall be submitted to
the City at least forty-five (45) calendar days before the event is scheduled
to take place, in order to allow sufficient time to process the application and
to allow timely appeal to the City Council in the event the application is
denied. Applications for new events or recurring events with changes that
submit the application less than forty-five (45) calendar days prior to the
scheduled event shall not be accepted. Applications are not considered complete
until all required information has been submitted to the City.
   B.   Advertising: No advertising of a special event shall be permitted until
City approval of the special event is granted and a special event permit is
issued.
   C.   Inspections: Authorized law enforcement officers, fire control
officers, and other government personnel shall be permitted free access to the
event to make inspections to ensure compliance with all City, State, and
Federal Laws.
   D.   Duration: Each application will indicate the duration of the event for
which the permit is sought.
   E.   Security Plan: The police department requires a security plan to be in
place. This information will be required as part of the online application.
The police department security requirements are:
      1.   An estimated amount of people expected at your event.
      2.   A security director on the site at all times with a cellphone. The
police department will need the name and cell number of this person to contact.
      3.   The total number of security personnel.
      4.   The security personnel must be twenty-one (21) years or older.
      5.   Security personnel must be in security shirts or vests that look the
same, so they are easily spotted by the police department.
      6.   The police department will need a name and phone number of someone
to contact in case of questions.
   F.   Single Event Liquor License: An application for a single event liquor
license under
Chapter 5.08 of city code may be submitted concurrently with a special event
permit application. Additionally, a local consent form must be signed by the
city allowing for the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission to grant
approval as per Utah Code 32B-9-201 prior to the special event. (Ord. 2024-16:
Ord. 2023-06)
12.22.040: INSURANCE REQUIREMENT:
Users are required to provide a certificate of insurance with a minimum limit
of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person in any one occurrence and two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate. Limits for property damage are one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in any one occurrence. Santa Clara City must be
named as an additional insured. A copy of this certificate must be submitted to
Santa Clara City. (Ord. 2023-06)
12.22.050: FEES:
Application And Cost Recovery Fees: Along with the application for a special
event permit, the applicant shall pay any applicable special event application
fees and City cost recovery fees.
   A.   City Cost Recovery Fees: Extra City services will be provided for
special events as determined by the City to be needed to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the public and shall be paid by the applicant.
      1.   City costs include, but are not limited to, police, fire/EMS, park
maintenance, power, water, road closures, and cleanup of City facilities
before, during, or after the event, and other costs to the City directly
attributable to the special event.
      2.   Before City approval is granted to hold the event, the applicant
shall pay the deposit and estimated City fees as determined by the City based
on the application, the applicant's past event history with the City, and
experience from similar events.
      3.   A deposit shall be required equal to at least 50% of all fees
required by the city including, but not limited to application and cost
recovery fees. The deposit shall be refundable within 14-days of the end of
event, less any additional city recovery costs not included in the initial fee.
   B.   Invoice: The City may mail or deliver to the permit holder an invoice
for the cost of City services provided and any costs incurred by the City in
restoring the site. If the amount exceeds the City cost recovery fees paid in
advance, the applicant shall pay the unpaid portion of the invoice within
thirty (30) days of the date that the invoice was mailed or delivered. If the
amount is less than the City cost recovery fees paid prior to issuance of the
permit, then the remaining amount shall be returned to the applicant.
   C.   Fee Waiver: The City may waive fees for any events put on by another
municipality or government agency. For all other events, an applicant may
obtain a fee waiver if the event for which a permit is sought on the basis
that: (1) the event is for the primary purpose that the applicant or
anticipated participants may exercise a right guaranteed under the 1st
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution; and (2) the applicant cannot afford to pay
the fees assessed. To obtain a fee waiver, an applicant must submit a signed
and notarized affidavit stating the basis for the requested waiver and include
or attach any information and documentation reasonably supporting such basis,
consistent with this paragraph. (Ord. 2023-06)
12.22.060: APPLICATION REVIEW, APPROVAL, AND ISSUANCE:
The City Manager, or designee(s), shall review and either approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the request for a special event permit and any fee waiver
request received. The City Manager, or designee(s) may refer the request for a
special event permit and/or any fee waiver request to the City Council for
approval. (Ord. 2023-06)
12.22.070: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
   A.   Grounds For Denial: The special event application may be denied by the
City if:
      1.   The proposed special event violates a law, ordinance, policy,
procedure, or regulation or poses a danger or threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare, or causes unreasonable inconvenience or cost to the public;
      2.   The proposed special event is not consistent with the intended
nature and use of the requested City property;
      3.   The proposed special event is scheduled at a place and time that
could disrupt or interfere with an already approved special event;
      4.   The proposed location or building is not adequate to accommodate the
proposed special event such as parking, sanitation facilities, and health or
safety codes, or the nature of the proposed special event is such that the
City, or the applicant does not have sufficient resources available to
reasonably ensure compliance with applicable ordinances (such as noise limits),
or to otherwise ensure the health, safety, and welfare of special event
participants or the general public;
      5.   The permit application contains a material falsehood or
misrepresentation;
      6.   The applicant has failed to pay a debt to the City including costs
incurred during a prior special event;
      7.   Incomplete permit applications;
      8.   Failure to pay any fees assessed, and no fee waiver has been
obtained; and
      9.   The applicant or any person on whose behalf the application for a
permit was made has on prior occasions:
         a.   Damaged City property if the application is for an event on City
property; or
         b.   Made material misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of
an event or activity previously permitted; or
         c.   Has violated the terms or prior permits issued to or on behalf of
the applicant.
Notice: If a special event permit application is denied, the City shall notify
the applicant in writing of the reason or reasons for the denial. (Ord. 2023-
06)
12.22.080: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Any applicant for a special event permit desiring to appeal an administrative
decision concerning the denial or modification of a special event permit may
petition the City Council if the decision was made by the City Manager or
designee(s). Any decision made by the City Council is final. All appeals shall
be in writing, shall state the specific grounds for the appeal, and shall be
delivered to the City Recorder within five (5) calendar days after the date the
applicant received notice of the denial. An applicant may appeal the City
Council's decision by seeking judicial review with the district court, which
review shall be limited to a review of the record. (Ord. 2023-06)
12.22.090: VIOLATION:
Any person or entity who maintains or assists in maintaining a violation of
this chapter shall be subject to a Class B misdemeanor, punishable as provided
by law. (Ord. 2023-06)
CHAPTER 12.24
CEMETERIES
SECTION:
12.24.010: Definitions
12.24.020: Name
12.24.030: Cemeteries Covered
12.24.040: Cemetery Superintendent Powers And Duties
12.24.050: Conveyance; Descent And Inheritance; Restrictions On Resale
12.24.060: Perpetual Care And Burial Rights; Costs
12.24.070: Burial Permit
12.24.080: Fees
12.24.090: Burial Hours; Sundays And Holidays
12.24.100: Restrictions On Burial
12.24.110: Vaults
12.24.120: Monuments; Grave Markers
12.24.130: Memorials
12.24.140: Regulations And Prohibited Uses
12.24.150: Burial Of Indigents
12.24.160: Disinterments; Exhumations
12.24.170: Additional Rules And Regulations
12.24.180: Penalty
12.24.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   BURIAL: The interment of human remains.
   BURIAL VAULT: A structure to hold a casket or container of cremated remains.
   CREMATED REMAINS: The ashes of an incinerated deceased person.
   DISINTERMENT OR EXHUMATION: The removal of a burial vault and/or casket from
a plot.
   FUNERAL FLOWERS: Flowers placed on the grave at the time of burial.
   LOT: An area of ground in which burial rights are deeded to an individual
for the purpose of burial.
   LOT OWNER: The owner or purchaser of burial privileges or the collateral
right of use of any burial lot evidenced by a deed or burial right for a
described plot or by proved and recognized decent or devise from the original
owner.
   MEMORIALS: Items placed on a grave as a remembrance. Temporary memorials
include, but are not limited to, potted plants, flags, floral wreaths and
flowers in vases. Semi-permanent memorials include, but are not limited to,
trees, shrubs and perennial flowers.
   MONUMENT OR GRAVE MARKER: A marker used to identify the person interred in a
plot.
   RESIDENT: Any member of a household whose primary place of residence can be
shown to be established in the City of Santa Clara, Utah.
   VETERAN: A person recognized by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs as
having veteran status. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.020: NAME:
The burial ground of this City shall be known and designated by the name of
Santa Clara City Cemetery. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.030: CEMETERIES COVERED:
All cemeteries owned and/or maintained by the City wherever situated are
declared subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.040: CEMETERY SUPERINTENDENT POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The Superintendent, subject to the direction of the City Council and
department head placed over him by the City Manager, has entire charge of the
cemetery and is authorized to enforce the rules and regulations pertaining
thereto. He may take such action as may be necessary, though not expressly set
forth herein, in order to protect the property of grave and lot owners, and the
cemetery, from injury, and to protect the peace, economy and good order of the
cemetery. It shall be the duty of the Cemetery Superintendent to keep the
cemetery plat and related records up to date, and to cooperate with the City
Treasurer in maintaining records of changes and payments made pursuant to this
chapter. The Cemetery Superintendent or a competent deputy or designee shall
attend every interment in a cemetery and shall register the names and ages of
all persons interred therein, and the place of their interment. He shall open
and close graves, maintain the cemetery, and perform such other duties as may
be required elsewhere in this chapter or directed by the City Council. (Ord.
2018-01)
12.24.050: CONVEYANCE; DESCENT AND INHERITANCE; RESTRICTIONS ON RESALE:
   A.   Deed: Plots and burial spaces in lots within a cemetery as described in
section
12.24.010 of this chapter, as designated on a plat to be kept in the City
offices, and staked under the supervision of the Cemetery Superintendent, or
any other tract of land that may hereafter be designated by the City for such
purpose, shall be conveyed by deeds of right granting a license to use for
burial purposes. Such deeds will be registered with the City in a book kept for
that purpose and issued to the purchaser. The size of any lot or the number of
lots to be sold to any person or family shall be the sole discretion of the
City, but no more than six (6) lots shall be sold to one individual or his
agent unless it can be shown that they are intended for immediate members of a
single family or unless otherwise approved by City Council.
   B.   Descent And Inheritance: Upon the death of the registered owner, the
City shall act upon its best judgment in determining heirship and succession,
unless an affidavit of heirship, together with the power appointing one of the
heirs to represent all, or a certified copy of decree of distribution of the
estate of the deceased purchaser is first filed with the City Recorder. The
City shall have no liability for a failure to properly determine the legal
succession of the rights in any cemetery space.
   C.   Unused Lots: If, for a period in excess of sixty (60) years and one day
from purchase of burial rights to any cemetery lot, the grantee, or persons
claiming through the grantee have not used portions of the lots or parcels for
purposes of burial and have not provided for the care of the lots or parcels
beyond that uniformly provided for all lots of the cemetery, and during the
sixty (60) year period have not given the City written notice or any claim of
interest in the lots or parcels, the City may, following the procedures set
forth in section 8-5-1, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, or its
successor, demand the grantee that they file with the City a written notice of
claim or interest in such burial rights accompanied by evidence of their claim
within fifty (50) days after service of a copy of notice of demand.
   D.   Restriction On Conveyance Of Historic Lots: Lots located in the
historic western portion of the cemetery, as designated by the Cemetery
Superintendent, shall not be further sold, transferred, conveyed or assigned to
any person except the City, except through descent and inheritance as described
in subsection B of this section. Any attempted sale, conveyance, or assignment
in violation of this paragraph shall be deemed to be void.
   E.   Voluntary Sell-Back: The City agrees to buy back any lot located
anywhere in the cemetery when the owner thereof desires to sell it. The
repurchase of such lots shall be for the original price paid by the purchaser,
or the current selling price of the lot, whichever is less, except that an
administrative fee shall be assessed in the amount of five percent (5%) of the
repurchase price. The City may thereafter re-sell any such repurchased lots,
unless a lot is located in the historic western portion of the cemetery, in
which case the lot shall not be re-sold.
   F.   Revert To City: Whenever a deed to burial rights or lots reverts to the
City, as provided for in this chapter, or becomes vested in the City for any
reason, before a new deed is issued, the original certificate or deed shall be
cancelled or an assignment given, and the record shall be so changed.
   G.   Issuance Of Deed: Each deed shall be issued and signed by the Mayor and
shall be attested by the Recorder. All lots or parts of lots, as provided in
this section, together with all improvements, shall be exempt from execution
and from taxation and assessment for care and maintenance charges from and
after said payment.
   H.   Profit Unlawful: It is unlawful for any City personnel to trade, deal
in, or make a profit, directly or indirectly, out of any transaction involving
the sale, purchase or transfer of any cemetery lot. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.060: PERPETUAL CARE AND BURIAL RIGHTS; COSTS:
   A.   Perpetual Care Required: No burial rights in the cemetery shall be sold
without perpetual care for the space to be used. Perpetual care shall consist
of that maintenance necessitated by natural growth and ordinary wear, and it
shall be provided at reasonable intervals within the budget limits of the
cemetery.
   B.   Costs: The City shall have the right to assess and collect perpetual
care charges or other appropriate fees to defray the costs of care and
maintenance of cemetery facilities, consistent with State law, and as set forth
additionally in section
12.24.080 of this chapter. Fees and charges shall be in such amounts as
established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.070: BURIAL PERMIT:
No body shall be interred, or remains received, unless a burial report is
received from a licensed mortician and signed by the Funeral Director, which
shall be an acknowledgement of the mortuary's obligation to pay for the burial,
or unless the burial charges have been paid in advance to the City Treasurer
and receipt therefor is presented to the Cemetery Superintendent as a permit
for the burial. The burial report or receipt shall reflect the full name of the
deceased, the date and place of birth, the date and place of death, and the
name and address of the person responsible for disposal. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.080: FEES:
   A.   Collection: The City Treasurer and other persons as the City Council
may designate are hereby authorized and required to collect in advance the
required fees as set by resolution of the City Council for the opening and
closing of graves and other services which shall include disinterring bodies
and properly restoring the earth and grounds.
   B.   Other Services: For any other service rendered, the Cemetery
Superintendent shall collect a reasonable fee to be determined in advance by
the City Council through resolution.
   C.   Disinterment Including Vault: If it is requested that a disinterment
shall include the vault, there shall be a surcharge in such an amount as
established by resolution of the City Council in addition to the above
disinterment fee. Notwithstanding such surcharge, the City does not guarantee
in such an event that the vault will be intact or undamaged. Disinterment of
remains not placed in a vault or other sealed container are not authorized
unless approved by the Mayor in writing. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.090: BURIAL HOURS; SUNDAYS AND HOLIDAYS:
No graveside service or interment will be allowed in the cemetery on Sunday, on
any State or Federal holiday, or any other holidays officially observed by the
City, including Swiss Days. On all other days, graveside service or interments
will be allowed between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and four o'clock
(4:00) P.M. All graveside services and interments must be arranged through the
Cemetery Superintendent forty eight (48) hours in advance of time set and
verification of burial rights by City staff, not including any intervening
Saturday, Sunday and/or holidays. Additional time will be required for opening
all plots in the historic and middle sections plots 155E through 149D. Any
exception to the provisions of this section shall be by the approval of Mayor
based recommendation of the Parks and Trails Director and will result in the
payment of additional fees. (Ord. 2020-09 § 1: Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.100: RESTRICTIONS ON BURIAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of a deceased person
within the City limits, except in a cemetery as described in this chapter. No
grave in the cemetery shall be opened or filled, refilled or sodded, except by
employees of the cemetery under the direction of the Cemetery Superintendent.
One interment only shall be allowed in a casket except for a parent with an
infant child, for two (2) children buried at the same time, or the addition of
one cremated remains placed in the casket at the time of burial. Not more than
one casket shall be allowed in a grave plot, except that two (2) cremation
vaults may be allowed in a half plot. All parts of a burial or cremation vault
shall be no less than two feet (2') below the surface of the ground. (Ord.
2024-08: Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.110: VAULTS:
Before a casket is accepted for burial, it must be housed within a concrete
vault having fixed top and side panel edge restraints incorporated into the
construction and having a strength capable of uniformly withstanding a stress
of seven and one-half (71/2) pounds per square inch or an equivalent light
weight burial container that meets industry strength standards. If a particular
type or construction of a vault is rejected by the Cemetery Superintendent, the
mortician or party utilizing the vault shall bear the burden of proving
compliance with the strength requirements of this section. Cremated remains
must be placed in a vault made of fiberglass, concrete, metal or polyethylene
with strength deemed adequate by the Cemetery Superintendent. (Ord. 2024-01:
Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.120: MONUMENTS; GRAVE MARKERS:
   A.   The owner of the burial rights to the plot or relatives of the deceased
persons buried in the plot are required to erect a stone monument with the name
of the deceased plainly described thereon. All graves shall be identified by a
temporary marker or stone monument placed at the head of the plot in the west
two feet (2') of the plot. No more than one monument or marker shall be
permitted for each grave except when the deceased person is a veteran, in which
case one traditional flat U.S. military marker may be placed anywhere in the
plot in addition to the primary monument or marker. Monuments and markers
placed prior to a burial will be removed from and replaced upon the plot
following burial at the plot owners' expense.
   B.   All cemetery monuments and markers shall comply with City standards to
be determined from time to time by the City Council through resolution.
   C.   In the event the owner of a plot or a burial space or relatives of a
deceased person buried in such plot do not place a monument or a marker with
the name of the deceased plainly inscribed thereon upon the grave within ninety
(90) days after interment, the Cemetery Superintendent shall have the right to
do so with a minimal stone or cement marker at the expense of the person owning
it or burying in said lot. Where burial of the remains of more than one person
or vault in a single plot is permitted by this chapter, either a joint combined
monument or small individual markers may be used, provided they can be
adequately accommodated within the limits of the plot, but the form and size of
the monument or marker shall be within the discretionary approval of the
Cemetery Superintendent in any event. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.130: MEMORIALS:
   A.   Permanent Memorials: Up to one permanent memorial per plot is permitted
in the east two feet (2') of the plot; provided, however, that permanent
memorials must otherwise comply with the requirements for monuments and grave
markers set forth in section
12.24.120 of this chapter. Permanent memorials placed prior to a burial will be
removed from and replaced upon the plot following burial at the plot owners'
expense.
   B.   Semi-Permanent Memorials: No person shall have the right to place and/
or plant trees, shrubs, flowers and other semi- permanent memorial items in a
plot without the approval of the Cemetery Superintendent. Approval will be
based on the following criteria: plant maintenance requirements, landscape
value and hardiness, interference with other plots, plants and mowing
operations; consistency with landscape design.
   C.   Temporary Memorials: Temporary memorials are permitted, but will be
removed without notice by cemetery employees when they become withered,
discolored, torn, broken or vandalized. Funeral flowers will be allowed to
remain for seven (7) days, after which cemetery employees may remove them based
on the above criteria. Other temporary memorial items such as glass containers,
wires, sticks, iron rods, pegs, ceramic pots or other containers that may pose
safety hazards may be removed by cemetery employees at any time.
   D.   Landscaping By Private Persons: Except as may be provided by rules and
regulations adopted by the City Council, it is unlawful for any person to erect
and maintain any fence, corner post, coping or boundary, to plant any
vegetation upon any lot or lots, street, alley or walk in the cemetery, or to
grade the ground or land thereof. The Cemetery Superintendent shall, when
required, furnish the true lines of any lots according to official survey,
shall prevent and prohibit any markings of the same except by official
landmarks and shall prevent and prohibit any grading that might destroy or
interfere with the general slope of the land. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.140: REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITED USES:
   A.   Park Regulations Govern: Insofar as they may be applicable, those
regulations adopted by the City to govern operation of its parks shall apply to
the cemetery. However, it shall be unlawful for any person to be in a cemetery
during the nighttime hours of any day. A person will be considered to be "in a
cemetery" if he or she is upon any portion of the property set aside as present
or future cemetery property as designated in the appropriate records of the
City and County.
   B.   Patrons; Children: Cemetery patrons are only allowed in a cemetery.
Children under twelve (12) years of age must be accompanied at all times on
cemetery property by a parent or supervising adult eighteen (18) years of age
or older.
   C.   Recreational Activities; Animals: It shall be unlawful to engage in any
active recreational activity such as, but not limited to, soccer, baseball and
football, or to bring any animal on cemetery property.
   D.   Burial Of Animals Or Nonhuman Items: It shall be unlawful to bury
animals or other nonhuman items in a cemetery, unless the Cemetery
Superintendent is directed otherwise by the City Council in a particular
instance.
   E.   Double Depth Burials: Double-depth burials shall not be permitted.
   F.   Motor Vehicles: No motor vehicles shall travel off clearly designated
roadways in a cemetery for any reason without consent of the Cemetery
Superintendent, and where such consent is given, the owner or operator of the
vehicle shall either repair any and all damage, including tire marks, which the
Cemetery Superintendent determines to have caused by such vehicle, or they
shall reimburse the City for the cost of such repair.
   G.   Sod Disturbance: In no event shall the sod of a cemetery be disturbed
without prior approval of the Cemetery Superintendent.
   H.   Irrigation And Drainage: The right to lay, maintain and operate lines
for water supply or drainage is expressly reserved to the City across any
portion of the cemetery block. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.150: BURIAL OF INDIGENTS:
   A.   The City Council may by resolution designate a portion of the City
Cemetery to the burial of indigents. Whenever it is made to appear to the Mayor
by proof submitted to him by the Recorder that any person who has died does not
have an estate sufficient to pay the purchase price of a lot in the cemetery,
and that the nearest relative or representative of such deceased person desires
to have the body of such deceased interred in the cemetery, the Mayor may grant
burial space for such deceased person at the request made to him or her by the
Recorder.
   B.   The Mayor shall communicate his or her decision to both the Recorder
and the Cemetery Superintendent. The Mayor shall give report of his or her
decision, whether affirmative or negative, to the City Council at its next
regular meeting. All strangers without funds or other persons who may die in
the City may be granted the privilege granted herein. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.160: DISINTERMENTS; EXHUMATIONS:
   A.   The scheduling of a disinterment shall be at the discretion of the
Cemetery Superintendent. It shall also be at the discretion of the Cemetery
Superintendent to refuse to disinter any person that would endanger the health
and safety of cemetery employees. Disinterment may be postponed without notice
if the Cemetery Superintendent deems it necessary in order to maintain the
regular operations of a cemetery.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to disinter any buried in the City
Cemetery under the direction of the City Parks Director. Before disinterment
the requester shall obtain a permit issued by the Board of Health and a written
order from the owner of the lot authorizing such removal or from a court of
competent jurisdiction, which order shall be filed and preserved by the
Cemetery Superintendent. All such removals shall be recorded by the Recorder in
a book kept for that purpose.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to remove the body of a person who has
died of a contagious disease within two (2) years from the date of burial,
unless such a body has been buried in a hermetically sealed coffin, and is
found to be so incased. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.170: ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   The City Council may promulgate by resolution such additional rules and
regulations concerning the care, use, operation and maintenance of the cemetery
as it shall deem necessary. If adopted, such policies, rules and regulations
will control over less specific or conflicting provision of the park rules and
regulations.
   B.   The Mayor may from time to time as the City Council deems necessary
direct and publish a booklet of rules and regulations for the convenience of
the purchasers of lots in the City Cemetery. Such rules and regulations shall
constitute a part of the terms and conditions under which owners and users may
utilize the cemetery and shall form a supplement to this chapter after they
have been adopted as official by resolution of the City Council.
   C.   Any change in the rules and regulations shall be adopted by the City
Council before such changes shall be official. (Ord. 2018-01)
12.24.180: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1.16.010 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-01)
CHAPTER 12.28
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
12.28.010: Declaration Of Findings And Intent; Scope Of Chapter
12.28.020: Definitions
12.28.030: Franchise Required
12.28.040: Compensation And Other Payments
12.28.050: Franchise Applications
12.28.060: Construction And Technical Requirements
12.28.070: Franchise, License, Transfer Or Sale
12.28.080: Oversight And Regulation
12.28.090: Rights Of City
12.28.100: Obligation To Notify
12.28.110: General Provisions
12.28.120: Federal, State And City Jurisdiction
12.28.010: DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND INTENT; SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
   A.   Declaration Of Finding And Intent:
      1.   Findings Regarding Rights Of Way: The city finds that the rights of
way within the city:
         a.   Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property
in the business and social life of the city;
         b.   Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled
consistent with that intent;
         c.   Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and
other public service entities delivering utility and public services rendered
for profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic
well being of the city and its citizens; and
         d.   Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper
management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the
taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and
negative effects upon the public from such facilities' construction, placement,
relocation, and maintenance in the rights of way.
      2.   Finding Regarding Compensation: The city finds that the city should
receive fair and reasonable compensation for use of the rights of way.
      3.   Finding Regarding Local Concern: The city finds that while
telecommunications systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce,
their operations also involve rights of way, municipal franchising, and vital
business and community service, which are of local concern.
      4.   Finding Regarding Promotion Of Telecommunication Services: The city
finds that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote
the rapid development of telecommunications services, on a nondiscrimination
basis, responsive to community and public interest, and to assure availability
for municipal, educational and community services.
      5.   Findings Regarding Franchise Standards: The city finds that it is in
the interests of the public to franchise and to establish standards for
franchising providers in a manner that:
         a.   Fairly and reasonable compensates the city on a competitively
neutral and nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
         b.   Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under
which providers may use the rights of way to serve the public;
         c.   Fully protects the public interests and the city from any harm
that may flow from such commercial use of rights of way;
         d.   Protects the police powers and rights of way management authority
of the city, in a manner consistent with federal and state law;
         e.   Otherwise protects the public interests in the development and
use of the city infrastructure;
         f.   Protects the public's investment in improvements in the rights of
way; and
         g.   Ensures that no barriers to entry of telecommunications providers
are created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting telecommunication services, within
the meaning of the telecommunications act of 1996 ("act") (PL 104-104).
      6.   Power To Manage Rights Of Way: The city adopts the
telecommunications ordinance codified in this chapter pursuant to its power to
manage the rights of way, pursuant to common law, the Utah constitution and
statutory authority, and receive fair and reasonable compensation for the use
of rights of way by providers as expressly set forth by section 253 of the act.
   B.   Scope Of Chapter: This chapter shall provide the basic local scheme for
providers of telecommunications services and systems that require the use of
the rights of way, including providers of both the system and service, those
providers of the system only, and those providers who do not build the system
but who only provide services. This chapter shall apply to all future providers
in the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, whether operating with or without a franchise as set forth in
subsection
12.28.120B of this chapter.
   C.   Excluded Activity:
      1.   Cable TV: This chapter shall not apply to cable television operators
otherwise regulated by ordinance 93-75 (cable television franchise ordinance).
      2.   Wireless Services: This chapter shall not apply to personal wireless
service facilities.
      3.   Provisions Applicable To Excluded Providers: Providers excused by
other law that prohibits the city from requiring a franchise shall not be
required to obtain a franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this
chapter through the exercise of the city's police power and not preempted by
other law shall be applicable. (Ord. 98-18 § 1)
12.28.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this chapter, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in the
present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include the
plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The word
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
   APPLICATION: The process by which a provider submits a request and indicates
a desire to be granted a franchise to utilize the rights of way of all, or part
of the city. An application includes all written documentation, verbal
statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by a provider
to the city concerning the construction of a telecommunications system over,
under, on or through the rights of way; the telecommunications services
proposed to be provided in the city by a provider; and any other matter
pertaining to a proposed system or service.
   CITY: Santa Clara City, Utah.
   COMPLETION DATE: The date that a provider begins providing services to
customers in the city.
   CONSTRUCTION COSTS: All costs of constructing a system, including make ready
costs, other than engineering fees, attorney or accountant's fees or other
consulting fees.
   CONTROL OR CONTROLLING INTEREST: Actual working control in whatever manner
exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership,
management, debt instruments or negative control, at the case may be, of the
system or of a provider. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control
or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly
or indirectly, by and person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more
that twenty five percent (25%) of any provider (which person or group of
persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or
"controlling interest" as used in this chapter may be held simultaneously by
more than one person or group of persons.
   FCC: The federal communications commission, or any successor thereto.
   FRANCHISE: The rights and obligation extended by the city to a provider to
own, lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a system in the rights of way
within the boundaries of the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean or include: a) any other permit or authorization
required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the
city required by the ordinances and laws of the city; b) any other permit,
agreement or authorization required in connection with operations on rights of
way or public property including, without limitation, permits and agreements
for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned
by the city or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in
or along the right of way.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A contract entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth,
subject to this chapter, the terms and conditions under which a franchise will
be exercised.
   GROSS REVENUE: Means and includes all revenues of a provider that may be
included as gross revenue within the meaning of chapter 26, title 11 Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, as amended.
   INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system which uses the rights of way.
   OPEN VIDEO SERVICE: Any video programming services provided to any person
through the use of rights of way, by a provider that is certified by the FCC to
operate an open video system pursuant to section 651 et seq., of the
telecommunications act (to be codified at 47 USC title VI, part V), regardless
of the system used.
   OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: The system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides,
optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment,
or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying or distributing open video services to or from subscribers or
locations within the city.
   OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system
and directly or through one or more persons owns a controlling interest in such
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a
system.
   ORDINANCE OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ORDINANCE: The telecommunications ordinance
codified in this chapter concerning the granting of franchises in and by the
city for the construction, ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a
telecommunications system.
   PSC: The public service commission, or any successor thereto.
   PERSON: Means and includes any individual, corporation, partnership,
association, joint stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the
city.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES: Has the same meaning as provided in
section 704 of the act (47 USC 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly
known as cellular and PSC services that do not install any system or portion of
a system in the rights of way.
   PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, resaler, or system lessee.
   RESALER: Refers to any person that provides local exchange service over a
system for which a separate charge is made, where that person does not own or
lease the underlying system used for the transmission.
   RIGHTS OF WAY: The surface of and the space above and below any public
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or
hereafter existing as such within the city.
   SIGNAL: Any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or
laser or radio frequency energy or optical information in either analog or
digital format.
   SYSTEM LESSEE: Refers to any person that leases a system or a specific
portion of a system to provide services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by
the user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video, and voice),
without change in the form or content of the information sent and received.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE(S) OR SERVICES: Any telecommunications services
provided by a provider within the city that the provider is authorized to
provide under federal, state and local law, and any equipment and/or facilities
required for and integrated with the services provided within the city, except
that these terms do not include "cable service" as defined in the cable
communications policy act of 1984, as amended by the cable television consumer
protection and competition act of 1992 (47 USC section 521 et seq.), and the
telecommunications act of 1996. Telecommunications system or systems also
includes an open video system.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles,
antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment,
wire and appurtenances owned, leased, or used by a provider, located in the
rights of way and utilized in the provision of services, including fully
digital or analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced
telecommunications services. Telecommunications system or systems also includes
an open video system.
   WIRE: Fiber optic telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
(Ord. 98-18 § 2)
12.28.030: FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
   A.   Nonexclusive Franchise: The city is empowered and authorized to issue
nonexclusive franchises governing the installation, construction, and
maintenance of systems in the city's rights of way, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The franchise is granted through a franchise
agreement entered into between the city and provider.
   B.   Every Provider Must Obtain: Except to the extent preempted by federal
or state law, as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction,
including any appeals, every provider must obtain a franchise prior to
constructing a telecommunications system or providing telecommunications
services using the rights of way, and every provider must obtain a franchise
before constructing an open video system or providing open video services via
an open video system. Any open video system or service shall be subject to the
customer service and consumer protection provisions applicable to the cable TV
companies to the extent the city is not preempted or permitted as ultimately
interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals. The
fact that particular telecommunications systems may be used for multiple
purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a franchise for other purposes. By
way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must
obtain a cable franchise, and, should it intend to provide telecommunications
services over the same system, must also obtain a telecommunications franchise.
   C.   Nature Of Grant: A franchise shall not convey title, equitable or
legal, in the rights of way. A franchise is only the right to occupy rights of
way on a nonexclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited period
stated in the franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned, or
subleased. A franchise does not excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate
access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its system on the
property of others, including the city's property. This section shall not be
construed to prohibit a provider from leasing conduit to another provider, so
long as the lessee has obtained a franchise.
   D.   Current Providers: Except to the extent exempted by federal or state
law, any provider acting without a franchise on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter shall request issuance of a franchise from
the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date of said ordinance. If
such request is made, the provider may continue providing service during the
course of negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or if negotiations
cease and a franchise is not granted, the provider shall comply with the
provisions of subsection
12.28.090D of this chapter.
   E.   Nature Of Franchise: The franchise granted by the city under the
provisions of this chapter shall be a nonexclusive franchise providing the
right and consent to install, repair, maintain, remove and replace its system
on, over and under the rights of way in order to provide services.
   F.   Regulatory Approval Needed: Before offering or providing any services
pursuant to the franchise, a provider shall obtain any and all regulatory
approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of
such services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, if
required, and shall submit to the city upon the written request of the city
evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
   G.   Term: No franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall have a term of
less than five (5) years or greater then fifteen (15) years. Each franchise
shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory manner. (Ord. 98-18 § 3)
12.28.040: COMPENSATION AND OTHER PAYMENTS:
   A.   Compensation: As fair and reasonable compensation for any franchise
granted pursuant to this chapter, a provider shall have the following
obligations:
      1.   Application Fee: In order to offset the cost to the city to review
an application for a franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or
charges, a provider shall pay to the city, at the time of application, five
hundred dollars ($500.00) as a nonrefundable application fee.
      2.   Franchise Fees: The franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the
franchise agreement. The obligation to pay a franchise fee shall commence on
the completion date. The franchise fee is offset by any business license fee or
business license tax enacted by the city.
      3.   Excavation Permits: The provider shall also pay fees required for an
excavation permit as provided in ordinance 97-19 (excavation permit ordinance).
   B.   Timing: Unless otherwise agreed to in the franchise agreement, all
franchise fees shall be paid on a monthly basis within forty five (45) days of
the close of each calendar month.
   C.   Fee Statement And Certification: Unless a franchise agreement provides
otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the
manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to its
accuracy.
   D.   Future Costs: A provider shall pay to the city or to third parties, at
the direction of the city, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and
reasonable expenses that the city incurs for the services of third parties
(including, but not limited to, attorneys and other consultants) in connection
with any renewal or provider initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this
chapter or a franchise, provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a
reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations. In the event the
parties are unable to agree, either party may submit the issue to binding
arbitration in accordance with the rules and procedures of the American
Arbitration Association. Any costs associated with any work to be done by the
power and public works department to provide a space on city owned poles shall
be borne by the provider.
   E.   Taxes And Assessments: To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by taxing authorities, other than the city on the use of the city
property as a result of a provider's use or occupation of the rights of way,
the provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such
taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such
payment shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this
chapter.
   F.   Interest On Late Payments: In the event that any payment is not
actually received by the city on or before the applicable date fixed in the
franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at a
rate charged for delinquent state taxes.
   G.   No Accord And Satisfaction: No acceptance by the city of any fee shall
be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount,
nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any
claim the city may have for additional sums payable.
   H.   Not In Lieu Of Other Taxes Or Fees: The fee payment is not a payment in
lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically provided in
this chapter, or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not
limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the city owned
poles are not waived and remain applicable.
   I.   Continuing Obligation And Holdover: In the event a provider continues
to operate all or any part of the system after the term of the franchise, such
operator shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter and the franchise, including, without limitation, all compensation and
other payment provisions throughout the period of such continued operation,
provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a
renewal or other extension of the franchise, nor as a limitation on the
remedies, if any, available to the city as a result of such continued operation
after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution.
   J.   Costs Of Publication: A provider shall assume any publication costs
associated with its franchise that may be required by law. (Ord. 98-18 § 4)
12.28.050: FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Franchise Application: To obtain a franchise to construct, own,
maintain or provide services through any system within the city, to obtain a
renewal of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, or to obtain the city
approval of a transfer of a franchise, as provided in subsection
12.28.070A2 of this chapter, granted pursuant to this chapter, an application
must be filed with city on the form attached to the ordinance codified in this
chapter as exhibit A, which is incorporated by reference. The application may
be changed by the mayor so long as such changes request information that is
consistent with this chapter. Such application form, as amended, is
incorporated by reference.
   B.   Application Criteria: In making a determination as to an application
filed pursuant to this chapter, the city may, but shall not be limited to,
request the following from the provider:
      1.   A copy of the order from the PSC granting a certificate of
convenience and necessity.
      2.   Certification of the provider's financial ability to compensate the
city for provider's intrusion, maintenance and use of the rights of way during
the franchise term proposed by the provider.
      3.   Provider's agreement to comply with the requirements of section
12.28.060 of this chapter.
      4.   Prior to making any attachments to poles, the willingness to enter
into a pole attachment agreement with the city.
   C.   Franchise Determination: The city, in its discretion, shall determine
the award of any franchise on the basis of these and other considerations
relevant to the use of the rights of way, without competitive bidding. (Ord.
98-18 § 5)
12.28.060: CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   General Requirement: No provider shall receive a franchise unless it
agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in this section governing
construction and technical requirements for its system, in addition to any
other reasonable requirements or procedures specified by the city or the
franchise, including requirements regarding locating and sharing in the cost of
locating portions of the system with other systems or with city utilities. A
provider shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the excavation
ordinance, before commencing any work in the rights of way.
   B.   Quality: All work involved in the construction, maintenance, repair,
upgrade and removal of the system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and
reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time,
it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority by federal
law or the FCC to make such determination, that any part of the system,
including, without limitation, any means used to distribute signals over or
within the system, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or
quality of service or reliability, the a provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
   C.   Licenses And Permits: A provider shall have the sole responsibility for
diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or
other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain,
upgrade or repair the system, including, but not limited to, any necessary
approvals from persons and/or the city to use private property, easements,
poles and conduits. A provider shall obtain any required permit, license,
approval or authorization, including, but not limited to, excavation permits,
pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for
which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.
   D.   Relocation Of The System:
      1.   New Grades Or Lines: If the grades or lines of any rights of way are
changed at any time in a manner affecting the system, then a provider shall
comply with the requirements of the excavation ordinance.
      2.   The City Authority To Move System In Case Of An Emergency: The city
may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined
by the city in its reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the system
and appurtenances on, over or under the rights of way of the city, in which
event the city shall not be liable therefor to a provider. The city shall
notify a provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon
as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any
action taken under this section. Notice shall be given as provided in
subsection
12.28.110D of this chapter.
      3.   A Provider Required To Temporarily Move System For Third Party: A
provider shall, upon prior reasonable written notice by the city or any person
holding a permit to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable
under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of its system to permit the
moving of said structure. A provider may impose a reasonable charge on any
person other than the city for any such movement of its systems.
      4.   Rights Of Way Change; Obligation To Move System: When the city is
changing a rights of way and makes a written request, a provider is required to
move or remove its system from the rights of way, without cost to the city, to
the extent provided in the excavation ordinance. This obligation does not apply
to systems originally located on private property pursuant to a private
easement, which property was later incorporated into the rights of way, if that
private easement grants a superior vested right. This obligation exists whether
or not the provider has obtained an excavation permit.
   E.   Protect Structures: In connection with the construction, maintenance,
repair, upgrade or removal of the system, a provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the city (and all
designated landmarks, as well as all other structures within any designated
landmark district). A provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the
city to alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage system, or
any other municipal structure on, over or under the rights of way of the city
required because of the presence of the system. Any such alteration shall be
made by the city or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A provider agrees
that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the city to replace or repair
and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonable specified
by the city, any municipal structure or any other rights of way of the city
involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the
system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by
or on behalf of a provider pursuant to the franchise.
   F.   No Obstruction: In connection with the construction, maintenance,
upgrade, repair or removal of the system, a provider shall riot unreasonably
obstruct the rights of way of fixed guide way systems, railways, passenger
travel, or other traffic to, from or within the city without the prior consent
of the appropriate authorities.
   G.   Safety Precautions: A provider shall, at its own cost and expense,
undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its
work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such
other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A provider shall comply
with all applicable federal, state and local requirements including, but not
limited to, the national electric safety code.
   H.   Repair: After written reasonable notice to the provider, unless, in the
sole determination of the city, an eminent danger exists, any rights of way
within the city which are disturbed or damaged during the construction,
maintenance or reconstruction by a provider of its system may be repaired by
the city at the provider's expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing
before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the city shall submit to such a
provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and restoring the
rights of ways intruded upon. The provider shall, within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the statement, pay to the city the entire amount thereof.
   I.   System Maintenance: A provider shall:
      1.   Install and maintain all parts of its system in a nondangerous
condition throughout the entire period of its franchise.
      2.   Install and maintain its system in accordance with standard prudent
engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the national
electrical safety code and all applicable other federal, state and local laws
or regulations.
      3.   At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized
representative of the city of the system and its effect on the rights of way.
   J.   Trimming Of Trees: A provider shall have the authority to trim trees,
in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement
restrictions, upon and hanging over rights of way so as to prevent the branches
of such trees from coming in contact with its system. (Ord. 98-18 § 6)
12.28.070: FRANCHISE, LICENSE, TRANSFER OR SALE:
   A.   Notification Of Sale:
      1.   Notification And Election: When a provider is the subject of a sale,
transfer, assignment, sublease or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by
forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise,
such that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek the
approval of the PSC, the provider or its successor entity shall promptly notify
the city of the nature of the transaction. The notification shall include
either:
         a.   The successor entity's certification that the successor entity
unequivocally agrees to all of the terms of the original provider's franchise
agreement; or
         b.   The successor entity's application in compliance with section
12.28.050 of this chapter.
      2.   Transfer Of Franchise: Upon receipt of a notification and
certification in accordance with subsection A1a of this section, the city
designee, as provided in subsection
12.28.090A1 of this chapter, shall send notice affirming the transfer of the
franchise to the successor entity. If the city has good cause to believe that
the successor entity may not comply with this chapter or the franchise
agreement, it may require an application for the transfer. The application
shall comply with section
12.28.050 of this chapter.
      3.   If PSC Approval No Longer Required: If the PSC no longer exists, or
if its regulations or state law no longer require approval of transactions
described in subsection A of this section, and the city has good cause to
believe that the successor entity may not comply with this chapter or the
franchise agreement, it may require an application. The application shall
comply with section
12.28.050 of this chapter.
   B.   Events Of Sale: The following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of the franchise requiring compliance with
subsection A of this section: 1) the sale, assignment or other transfer of all
or a majority of a provider's assets to another person; 2) the sale, assignment
or other transfer of capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity
interests in a provider by one or more of its existing shareholders, partners,
members or other equity owners so as to create a new controlling interest in a
provider; 3) the issuance of additional capital stock or partnership,
membership or other equity interest by a provider so as to create a new
controlling interest in such a provider; or 4) the entry by a provider into an
agreement with respect to the management or operation of such provider or its
system. (Ord. 98-18 § 7)
12.28.080: OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION:
   A.   Insurance, Indemnity, And Security: Prior to the execution of a
franchise, a provider will deposit with the city an irrevocable, unconditional
letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the franchise, and
shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the
franchise. A provider shall also indemnify the city as set forth in the
franchise.
   B.   Oversight: The city shall have the right to oversee, regulate and
inspect periodically the construction, maintenance, and upgrade of the system,
and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the franchise and
applicable law. A provider shall establish and maintain managerial and
operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a provider to
prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the city at all times
throughout the term, that a provider is in compliance with the franchise. A
provider shall retain such records for not less that the applicable statute of
limitations.
   C.   Maintain Records: A provider shall at all times maintain:
      1.   On file with the city, a full and complete set of plans, records and
"as built" hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an
electronic format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the
city's existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the
types of equipment and systems installed or constructed in the rights of way,
properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by
appropriate symbols and marks which shall include annotations of all rights of
ways where work will be undertaken. As used herein, "as built" maps includes
"file construction prints". Maps shall be drawn to scale. "As built" maps,
including the compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be
submitted within thirty (30) days of completion of work or within thirty (30)
days after completion of modification and repairs. "As built" maps are not
required of the provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the
existing system to the extent they do not exist.
      2.   Throughout the term of the franchise, a provider shall maintain
complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership,
and operations of a provider with respect to the system in a manner that allows
the city at all times to determine whether a provider is in compliance with the
franchise. Should the city reasonably determine that the records are not being
maintained in such a manner, a provider shall alter the manner in which the
books and/or records are maintained so that a provider comes into compliance
with this section. All financial books and records which are maintained in
accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that
regulates utilities in the state, and generally accepted accounting principles
shall be deemed to be acceptable under this section.
   D.   Confidentiality: If the information required to be submitted is
proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by federal, state or local
law, upon proper request by a provider, such information shall be classified as
a protected record within the meaning of Utah government records access and
management act ("GRAMA"), making it available only to those who must have
access to perform their duties on behalf of the city, provided that a provider
notifies the city of, and clearly labels the information which a provider deems
to be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling
shall be the sole responsibility of the provider.
   E.   Provider's Expense: All reports and records required under this chapter
shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter or a franchise.
   F.   Right Of Inspection: For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of
the franchise fee, the books and records of the provider pertaining thereto
shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the
city at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to
inspect or audit the books and records, provided that the city shall not audit
the books and records of the provider more often that annually. The provider
agrees to reimburse the city the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit
discloses that the provider has paid ninety five percent (95%) or less of the
compensation due the city for the period of such audit. In the event the
accounting rendered to the city by the provider herein is found to be
incorrect, then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within thirty
(30) calendar days of written notice, it being agreed that the city may accept
any amount offered by the provider, but the acceptance thereof by the city
shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or is
later found to be incorrect. (Ord. 98-18 § 8)
12.28.090: RIGHTS OF CITY:
   A.   Enforcement And Remedies:
      1.   Enforcement; City Designee: The city is responsible for enforcing
and administering this chapter, and the city or its designee, as appointed by
the mayor, is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any
franchise agreement.
      2.   Enforcement Provision: Any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and
protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for
accessing the bond/security fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
   B.   Force Majeure: In the event a provider's performance of any of the
terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise is
prevented by a cause or event not within a provider's control, such inability
to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be
imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events
not within the control of a provider shall include, without limitation, acts of
God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of
utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires.
   C.   Extended Operation And Continuity Of Services:
      1.   Continuation After Expiration: Upon either expiration or revocation
of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the city shall have discretion
to permit a provider to continue to operate its system or provide services for
an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of such
expiration or revocation. A provider shall continue to operate its system under
the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant to
this chapter.
      2.   Continuation By Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier: If the provider is
the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to
operate its system and provide services without regard to revocation or
expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good faith.
   D.   Removal Or Abandonment Of Franchise Property:
      1.   Abandoned System: In the event that: a) the use of any portion of
the system is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, and
thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the city to the last
known address of provider; b) any system has been installed in the rights of
way without complying with the requirements of this chapter or franchise; or c)
the provisions of section
12.28.030 of this chapter are applicable and no franchise is granted, a
provider, except the provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall
be deemed to have abandoned such system.
      2.   Removal Of Abandoned System: The city, upon such terms as it may
impose, may give a provider written permission to abandon, without removing,
any system, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained
under a franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, a provider shall remove within a reasonable time the
abandoned system and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any
affected rights of way to their former state at the time such system was
installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, a provider shall refill, at its own expense, any
excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all rights of way in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially
interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires,
poles or attachments. The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the
condition of the rights of way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to
and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this
chapter and any security fund provided in a franchise shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a
provider with the terms and conditions of this section.
      3.   Transfer Of Abandoned System To City: Upon abandonment of any system
in place, a provider, if required by the city, shall submit to the city a
written instrument, satisfactory in form to the city, transferring to the city
of the ownership of the abandoned system.
      4.   Removal Of Aboveground System: At the expiration of the term for
which a franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as
provided for by this chapter, in any such case without renewal, extension or
transfer, the city shall have the right to require a provider to remove, at its
expense, all aboveground portions of a system from the rights of way within a
reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty
(180) days. If the provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall
not be required to remove its system, but shall negotiate a renewal in good
faith.
      5.   Leaving Underground System: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
set forth in this chapter, a provider may abandon any underground system in
place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the right of
way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other
person. (Ord. 98-18 § 9)
12.28.100: OBLIGATION TO NOTIFY:
Before entering onto any private property, a provider shall make a good faith
attempt to contact the property owners in advance, and describe the work to be
performed. (Ord. 98-18 § 10)
12.28.110: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Conflicts: In the event of a conflict between any provision of this
chapter and a franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this chapter
in effect at the time the franchise is entered into shall control.
   B.   Severability: If any provision of this chapter is held by any federal,
state or local court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting
with any federal or state statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in
any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law and all
appellate remedies with regard to the validity of the chapter provisions in
question are exhausted, such provision shall be considered a separate,
distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and such holding shall not
affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the
event that such law is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise
changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no
longer in conflict with such law the provision in question shall return to full
force and effect and shall again be binding on the city and the provider,
provided that the city shall give the provider thirty (30) days, or a longer
period of time as may be reasonably required for a provider to comply with such
a rejuvenated provision, written notice of the change before requiring
compliance with such provision.
   C.   New Developments: It shall be the policy of the city to liberally amend
this chapter, upon application of a provider, when necessary to enable the
provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of
telecommunications which will afford the provider an opportunity to more
effectively, efficiently, or economically serve itself or the public.
   D.   Notices: All notices from a provider to the city required under this
chapter or pursuant to a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
directed to the officer as designated by the mayor. A provider shall provide in
any application for a franchise the identity, address and phone number to
receive notices from the city. A provider shall immediately notify the city of
any change in its name, address, or telephone number.
   E.   Exercise Of Police Power: To the full extent permitted by applicable
law either now or in the future, the city reserves the right to adopt or issue
such rules, regulations, orders, or other directives that it finds necessary or
appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers. (Ord. 98-18 § 11)
12.28.120: FEDERAL, STATE AND CITY JURISDICTION:
   A.   Construction: This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent
with all applicable federal and state statutes.
   B.   Chapter Applicability: This chapter shall apply to all franchises
granted or renewed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter. This chapter shall further apply, to the extent permitted by
applicable federal or state law to all existing franchises granted prior to the
effective date of said ordinance and to a provider providing services, without
a franchise, prior to the effective date of said ordinance.
   C.   Other Applicable Ordinances: A provider's rights are subject to the
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the
health, safety and welfare of the public. A provider shall comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to its
police powers. In particular, all providers shall comply with the city zoning
and other land use requirements.
   D.   City Failure To Enforce: A provider shall not be relieved of its
obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any
franchise granted pursuant to this chapter by reason of any failure of the city
to enforce prompt compliance.
   E.   Construed According To Utah Law: This chapter and any franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the
substantive laws of the state. (Ord. 98-18 § 12)
CHAPTER 12.32
STREET TREES AND TREE PLANTINGS
SECTION:
12.32.010: Purpose And Intent
12.32.020: Definitions
12.32.030: Administration
12.32.040: Street Tree Maintenance And Care
12.32.050: Removal Of Trees
12.32.060: Authorization
12.32.070: Other Plantings
12.32.080: Street Tree Planting In Previously Developed Areas
12.32.090: Heritage Trees
12.32.100: Appeals
12.32.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Santa Clara City recognizes substantial economic, environmental and
aesthetic importance of the trees and plantings within the community. It is in
the best interests of the citizens and public that a plan be developed to
regulate the planting and maintenance of trees and other plantings in or
adjacent to streets and within easements, in rights of way and other public
places within the city, to provide for orderly development and protection of
public facilities, and to regulate the removal of trees that contribute
significantly to the value of land, preservation of resources, and quality of
life in the city.
   B.   It is the intent of the city council of Santa Clara City that the terms
of this chapter shall be construed as to promote:
      1.   The planting, maintenance, restoration, and survival of desirable
trees within the city; and
      2.   The protection of community residents from personal injury and
property damage, and the protection of Santa Clara City from property damage
caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees
located in and upon public areas and rights of way within Santa Clara City.
(Ord. 2008-16 § 1)
12.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
   HERITAGE TREE: Any tree which is determined to have special significance to
the community as to historic value, unique quality, significant girth or
height, or protected species identified in the development process as a city
resource and is formally accepted as a heritage tree by the city council.
   OTHER PLANTINGS: Any shrubs, grass or ground cover planted within street
rights of way or easements or in proximity thereto, or on adjoining property.
   PARKS AND RECREATION DIRECTOR: The person or designee responsible for
maintenance of street trees.
   RESPONSIBLE DEVELOPER: A developer who has chosen to install street trees in
a commercial, industrial or multi-family development.
   STREET TREE: Any tree hereafter planted within any street right of way or
easement adjacent thereto.
   TOP OR TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three
inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove
the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
   TREE TRIMMING: The removal of plant parts to control growth and enhance
performance or function in the landscape by developing and preserving tree
structure and health. The removal of water sprouts, sucker growth, and hanging
limbs constituting less than ten percent (10%) of the tree canopy is not
considered tree trimming according to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2008-16 § 1)
12.32.030: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Authority: The parks and recreation director or designee shall be
responsible for administering and enforcing this chapter. He or she shall:
      1.   Have supervision of all trees and shrubs planted or growing in
public street or city owned places within the city.
      2.   Supervise and inspect the planting, trimming, spraying, preservation
and removal of trees and other plants in public streets, in city cemeteries,
and in city parks to promote safety and preserve the beauty of such public
places.
      3.   Provide a tree management program to include a street tree inventory
to evaluate city owned tree health, identify tree species to evaluate and
establish a long term maintenance and replacement program, and obtain funding
to ensure adequate street tree maintenance and care.
      4.   Care for all trees in the city which have been designated by the
city council as heritage trees.
      5.   Supervise the maintenance of trees in the right of way of all public
streets and may prune or remove such trees as he determines such action to be
in the best interest of the city. (Ord. 2008-16 § 1)
12.32.040: STREET TREE MAINTENANCE AND CARE:
   A.   Care And Maintenance: The parks and recreation director shall initiate
and administer a program to provide for the planting, maintenance, care,
removal and replacement of street trees, consistent with resources available.
   B.   Standards: All trees located within city streets, parks, rights of way,
landscape borders, or on city maintained property should be maintained
according to standards set by the National Arborist Association, International
Society of Arboriculture, and Utah community forest council or other
appropriate organization.
   C.   City Tree Maintenance: The city shall have the right to plant, prune,
maintain, and remove street trees located within the public rights of way. The
city may remove, or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof
which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious
to sewer, electrical power lines, natural gas lines, water lines, or other
public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other
pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent
property owners, providing that the selection and location of said tree is
approved by the parks and recreation director or designee.
   D.   Tree Replacement: The city may replace street trees or other plantings
which have died or been removed for any reason, or plant additional street
trees deemed appropriate consistent with available resources.
   E.   Adjacent Property Owners To Maintain Trees On Their Property: Adjacent
property owner trees and other plantings shall not overhang or encroach upon
sidewalks, streets, public rights of way or other designated pedestrianways,
not obstruct the view of traffic signs or any street intersection. Trees and
other plantings shall be pruned clear of all branches between the ground and a
height of seven feet (7') for that portion over the sidewalk or pedestrianway.
Trees and other plantings that project over any street or access road that may
be used for emergency purposes shall be trimmed to a height of thirteen feet
six inches (13'6") from the grade of the street or access road. Said owners
shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees; or broken or decayed limbs
which constitute a menace to public safety at their expense.
   F.   Tree Topping: It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person,
firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on
public property. Trees damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical, may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the
parks and recreation director, or designee.
   G.   Planting Season: Planting season for trees planted along streets, in
rights of way, in landscape borders, in parks, or city maintained properties is
September 1 through April 1. This will ensure a higher survival rate of new
trees. Plantings planned outside of the planting season must acquire written
approval of the parks and recreation director, or designee, before proceeding.
(Ord. 2008-16 § 1)
12.32.050: REMOVAL OF TREES:
   A.   Permission Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
partnership, corporation or organization of any kind to prune or remove any
tree or shrub upon any public street or on any city owned property within the
city without first having obtained written permission from the parks and
recreation director, or designee. The request must state specifically the work
to be done and shall expire thirty (30) days after the date of its issue.
   B.   Removing Stumps: Any tree, tree stump or shrub that shall be removed
from city owned property shall be removed below the surface of the ground so
that the top of the stump shall not project above the level of the ground,
unless permission to leave a projecting stump is granted by the parks and
recreation director, or designee.
   C.   City Authority: The city may condemn and remove, or order the removal
of any tree, tree stump, shrub, or plant upon any of the public streets or on
city owned property within this city where the same is dead, diseased or for
any reason whatsoever is deemed unsafe by the parks and recreation director, or
designee. The city shall have the authority to condemn and remove, or order to
be removed any tree, tree stump, shrub, or plant upon private property when the
parks and recreation director, or designee, shall find such action necessary
for public safety or to prevent the spread of disease or insects to public
trees and places. Where no apparent emergency exists, the parks and recreation
director, or designee, shall give at least fifteen (15) days' notice of intent
to remove any street tree to adjacent property owners of the decision to remove
the street tree. (Ord. 2008-16 § 1)
12.32.060: AUTHORIZATION:
   A.   Planting: It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to be
planted any tree in public rights of way without first obtaining written
permission from the parks and recreation director, or designee. Said approval
shall specify the location and variety of trees to be planted.
   B.   Trimming: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than city
personnel, to trim any approved street tree without first obtaining written
permission from the parks and recreation director, or designee. Permission is
not required for removing sucker growth, water sprouts, minor limbs causing
obstructions, or for removal of less than ten percent (10%) of the tree canopy.
   C.   Removal: Any property owner desiring to remove a tree from the park
strip or easement abutting his property shall make application to the parks and
recreation director, or designee. The parks and recreation director, or
designee, shall determine whether or not such tree is required to be retained
in order to preserve the intent and purpose of this chapter. In making this
determination the parks and recreation director, or designee, shall consider
the inconvenience or hardship which retention of the tree would cause the
property owner, and consider also the condition, age, desirability of tree
species and location. If the parks and recreation director, or designee, finds
that the tree may be removed without violating the intent and spirit of this
chapter, he may schedule the removal by city personnel or the property owner to
remove such tree at the property owner's own expense and liability providing
that any trees removed shall be replaced by street trees as approved by the
parks and recreation director, or designee.
   D.   Replacement: Any replacement shall be made based on evaluation by the
parks and recreation director, or designee, of the condition of the site to
determine whether replacement is warranted. If permission is granted for
removal of a street tree, all removal work shall be completed within thirty
(30) days from the date of issuance of the authorization and shall be under the
general supervision of, and in accordance with this chapter. All removal
authorizations shall be null and void after the expiration of thirty (30) days
from the date of issuance, unless extended by the parks and recreation
director, or designee.
   E.   Considerations: In determining whether a tree may be removed and
replaced, the parks and recreation director, or designee, shall consider, among
other things, the following:
      1.   Whether the tree or trees pose a potential for safety problems
despite a sound maintenance program;
      2.   Whether the roots from adjacent park strip trees are interfering
with sewer lines servicing the abutting property to the extent that the
property owner requires frequent repair of said sewer lines;
      3.   Whether the tree is dead, dying or incurably diseased;
      4.   Whether the tree is diseased and weakened by age, storm, fire or
other injuries so as to pose a danger to persons, property, improvements or
other trees;
      5.   Whether the tree(s) is of an undesirable species;
      6.   Whether the tree poses a hardship to the adjacent property owner
such as, but not limited to, the cracking or raising of a garage floor or, in
the case of a handicapped person, special circumstances exist which cause the
location of the tree to become a hindrance for vehicle, and handicapped access;
      7.   Whether removal is necessary for construction of a street widening
or other public improvement project, or necessary street or public improvement
repair work. (Ord. 2008-16 § 1)
12.32.070: OTHER PLANTINGS:
The property owner may plant in planting strips and easements various plantings
such as lawn, various perennials or annuals, or shrubs not to exceed two feet
(2') in height and which will not interfere with the functioning of any curb,
gutter, sidewalk, water meter, fire hydrant, or other public facility, and will
not interfere with or impair the growth of any approved street tree, or plant
in landscaped areas maintained by the city as a public improvement and will not
constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 2008-16 § 1)
12.32.080: STREET TREE PLANTING IN PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED AREAS:
Planting of street trees in previously developed areas will be approved and
supervised by the parks and recreation director, or designee. Trees planted in
these areas will be of approved species and a sense of uniformity will be
maintained where possible. Private citizens may only plant street trees in
these areas with the approval of the parks and recreation director, or
designee. Unapproved plantings may be removed by the city. (Ord. 2008-16 § 1)
12.32.090: HERITAGE TREES:
   A.   Description: The city may, with participation of the landowner,
designate trees of importance as heritage trees. Trees receiving this
designation should have historical or peculiar significance to the community.
Trees that are designated as heritage trees will become the responsibility of
Santa Clara City and will be under the care of the parks and recreation
director, or designee.
   B.   Maintenance: Heritage trees may not be pruned, sprayed, altered in any
way, or removed without written consent of the parks and recreation director,
or designee. Heritage trees shall be protected from construction, excavation,
or any other kind of development that would negatively affect the tree, its
trunk, its branches, or its root system at any time. It will be unlawful for
anyone to disfigure, damage, compromise, or destroy a heritage tree.
   C.   Classification As A Heritage Tree: A tree can only be accepted as a
heritage tree if:
      1.   The tree has proven historical significance, or the tree has a
peculiarity that makes it significant.
      2.   The tree is free from infestation that may cause the demise of the
tree.
      3.   The landowner agrees to give responsibility of the tree to the city.
      4.   The tree is free from past topping or other pruning that has
significantly compromised the structure of the tree.
      5.   The tree is in apparent good health.
      6.   The tree does not exist on property lines that are in dispute.
      7.   The tree has been approved by a majority of the parks and heritage
committee, or designee.
      8.   The city council has designated the tree as a heritage tree. (Ord.
2008-16 § 1)
12.32.100: APPEALS:
The decision of the parks and recreation director, or designee, may be appealed
by any person aggrieved by the decision. The appeal shall be in writing, signed
by the applicant with a statement of reasons supporting the appeal. The appeal
shall be filed with the technical review committee, or designee, not later than
the fifteenth day following the decision being appealed. The technical review
committee, or designee, shall hear the appeal and render an opinion within
forty five (45) days. Any person excepting to any decision rendered by the
technical review committee, or designee, may appeal to the council, in writing,
within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing of the decision to the
applicant. (Ord. 2008-16 § 1)
CHAPTER 12.36
SHADE TREE COMMITTEE
SECTION:
12.36.010: Creation Of Committee
12.36.020: Number Of Committee Members
12.36.030: Terms Of Office
12.36.040: Officers
12.36.050: Compensation
12.36.060: Rules And Procedures
12.36.070: Quorum And Vote
12.36.080: Duties And Responsibilities
12.36.090: Violation Penalty
12.36.010: CREATION OF COMMITTEE:
There is created the shade tree committee of the city of Santa Clara. The
committee shall serve as an advisory body to the city council through the parks
and trails department and is not vested with authority to take final action on
any substantive matters which could be legally binding upon the city. (Ord.
2010-11)
12.36.020: NUMBER OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS:
The committee shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the mayor with
the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 2012-04)
12.36.030: TERMS OF OFFICE:
Committee members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years and shall
serve not more than two (2) consecutive three (3) year terms, except that, as
to the first appointed members, three (3) shall serve for a term of three (3)
years and two (2) for a term of two (2) years, to provide for continuity of
experience. Lots shall be drawn at the first meeting of the shade tree
committee to determine which of the members shall serve for three (3) years and
which shall serve for two (2) years. Thereafter, all appointments to the
committee shall be for terms of three (3) years, and the term of each such
appointment shall commence immediately upon the termination of the term which
is being filled. In the event of a vacancy during a term, the successor member
shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of that term. Terms shall expire
on December 31. Any member may be removed for cause by the appointing
authority. (Ord. 2010-11)
12.36.040: OFFICERS:
The mayor of the city of Santa Clara, Utah, with the advice and consent of the
city council, shall appoint a member of the shade tree committee to serve as
the chairperson for that body. The chairperson shall conduct all meetings and
serve for a term of two (2) years. At the end of this term, he/she may be
reappointed for one additional two (2) year term by a majority vote of the
shade tree committee members. All subsequent chairpersons shall be appointed by
a majority vote of committee members. The shade tree committee secretary and
the chairperson pro tem shall be appointed by a majority vote of the committee
and each shall serve for a two (2) year term. At the end of the initial two (2)
year term, each may be appointed for one additional two (2) year term by a
majority vote of the shade tree committee members. The secretary shall post
agendas of all meetings and record and prepare accurate written minutes of all
meetings to be kept on file in the records vault of the city of Santa Clara, as
required by law. The chairperson pro tem shall conduct meetings in the absence
of the chairperson. (Ord. 2010-11)
12.36.050: COMPENSATION:
The members of the shade tree committee shall serve without compensation,
except that the city council shall provide for reimbursement of the members for
actual expenses incurred, upon presentation of proper receipts and vouchers.
(Ord. 2010-11)
12.36.060: RULES AND PROCEDURES:
The shade tree committee shall adopt such rules and procedures as it may deem
necessary for the proper conduct of its business. A record shall be kept of its
proceedings; such record shall be open to inspection by the public during
regular office hours. (Ord. 2010-11)
12.36.070: QUORUM AND VOTE:
A quorum shall consist of three (3) members of the committee, including the
chairman. No evidence shall be presented or matter discussed unless a quorum is
present. The concurring vote of a majority of those present shall be required
to carry and pass any motion. All members of the shade tree committee shall
vote on all matters before the committee. (Ord. 2010-11)
12.36.080: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The committee shall recommend actions to improve the long term health and
safety of our forest resources through selection of proper tree species,
prioritized pruning, and hazard tree programs; maintain the designation of
"tree city USA" for the city; involve residents in annual Arbor Day
celebrations with tree plantings and other activities; create an adopt-a-tree
sponsoring program for citizens or businesses; promote resident tree planting
programs to aid in revitalizing and expanding the tree population; promote tree
awareness and stewardship among residents through educational workshops and
literature; work directly with local schools to promote trees and seek funding
through various grants and donations. (Ord. 2010-11)
12.36.090: VIOLATION PENALTY:
Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a class B
misdemeanor, punishable as provided by law. (Ord. 2010-11)
TITLE 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
CHAPTER 13.04
UTILITIES GENERALLY
SECTION:
13.04.010: Title
13.04.020: Billing
13.04.030: Due Date
13.04.040: Late Charge
13.04.050: Disconnect Procedures
13.04.060: Deposits
13.04.010: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the UTILITY BILLING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SANTA
CLARA, UTAH. (Ord. 1989-2 § 1: prior code § 14-410)
13.04.020: BILLING:
All charges for water, sewer, and electricity provided by the city shall be
billed monthly on a combined statement (the "statement"), together with the
charges for solid waste collection and storm water services which are included
as an integral part of the statement. (Ord. 2004-10 § 2: Ord. 1989-2 § 1: prior
code § 14-411)
13.04.030: DUE DATE:
All charges billed on the statement shall be due and payable on the due date
provided on the statement. The due date shall be between fifteen (15) and
twenty five (25) days after the statement is mailed. All payments received by
the city shall be allocated among the charges on the statement according to
procedures determined by the city recorder. These procedures shall be based on
requirements of the city's debt obligations and limitations which may be
inherent in the city's computer facilities. (Ord. 1989-2 § 1: prior code § 14-
412)
13.04.040: LATE CHARGE:
A late charge of ten percent (10%) shall be assessed on all charges not paid on
the due date thereof. The late charge shall be due and payable with all other
unpaid charges. (Ord. 2004-10 § 2: Ord. 1989-2 § 1: prior code § 14-413)
13.04.050: DISCONNECT PROCEDURES:
In the event any customer fails to pay all billed charges on or before the due
date, the customer shall be subject to the following disconnect procedures:
   A.   As soon as possible, but not earlier than five (5) days after the due
date on the statement, the customer shall be notified in writing at the
customer's last known address, that the customer's electrical and/or water
service shall be disconnected if all delinquent charges for utility services
and other related charges are not paid within five (5) days of the date the
disconnect notice is delivered to the customer's residence. The customer shall
be informed in said notice that he or she may request a review of the statement
with a representative of the city if he or she feels that there is an error in
the statement or if he or she disagrees with the statement for any other
reason. The request for review of the statement should be made before the date
stated for service to be terminated.
   B.   If all delinquent charges are not paid by the end of the five (5) day
period stated on the termination notice and no request for a review of the
statement has been made by the customer, electrical and/or water service shall
be disconnected. (Ord. 98-08 § 2: Ord. 1989-2 § 1: prior code § 14-414)
13.04.060: DEPOSITS:
   A.   Any renter moving into a rented home or apartment shall deposit at the
city office an amount to be set from time to time as a utility deposit before
occupying the residence. A landlord may have this deposit waived by notifying
the city in writing that he or she will assume responsibility for all unpaid
utility charges when or if the renter moves leaving unpaid balances.
   B.   When a property owner or tenant who has not paid a utility deposit to
the city has to have services terminated because of nonpayment, that owner or
tenant shall pay all the unpaid charges plus the normal utility deposit, plus a
twenty dollar ($20.00) reconnect fee, before services will be restored. (Ord.
1989-2 § 1: prior code § 14-415)
CHAPTER 13.08
ELECTRICAL POWER DEPARTMENT AND SYSTEM
SECTION:
Article I. Electrical Power Department
13.08.010: Electric Power Department And System
13.08.020: Superintendent
13.08.030: Duties Of Superintendent
13.08.040: General
13.08.050: Definitions
13.08.060: Service Agreements
13.08.070: Supplying And Taking Of Service
13.08.080: Customer's Installation
13.08.090: Department's Installation
13.08.100: Metering
13.08.110: Billing
13.08.120: Selection And Application Of Rate Schedules
13.08.130: Deposits
13.08.140: Application Of And Changes And Additions To Electric Power Service
Chapter And Rate Schedules; Conflicts
Article II. Electrical Power System
13.08.150: Operation Of City Electrical System
13.08.160: Real Estate And Contracts
13.08.170: Extensions Of Services; Fees
13.08.180: Use Of Public Rights Of Way
13.08.190: Service Rates
13.08.200: Advertising
13.08.210: Budget And Records
13.08.220: Joint Operations
13.08.230: Reconnection Fee
13.08.240: Renter Deposit
13.08.250: Payment Of Electrical Costs
13.08.260: Theft Of Electricity
13.08.270: Access To Premises
13.08.280: Damage To System
13.08.290: Turning On Current
13.08.300: City Not Liable
13.08.310: Violation; Penalty
   Article III. Net Metering Policy
13.08.400: Availability
13.08.410: Application Provisions
13.08.420: Inspection
13.08.430: Energy Rates And Payments
13.08.440: Liability
13.08.450: Forms
ARTICLE I. ELECTRICAL POWER DEPARTMENT
13.08.010: ELECTRIC POWER DEPARTMENT AND SYSTEM:
The electric power department of the city is created. It shall administer the
operation and maintenance of the electric power system of the city. (Ord. 1989-
1 § 1: prior code § 14-310)
13.08.020: SUPERINTENDENT:
There is created the position of superintendent of the electric power
department. (Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-311)
13.08.030: DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The superintendent of the electric power department shall manage and supervise
the city electric power system pursuant to the provisions of this part and
pursuant to resolutions, rules, and regulations adopted by the city council
from time to time prescribing his or her powers and duties and directing the
manner and frequency with which he or she shall make reports to the mayor
relating to the electric power system. All of the functions and activities of
the superintendent shall be carried on under the direction of the mayor. (Ord.
1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-312)
13.08.040: GENERAL:
This electric power service chapter is designed to govern the supplying and
utilization of electric power service consistent with prudent utility practice
and with safety to customers and to the department. All rate schedules are on
file in the office of the city recorder and copies are obtainable by any
customer without charge upon request. The city council may supplement this
electric power service chapter with such administrative rules, forms, and
specifications as may be necessary to properly enforce and administer this
chapter and the applicable rate schedules and to effect compliance with the
intent of the same. (Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-313)
13.08.050: DEFINITIONS:
The following expressions, when used in this electric power service chapter, in
rate schedules, and in service agreements, shall, unless otherwise indicated,
have the meanings given below:
   CITY: City of Santa Clara, Utah, or the city of Santa Clara electric power
department.
   CONNECTED LOAD: The combined nominal rated capacity of all motors or other
energy consuming devices installed on the customer's premises, which may, at
the will of the customers, be operated with energy supplied by the department.
   CUSTOMER: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, public or private
corporation, or governmental agency receiving the department's service at any
specified location.
   CUSTOMER'S INSTALLATION: The department will furnish and install necessary
meter or meters, and the customer shall provide and maintain locations for
installation thereof, free of expense and satisfactory to the department. No
meter shall be installed on an interior wall of a building nor shall any
construction be performed that will cause an installed meter to be enclosed
within a building or other similar structure.
   DEPARTMENT: City of Santa Clara electric power department.
   ELECTRIC SERVICE: The availability of electric power and energy,
irrespective of whether any electric power and energy is actually used.
Supplying of service by the department consists of the maintenance by the
department, at the point of delivery, of approximately the established voltage
and frequency by means of facilities adequate for carrying the customer's
proper load.
   HORSEPOWER: The equivalent to seven hundred fifty (750) watts.
   INDETERMINATE SERVICE: Service to residential, commercial, or industrial
customers (except as defined herein as temporary service) when the use of
service, both as to amount or permanency, cannot be reasonably assured.
Indeterminate service shall include, but is not limited to:
   A.   Service to mines, quarries, oil wells, industrial manufacturing, and
large commercial enterprises to speculative character;
   B.   Real estate subdivisions;
   C.   Mobile homes and recreational vehicles;
   D.   Property being developed for sale;
   E.   Enterprises where the applicant will not be the user of service;
   F.   Locations where there is little or no immediate demand for service by
any other customer;
   G.   Seasonal service.
   METER: The meter or meters, together with auxiliary devices, if any,
constituting the complete installation needed to measure the power and energy
supplied to any individual customer at a single point of delivery.
   MONTH: An interval of approximately thirty (30) days between successive
meter reading dates, except when the calendar month is specified.
   NOTICE: Unless otherwise specified, a written notification delivered
personally or mailed by one party to the other at such other party's last known
address, the period of notice being computed from the date of such personal
delivery or mailing.
   PERMANENT SERVICE: Service to residential, commercial or industrial
customers when the use of service, both as to amount and permanency, can be
assured. To be classified as permanent service, the power using facilities must
be in place at the date of classification.
   POINT OF DELIVERY: The customer's service terminal, or the point where the
department's wires are joined to the customer's wires or apparatus, unless
otherwise specified in the customer's service agreement.
   RATE SCHEDULE: Electric rate tariffs, as adopted by the city.
   SERVICE AGREEMENT: The agreement or contract between the department and the
customer pursuant to which service is supplied and taken.
   SERVICE FACILITIES:
Service Drop: The wires owned by the department connecting the department's
distribution system to the customer's service entrance conductors.
Service Entrance Conductors: The portion of the customer's installation to
which the department's service drop is connected.
   STANDBY SERVICE: Service to a load for which the customer has available an
alternative source of power other than that provided by the department.
   TEMPORARY SERVICE: Service to customers when the use of service is of a
temporary nature or the ventures are of such uncertain speculative character as
their permanency is questionable. Temporary service may include, but is not
limited to:
   A.   Construction work;
   B.   Circuses;
   C.   Bazaars;
   D.   Fairs;
   E.   Concessions and similar enterprises;
   F.   Mining or oil and gas production operations during a preliminary
development period. (Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-314)
13.08.060: SERVICE AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Form And Execution Of Service Agreements: Each applicant for service
shall make a written application on the department's standard form, or execute
a formal contract. The department's standard application form, when signed by
the department's authorized representative, as well as the customer, becomes a
binding service agreement. Receipt of electric power service shall constitute
an agreement to abide by all provisions of the standard application form and
this electric power service chapter.
   B.   Implied Service Agreement: In the absence of a signed service
agreement, the delivery of electric power service by the department and
acceptance thereof by the customer shall be deemed to constitute an agreement
by and between the department and the customer for delivery and acceptance of
electric power service under the terms and conditions in this electric power
service chapter.
   C.   Term Of Service Agreement: Unless otherwise provided, service
agreements are to continue in effect for an initial period of one month where a
new service is provided.
   D.   Expiration Or Renewal Of Service Agreements: Unless otherwise provided,
each service agreement will automatically extend from its expiration date for
additional successive periods of one month each, unless and until either party
has notified the other in writing not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
end of any such period of its desire to terminate such agreement.
   E.   Department's Rights To Cancel Service Agreement Or To Suspend Service:
For any default or breach of the service agreement by the customer, including
failure to pay bills within the specified period, the department, in addition
to all other legal remedies, may terminate the service agreement or suspend
service at the location where such default has occurred. No such termination or
suspension, however, will be made by the department without ten (10) days
notice to the customer, stating in what particular manner the service agreement
has been violated, except that no notice need to given in cases of theft or
unauthorized use or disposition of service by the customer, or where in the
department's judgment the customer is violating or threatening to violate the
provisions of this electric power service chapter or other ordinances, laws, or
codes. Also, no notice need be given in case of short circuit, or other
dangerous conditions on the customer's side of the point of delivery, or in
case of utilization by the customer of service in such manner as to cause
danger to persons or property, or to jeopardize service to the customer or to
others. Failure of the department at any time after any such default or breach
either to suspend supply of service, or to terminate the service agreement, or
to resort to any other legal remedy, or its failure to exercise on any one or
more of such remedies, shall not affect the department's right to resort
thereafter to any one or more of such remedies for the same or any future
default or breach by the customer.
   F.   Cancellation Of Service Agreement: Unless otherwise provided in the
service agreement, where the customer entirely suspends operations with the
intention to permanently abandon them, the service agreement may be canceled by
written notice to the department not less than thirty (30) days before the date
upon which service is to be terminated. Suspension of operation by the customer
without notification shall not release the customer from his or her prior
obligations.
   G.   Change Of Address Of The Customer:
      1.   When the customer changes his or her address, he or she shall give
notice thereof to the department at least three (3) days prior to the date of
change. The customer will be held responsible for all service supplied to the
vacated premises until such notice has been received and the department has had
a reasonable time, but not less than three (3) days, to discontinue service.
      2.   If the customer moves to an address at which he or she requires
electric power service for any purposes specified in his or her service
agreement, and at which address the department has such service available under
the same rate schedule, the notice shall be considered as the customer's
request that the department transfer such service to the new address; but if
the department does not have such service available at the new address, the old
service agreement shall, at the option of the department, either be considered
canceled or the customer remains liable thereunder. If the department has
service available at the new address to which a different rate schedule
applies, a new service agreement, including the applicable rate schedule, will
be offered to the customer. The department will make transfers of service as
promptly as reasonably possible after receipt of notice.
   H.   Successors And Assigns: Service agreements shall inure to the benefit
of and be binding upon the respective heirs, legal representatives, or
successors by operation of law, of the parties thereto. The customer may assign
his or her service agreement to a third party only with the written consent of
the department. The department may, without the customer's consent, assign any
service agreement to any person or corporation, in any lawful way acquiring or
operating all or any part of the department's property used in supplying
service under such agreement. (Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-315)
13.08.070: SUPPLYING AND TAKING OF SERVICE:
   A.   Power Supply: The department supplies alternating current at
approximately sixty (60) cycles. Secondary distribution voltages are available
at 120/240 volts, 120/208 volts, and 277/480 volts. The department may, at its
option, provide other voltages. All voltages are nominal and subject to
standard variation. The standard amperage shall be two hundred (200) amps.
   B.   Supply Of Service: Service will be supplied only under and pursuant to
this electric power service chapter, and any modifications or additions
thereto, and such applicable rate or rates as may from time to time be adopted.
Service will be supplied under a given rate schedule only at such point of
delivery as are adjacent to facilities of the department and are adequate and
suitable as to capacity and voltage for the service desired. Otherwise, special
agreements between the customer and the department may be required.
   C.   Continuity Of Service: The department will use reasonable diligence to
supply steady and continuous service, but does not guarantee the service
against irregularities or interruptions. The department shall not be liable to
the customer for any injury, loss, or damages occasioned by or related to
irregularities or interruptions from whatever cause, nor shall such
irregularity or interruption constitute a default in the service agreement or
on the part of the department.
   D.   Compliance With Regulations: If compliance with orders or formal
requests of any governmental agency, curtailing or diverting the department's
available electric power resources, make it impossible for the department to
supply the full electric power requirements of all its customers, the
department shall not be liable for any injury or loss caused by the resultant
curtailment, in whole or in part, of its supply to any customer. If any such
curtailment reduces the amount of power available to a customer below the
minimum amount contracted for, such a customer shall be relieved of the
obligation to pay more than the amount of power from time to time made
available by the department. Such other adjustments in amounts payable by the
customer will be made as may be equitable, taking into consideration the time
and extent of curtailment. Inability on the part of the department to meet its
contractual obligations to any customer, when such inability is due to the
department's compliance with an order or formal request of a governmental
agency, shall not constitute default on the part of the department as to any
contract or agreement, and any contract or agreement affected by such
compliance shall remain in full force and effect except as necessarily modified
during the effective period of such order or formal request.
   E.   Suspension Of Service For Repairs And Changes: When necessary to make
repairs or changes in the department's electrical facilities or other property,
the department may, without incurring any liability, suspend service for such
periods as may be reasonably necessary and in such manner as not to
inconvenience the customer unnecessarily.
   F.   Use Of Service: Service shall be supplied directly to the customer
through the department's own meter, and shall be used by the customer only for
the purposes specified in and in accordance with the provisions of the service
agreement. Service shall be for the customer's use only, and under no
circumstances may the customer or the customer's agent or any other individual
association or corporation install meters or other apparatus or facilities for
the purpose of remetering or reselling or otherwise disposing of service
supplied the customer to lessees, tenants, or others, except in accordance with
a service agreement of the department which specifically authorizes such use of
the service. In no case shall the customer, except with the consent of the
department, extend or connect his or her installation to lines across or under
a street, alley, lane, court, or avenue, or other public or private space in
order to obtain service from an adjacent property through one meter, even
though such adjacent property be owned by the customer. In case such
unauthorized remetering, sale, extension, or other disposition of service, the
department may immediately discontinue the supplying of service to the customer
until such unauthorized remetering, sale, or act is discontinued and full
payment is made for all service supplied or used, billed on proper
classification rate schedules, and reimbursement in full is made to the
department for all extra expenses incurred, including attorney fees and
expenses for clerical work, testing, and inspections.
   G.   Right Of Way: Without reimbursement, the customer shall make a proper
conveyance to the department of right of way satisfactory to the department
across the property owned by or controlled by the customer for the department's
lines or extensions thereof necessary or incidental to the supplying of service
to the customer.
   H.   Access To Premises: The duly authorized agents of the department shall
have access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the customer for the
purpose of inspecting wiring and apparatus, removing or replacing the
department's property, reading of meter, and all other purposes incident to the
supplying of electric power service. It shall be the responsibility of the
customer to provide access that is safe and free of obstruction at all times.
In the event the department determines, in its discretion, that the access
provided is not safe or is not free of obstruction, it shall give the customer
notice that the customer must remove the unsafe condition and/or obstruction
within ten (10) days of the notice. In the event the customer fails to comply
with the terms of the notice, the city may do either of the following:
      1.   The city may estimate for each month the electrical consumption at
the premises and use that estimate for purposes of charging the customer for
electrical consumption.
      2.   The city may without further notice discontinue electric power
service at the premises. If the city elects to estimate the electrical
consumption, that estimate shall equal the highest monthly level of metered
consumption at the premises during the preceding twelve (12) months, plus an
additional twenty five percent (25%). The estimate of consumption determined by
the city shall be binding upon the customer. The fact that the city estimates
consumption for one or more months shall not preclude it from subsequently
electing to terminate electric power service if the customer has not removed
the unsafe condition and/or obstruction.
   I.   Location Of Customer's Service Entrance Conductors: The customer's
service entrance conductors shall be located at a point readily accessible to
the department's service drop, such point to be determined by the department.
(Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-316)
13.08.080: CUSTOMER'S INSTALLATION:
   A.   Customer's Facilities For Receiving Service: The customer's facilities
for receiving shall be installed in accordance with the department's standards
and national electric code. The department's specifications mentioned above are
on file at the department's office and are made part of this electric power
service ordinance. The customer shall not employ or utilize any equipment,
appliance, or device so as to affect adversely the department's service to the
customer or to others. When polyphase service is supplied by the department,
the customer shall control the use thereof so that the load at the point of
delivery will be maintained in reasonable electric balance between the phases.
   B.   Power Factor Correction And Voltage Control:
      1.   The department reserves the right to require the customer to
install, at his or her expense, such power factor corrective and/or load
limiting equipment as is necessary for the department.
      2.   When fluorescent, neon, zeon, or other hot or cold cathode types of
gaseous tube lighting having similar power factor characteristics are installed
and used, the customer may be required to furnish, install, and maintain, at
his or her own expense, corrective apparatus designed to maintain at not less
than approximately ninety percent (90%) lagging the power factor or each unit
of such equipment or group of such equipment controlled as a unit by a single
switch or its equivalent which controls any such unit. Similarly, all air
conditioning equipment installed after the effective date of this electric
power service chapter shall be equipped so that when in operation, the power
factor is not less than ninety percent (90%) lagging.
      3.   Where the customer installs power factor corrective equipment, the
department reserves the right to require the customer to install such controls
as are necessary, in the department's opinion, to prevent voltage or other
disturbances on the department's system that are detrimental to the service
furnished other customers.
      4.   The department shall have the right to refuse or discontinue service
to any such installation, until the customer has complied with the foregoing
provisions.
   C.   Phase Of Motors:
      1.   Individual motor installations requiring less than five (5)
horsepower shall be single phase. Motors not exceeding one-half (1/2)
horsepower shall be for one hundred fifteen (115) volts; and motors of one-half
(1/2) horsepower to five (5) horsepower shall be for two hundred thirty (230)
volts. Exceptions may be served at the option of the department.
      2.   For installations of motors of five (5) horsepower and over, 3-phase
alternating current will be furnished at the voltage stated in the service
agreement, but single phase service, at the option of the department, may be
furnished for installation of motors of five (5) horsepower and over, where the
department has only single phase service available at the point where the
customer desires service.
   D.   Current-Limiting Devices:
      1.   Auto starters or other suitable devices shall be provided by the
customer for motors having above five (5) horsepower.
      2.   All motors starting on other than light load shall be provided with
suitable device or be of suitable type to limit the starting current.
   E.   Changes In Installation: Since the department's service drop,
transformers, meters, and other facilities used in supplying service to a
customer have a definite limited capacity, before making any material changes
or increases in the customer's installation or use, the customer shall give
notice thereof to the department, and obtain the department's consent thereto.
The department as promptly as possible after receipt of such notice will either
give its approval to the proposed change or increase, or will advise the
customer upon what conditions service can be supplied for such change or
increase.
   F.   Inspection By Department: The department shall have the right, but does
not assume the duty, to inspect the customer's installation at any time, and
from time to time, the department shall also have the right to refuse to
commence or to continue service whenever it does not consider such installation
to be in good operating condition, but the department does not in any event
assume any responsibility whatever in connection with the customer's
installation.
   G.   Customer's Responsibility: The customer assumes all responsibility on
the customer's side of the point of delivery for service supplied or taken, as
well as for the electrical installation, appliances, and apparatus used in
connection therewith, and shall indemnify the department from and against all
loss, cost, damage, or claims for injury or damages to persons or property
occasioned by or in any way resulting from such service or the use thereof on
the customer's side of the point of delivery. Such indemnity shall extend to
cover all expenses, including all attorney fees and court costs, incurred by
the department, with or without suit. (Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-317)
13.08.090: DEPARTMENT'S INSTALLATION:
   A.   Installation And Maintenance: Except as otherwise provided in this
electric power service chapter, in service agreements, or rate schedules, the
department will install and maintain its lines and equipment on its side of the
point of delivery, but shall not be required to install or maintain any lines
or equipment, except meters, on the customer's side of the point of delivery.
Only the department's agents are authorized to connect the department's service
drop to the customer's service entrance conductors.
   B.   Connections To Customer's Service: The service drop will ordinarily be
installed overhead. If the customer desires to have the service drop installed
in any other manner, special arrangement will be made between the customer and
the department whereby such service drop will be installed and maintained at
the customer's expenses.
   C.   Relocation Of Department Facilities At Customer's Request: When, solely
for the customer's convenience, the department is requested to relocate its
facilities, the customer shall pay to the department the total cost of making
the requested change, as that cost is determined by the department.
   D.   Protection By Customer: The customer shall protect the department's
wiring and apparatus on the customer's premises and shall permit no one but the
department's agents or persons authorized by law to inspect or handle same. In
the event of any loss or damage to such property of the department caused by or
arising out of carelessness, neglect, or misuse by the customer or other
unauthorized persons, the cost of making good such damages, including attorney
fees and court costs, shall be paid by the customer.
   E.   Tree Trimming: The department shall regularly review the condition of
trees growing in or near public utility easements to determine if potential
interference with overhead utility lines might pose a problem by reason of
their growth patterns during the growing season of the trees. Trees growing
under or near power lines that could potentially interfere with the system will
be trimmed no less than ten feet (10') below the nearest line. Consideration of
the growth patterns of the particular tree will be taken into account. Trees
with rapid growth may be trimmed as much as fifteen feet (15') below the lines.
The department will make a reasonable effort to contact property owners before
trimming a tree or trees, but where this is not possible, and the crew is in
the area with their equipment, the trees will be trimmed. Consideration will be
given to the appearance of the trimmed tree, but an owner who is not satisfied
with the appearance of his or her tree may at his or her expense shape the tree
to his or her liking. This work may be done by the owner or by a commercial
company paid by the owner, but is not the responsibility of the city. Access to
easements will be obtained from the property owner wherever possible. Debris
from trimming operations will be removed by the city crew. Because of the
safety hazard and potential for electric shock, owners are advised not to trim
their own trees. If the owner does his or her own trimming, he or she agrees by
so doing not to hold the city liable for his or her failure to comply with this
chapter or for any accident related to his noncompliance. In the event the
property owner refuses to permit the city crew to enter the premises to
complete the required trimming work, the city shall discontinue electrical
power service to such property owner at that location until such permission is
given. (Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-318)
13.08.100: METERING:
   A.   Installation: The department will furnish and install the necessary
meter or meters, and the customer shall provide and maintain locations for
installation thereof free of expense and satisfactory to the department.
   B.   Evidence Of Service Use: The registration of the department's meter
shall be accepted and received at all times and places as prima facie evidence
of the amount of power and energy taken by the customer.
   C.   Voltage Of Installation: Metering will be at secondary voltage unless
otherwise specified in the service agreement.
   D.   Meter Tests And Bill Adjustments:
      1.   When the accuracy of a meter is questioned, upon written request
from the customer, the department will test the meter by comparing with a
standard test meter. If the meter is found to be accurate within plus or minus
two percent (±2%), the customer will reimburse the department for the cost of
said test. Prior to any test, the department reserves the right to require a
deposit to cover said costs.
      2.   If the meter being tested is found to be more than two percent (2%)
slow or fast, no charge shall be made for testing, and the department will
adjust the proportion to the error (either fast or slow) for the period covered
by the billing in question and until the date of installation of a new meter,
but said adjustment period, in any event, shall not exceed ninety (90) days.
(Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-319)
13.08.110: BILLING:
   A.   Billing Periods: Bills ordinarily will be rendered regularly at monthly
intervals, but may be rendered more frequently at the department's option.
Nonreceipt of bills by the customer shall not release or diminish the
obligation of the customer with respect to payment thereof.
   B.   Minimums: When a customer receives service for less than thirty (30)
days during the billing period, the applicable monthly minimum shall apply.
   C.   Separate Billing For Each Point Of Delivery:
      1.   At each point of delivery, use of service shall be metered
separately for each customer served. Whenever, for any reason, the department
furnishes two (2) or more meter installations for a single customer or supplies
service under a rate schedule which does not require a meter, each point of
metering and/or point of delivery where no meter is required shall be
considered as a separate service. A separate service agreement will be
required, and bills will be separately calculated for each such separate
service, except where the department may, under special circumstances, waive
this requirement.
      2.   For service locations established prior to April 18, 1989, which
have more than one meter and which were billed on a conjunctive meter basis
under a common rate schedule, the department will continue to bill these
locations on a conjunctive meter basis until said multiple meters can be
combined into a single meter location.
   D.   Payment Of Bills: All charges due from the customer become delinquent
if not paid on or before the due date set forth on the bill. Upon becoming
delinquent, all unpaid balances will be assessed a late charge of five percent
(5%). The customer shall pay any attorney fees and court costs incurred in the
collection of past due bills. In addition the customer's service may be
terminated as provided in the city's uniform utility billing ordinance.
   E.   Billing Dispute: In the event any portion of any bill is dispute,
including questions relating to metering, the disputed amount shall be paid
under protest when due. Said protest must be in written form and must be
received by the department on or before the due date of the bill in question.
The protest shall be referred to the city recorder or his or her designee for
resolution. Upon their written determination of the amount due, the customer
may appeal to the utilities commission. In the absence of such an appeal, the
determination of the department and city recorder shall be final. If protest is
not made as herein provided, no adjustment will be made.
   F.   Tax Adjustment Clause: In the event any governmental body shall impose
a gross revenue, occupation, or franchise tax upon the city for power supplied,
then the amount of such tax shall be billed to and paid by the customers
receiving the power from the city.
   G.   Theft Of Service: In any case of tampering with a meter installation or
interfering with the proper working thereof, or theft of service by any person,
the customer shall be liable to immediate discontinuance of service as provided
herein, and the department shall be entitled to collect from the customer at
the appropriate rate for all power and energy not recorded on the meter by
reason of such tampering, interfering, or theft or service diversion, as such
amount may be estimated by the department from the best available date. The
customer shall also pay all expenses, including attorney fees and court costs,
incurred by the department in the collection of amounts due or in the remedying
of any tampering, interfering, or theft. (Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-320)
13.08.120: SELECTION AND APPLICATION OF RATE SCHEDULES:
   A.   Selection Of Rate Schedule:
      1.   When a prospective customer makes application for service, the
department will, upon request, assist in the selection of the rate schedule
appropriate to the customer for the service requested. The selection will be
based on the prospective customer's statement as to the class of service
desired, the amount and manner of use, and any other pertinent information.
This statement will be recorded and filed with the application. The department
shall not be liable for any errors in designating the applicable schedule.
      2.   If through error a service agreement is entered into specifying a
rate schedule which is not applicable to the class of service taken, on
discovery of the error, all bills rendered during the preceding twelve (12)
months shall be recalculated in accordance with the lowest properly applicable
rate schedule, and any excess paid shall be applied on any outstanding balance
owing by the customer or, if no balance is owing, shall be refunded by the
department, or any balance due shall be paid by the customer, as the case may
be. No adjustments may be made for service provided more than twelve (12)
months prior to the date on which adjustment is first requested in writing.
   B.   Distinction Between Residential And Commercial Service: Service
rendered through one meter to apartment houses and to recognized rooming and/or
boarding houses will be considered commercial service.
   C.   Lighting On Power Schedules: Lighting service will not be supplied
under any power rate schedules unless it is so specified in such power rate
schedule, and when so supplied the customer will provide and maintain all
auxiliary apparatus (transformers, regulators, etc.) that may be necessary.
Service supplied to motor generators, any portion of the output of which is
used for lighting purposes, shall be considered lighting service.
   D.   Temporary And Standby Service:
      1.   Temporary and standby service shall not be rendered except under a
special agreement between the department and the customer unless the temporary
service is provided during construction where a permanent service will be
established.
      2.   In no event will the department supply power and energy for the
purpose of starting or furnishing excitation or other auxiliary service
necessary to the operation of any of the customer's generating plant or for
parallel operation of the customer's generating equipment with the department's
system except under a special agreement between the department and the
customer. (Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-321)
13.08.130: DEPOSITS:
   A.   When Required: The department, at the time application for electric
power service is made or anytime thereafter, may require a cash deposit or
guarantee satisfactory to the department to secure the payment of bills as they
become due. Such deposit or guarantee may be held in its entirety by the
department until final settlement of the customer's account. The amount of such
deposit may be equivalent of the estimated cost of service for ninety (90)
days, as estimated by the department.
   B.   Refunds: Deposits shall be refunded upon the customer's request after a
satisfactory payment history of twenty four (24) months. Deposits shall be
credited to the customer's bills for electric power service. If the customer is
terminating service and that customer's deposit balance remains greater than
the customer's last bill, the remaining balance, after crediting the bill, may
be refunded directly to the customer. (Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-322)
13.08.140: APPLICATION OF AND CHANGES AND ADDITIONS TO ELECTRIC POWER SERVICE
CHAPTER AND RATE SCHEDULES; CONFLICTS:
   A.   Application Of Electric Power Service Chapter And Rate Schedules:
Service agreements that are presently in effect or that may be entered into in
the future are made expressly subject to this electric power service chapter
and to the applicable rate schedules and any modifications or additions
thereto. When practicable, thirty (30) days notice by publication in a local
newspaper or by mail, at the department's option, will be given to any of the
customers affected by any such change, addition, or substitution.
   B.   Conflicts: In case of a conflict between any provision of this electric
power service chapter, a customer's service agreement, or a rate schedule, the
provisions of the service agreement take precedence, followed by the provisions
of the rate schedule.
   C.   Miscellaneous: Any provisions of this chapter held invalid shall be
ineffective to the extent of such invalidity without affecting or invalidating
the remaining provisions of this chapter. The chapter supersedes and repeals
that portion of any ordinance or resolution that is inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1989-1 § 1: prior code § 14-323)
ARTICLE II. ELECTRICAL POWER SYSTEM
13.08.150: OPERATION OF CITY ELECTRICAL SYSTEM:
The electrical power department is created and hereinafter referred to in this
chapter as "the department". It shall be comprised of all the property,
equipment and personnel necessary to maintain and operate the municipality's
electrical power system.
The department shall administer the operation and maintenance of the municipal
electrical power system under the general supervision of the city council. All
hiring of employees shall be done in accordance with the city's personnel
policies and procedures. This section does not, in any manner, prohibit the
city council from contracting the maintenance services to a private vendor.
(Ord. 1988-1: prior code § 14-511.1)
13.08.160: REAL ESTATE AND CONTRACTS:
The city council, for the efficient and economical operation of the department,
may enter into contract to: a) sell its products and services to the public and
private corporations and to other consumers; b) construct power generating
plants, transmission lines, and other facilities; c) purchase real estate and
franchises; d) purchase power; and e) lease property which may be necessary for
the proper operation of the electrical system. (Ord. 1988-1: prior code § 14-
511.2)
13.08.170: EXTENSIONS OF SERVICES; FEES:
The council may adopt regulations governing extensions of services of the
department both inside and outside the city limits. The regulations shall
provide the conditions under which the extensions shall be made to render
compensatory and shall provide that each extension project shall, when
completed, become the property of the city whether on public or private
property. The council may provide for the form of refunds where advances by the
persons benefitted are necessary to make extensions compensatory. (Ord. 1988-1:
prior code § 14-511.3)
13.08.180: USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
The department may use the property over, under or along any public street,
sidewalk or other right of way in the operations of the department; but said
department shall in all cases be subject to applicable general regulations of
the city and cause the surface of the public way to be restored to its usual
condition. (Ord. 1988-1: prior code § 14-511.4)
13.08.190: SERVICE RATES:
The city council, after recommendation by the power board, shall fix rates to
be charged for electricity sold and services rendered by the department. Rates
shall be fair, reasonable, and compensatory and shall be uniform for all
consumers within the same class; but different rate schedules may be applied to
different classes of consumers as determined by the council. Rates within the
city limits may be less but shall be no greater than for the same class of
consumers outside the city limits. Rates shall be sufficient to pay all
operating and maintenance expenses of the department and all bond interest and
redemption costs of the electrical power system. The council may require
reasonable deposits as security for the payment of charges for services and may
provide for the return of said deposits when satisfactory consumer credit has
been established.
The city offices shall administer the collection of any and all funds generated
by the department.
The rates charged for electric services shall be established by resolution of
the city council after recommendation of the power board. (Ord. 1988-1: prior
code § 14-511.5)
13.08.200: ADVERTISING:
The city council, after recommendation from the power board, may authorize
reasonable expenditures to advertise and promote the use of services of the
department and to acquaint the public with the operations, programs and planned
expansion of the department and the city electrical power system. (Ord. 1988-1:
prior code § 14-511.6)
13.08.210: BUDGET AND RECORDS:
The power board shall furnish a proposed budget for the department to the city
council no later than May 1 of each fiscal year so that it may be incorporated
in the general budget of the city. Said proposed budget shall be subject to a
review process as outlined in title 10-6-111 Utah Code Annotated.
The accounts and records of the department shall be maintained by city offices,
but shall be kept separately from the general accounts and funds of the city
except as may be otherwise specifically provided by state law or other city
ordinances.
The council shall have the power to transfer to the city treasury all surplus
funds which in their best judgement will not be needed for the proper
operation, maintenance, bond payments and care of the department. This transfer
to be made at the close of each operational year of the department. (Ord. 1988-
1: prior code § 14-511.7)
13.08.220: JOINT OPERATIONS:
The city council may contract with any public agency or private corporation or
other municipality or individual for the joint use of poles and other property
belonging to the city or to the other party. The city council may also contract
with any other party for the joint acquisition of real property and franchises,
and the joint financing, construction, operation and maintenance of power
generating facilities, transmission lines and other property. (Ord. 1988-1:
prior code § 14-511.8)
13.08.230: RECONNECTION FEE:
Any person desiring reconnections of service to the Santa Clara City electrical
power system after said service has been turned off, shall be required to pay,
in advance, the sum of thirty dollars ($30.00) for an inside the city limits
electrical reconnection fee and the sum of forty dollars ($40.00) for an
outside the city limits electrical reconnection fee. (Ord. 1988-1: prior code §
14-511.9)
13.08.240: RENTER DEPOSIT:
   A.   All renters or tenants of commercial, residential or other property
shall pay a deposit, in advance, of commencement of electrical service. Said
deposit shall be in addition to the regular monthly or other periodic payments
for electricity. Such deposits shall be in an amount established by resolution
of the city council.
   B.   Such deposits shall be received by the city treasurer and deposited in
the general account of the city and shall be retained by the city so long as
any services have not been paid for in full. The city shall use such amount of
said deposit as is needed to pay any delinquent charges for such services not
paid for by the tenant or renter.
   C.   The city council may by resolution require the landlord or owner of
rental property to be responsible for the payment of electrical power services
furnished to the property, whether or not the landlord or owner resides upon
the property. In addition, the landlord or owner may be required to post such
deposits with the city as the governing body may deem appropriate to ensure the
payment for electrical services. (Ord. 1988-1: prior code § 14-511.10)
13.08.250: PAYMENT OF ELECTRICAL COSTS:
All charges for electricity shall be paid for monthly by the consumer. Any
consumer failing, neglecting or refusing to pay such charges by the twentieth
day of the month shall be assessed a ten percent (10%) penalty. Consumers whose
accounts are delinquent in excess of thirty (30) days shall also be subject to
having their electric current shut off by the department. (Ord. 1988-1: prior
code § 14-511.11)
13.08.260: THEFT OF ELECTRICITY:
It is unlawful for any person to use electric current ahead of the meter or to
use, employ or follow any other procedure or device for obtaining electricity
without paying therefor or to aid, abet, encourage or assist any other person
in so doing. (Ord. 1988-1: prior code § 14-511.12)
13.08.270: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
Free access at all reasonable hours shall be allowed employees of the
department to all premises supplied with electrical service. All meters shall
be outside of the building which they serve and readily accessible and mounted
five (5) to seven feet (7') above the ground. Variations in mounting of the
meter must be approved in advance by the department. It shall be unlawful for
any person to interfere with or obstruct the employees of the department in the
performance of their duties. (Ord. 1988-1: prior code § 14-511.13)
13.08.280: DAMAGE TO SYSTEM:
It is unlawful for any person to take down, remove, damage, obstruct, displace,
destroy or otherwise interfere with any power line or equipment or any part
thereof, or to sever or damage any wire or cable thereof, or in any manner to
interrupt the transmission of electricity along such line, or damage in any
manner whatsoever any building or structure or machinery connected therewith.
(Ord. 1988-1: prior code § 14-511.14)
13.08.290: TURNING ON CURRENT:
It is unlawful for person to turn on the electric current to his or hers or any
other premises or to use any electric current from the city system without
written permission from the department. (Ord. 1988-1: prior code § 14-511.15)
13.08.300: CITY NOT LIABLE:
Santa Clara City and its power system shall not be held liable for damages to
any electric user by reason of a stoppage, fluctuation of voltage, or
interruption of his or her electrical service caused by accident to power
plant, service or transmission lines, alterations, additions, repairs or other
unavoidable causes. (Ord. 1988-1: prior code § 14-511.16)
13.08.310: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any person violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished as prescribed by law. (Ord. 1988-1: prior code § 14-511.17)
ARTICLE III. NET METERING POLICY
13.08.400: AVAILABILITY:
Santa Clara City ("city") desires to encourage the use of renewable resources
with Santa Clara City electric customers ("customers") by making available a
meter capable of providing the necessary accounting to allow the customer to
displace electric energy otherwise purchased from the city or to provide
electric energy to the city ("net meter"). The net meter will be available to
any electric customer connected to the Santa Clara City's electric distribution
system provided that the customer installs a solar, wind, or other city
approved renewable generation resource ("renewable resource") on the customer's
side of the meter, subject to the application provisions. (Ord. 2013-08)
13.08.410: APPLICATION PROVISIONS:
The customer must make an application to Santa Clara City and receive approval
from the city before installing an interconnected renewable resource on their
property. Santa Clara City may withhold approval if for any reason the
requested interconnection would result in a negative monetary or physical
impact on the city's electrical system. The city may approve the agreement if
there is no physical negative impact, but may terminate this agreement at any
time if it is determined to have an adverse monetary impact.
   A.   By accepting this net metering policy, the customer hereby agrees to
the following provisions:
      1.   The monthly electrical output of the renewable resource shall not be
greater than one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the historical maximum
monthly energy consumption at a single point of delivery of the customer.
      2.   A renewable resource installed by the customer shall include, at the
customer's expense, all equipment necessary to meet applicable safety, power
quality and interconnection requirements established by the national electric
code ("NEC"), national electric safety code ("NESC") and shall be manufactured
and installed to interconnection standards that meet or exceed the Institute Of
Electrical And Electronics Engineers, Inc. ("IEEE") standard 1547 for
interconnecting distributed resources with electric power systems and
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. ("UL") standard 1741, inverters, converters and
controllers for use in independent power systems.
      3.   The customer shall be required to install a manual disconnect that
is within five feet (5') of the meter location, readily accessible by city
personnel and outside of any fenced in area. The disconnect switch shall be
lockable and shall be labeled as "generation disconnect".
      4.   The city shall install and maintain a new revenue meter for the
customer, at the customer's expense. In addition, any subsequent revenue meter
change necessitated by the customer, whether because of a decision to stop net
metering or for any other reason, shall be an expense billed to the customer at
the applicable service rates.
      5.   By accepting this agreement the customer releases to the city all
renewable energy credits ("RECs"), solar renewable energy credits ("SRECs") or
other renewable attributes as appropriate based on actual on site electric
generation from the renewable resource.
      6.   The customer will comply with all city service and utility billing
requirements, including payments for applicable monthly electrical base rates
and other utility billings, fees and taxes.
      7.   The customer will comply with all installation requirements,
applicable inspection fees, building and electric codes of the city.
      8.   The customer's facility used for net metering shall be equipped with
metering equipment, which can measure the flow of electricity in both
directions at the same rate. For customer facilities less than ten (10)
kilowatts ("kW") in rated capacity, this shall be accomplished through the use
of a single, bidirectional electric revenue meter which has only a single
register for billing purposes.
      9.   The city shall make net metering available to eligible customers on
a first come, first served basis. Single or multiple net metering connections
to a city owned transformer, which create an imbalance that exceeds twenty
percent (20%) of the nameplate, rating may be denied at the city's discretion
or, if approved may require system upgrades including additional transformers
or other system upgrades at the customer's expense.
      10.   Net metering connections to city facilities above or greater than
industry standard, secondary voltages shall not be allowed under this policy
and shall be reviewed by the city under a separate review and approval process,
which may include a system impact study. Renewable resource connections to
transmission lines within the city are prohibited.
      11.   If the net metering project requires special engineering studies as
determined by the city, the customer shall be responsible for all costs. An
estimate of costs shall be provided by a licensed engineering firm as
determined by the city and payment will be made by the customer, to the city,
before the engineering study is approved. Final billing for the study will be
trued up upon completion and the customer shall be billed for any amount above,
or their electric account credited, for any amount below the initial estimate.
      12.   The customer shall be solely responsible for all work, and costs
incurred, for installation and maintenance of the renewable resource. All
modifications or improvements required to the city's electric system due to the
customer's installation of facilities shall be paid for by the customer. (Ord.
2013-08)
13.08.420: INSPECTION:
Upon approval and installation of a renewable resource, but before
interconnection to the net meter, the city shall inspect the renewable
resource, installation and interconnection and approve or disapprove the
interconnection. The city may disapprove any final interconnection for any
reason.
   A.   The city shall have the right to inspect the customer's renewable
resource during reasonable hours and with reasonable prior notice to the
customer. If the city finds that the customer's renewable resource is not in
compliance with the requirements of the city's interconnection rules and the
standards set forth in this policy, and noncompliance adversely affects the
safety or reliability of the city's facilities or other customer's facilities,
the city may require the customer to disconnect the facility until compliance
is achieved.
   B.   If the city disconnects the renewable resource, the customer shall
receive in a timely manner, a written explanation of the disconnection. The
customer shall have the right to correct the situation and petition the city to
reestablish an interconnection. (Ord. 2013-08)
13.08.430: ENERGY RATES AND PAYMENTS:
The customer shall be subject to the following provisions for service under
this policy:
   A.   For all kWh delivered by the city the customer shall pay the normal
city rate for customer service, as if the customer had not installed a
renewable resource.
   B.   The city shall credit the customer's bill for kWhs only that exceeds
the customer's on site consumption of kWh in the billing period following the
billing period of excess production at four cents ($0.04) per kWh.
   C.   On June 1 of each calendar year any remaining unused credit accumulated
for a period of greater than thirty (30) days of historical monthly usage,
shall be relinquished by the customer with no compensation by the city to the
customer.
   D.   If a home with a renewable resource is sold, any remaining credits will
be applied to the electrical billing for kWh consumption with any remaining
unused credits above the total billing relinquished to the city.
   E.   Net metering credit shall only be applied to offset part or all of the
customer's own electrical requirements at a single metering point exclusively.
Net metering credit shall not be applied to multiple meters owned by a single
customer at separate locations.
   F.   This agreement is between the electric customer and the city. Nothing
in this policy allows for the purchase or sale of energy produced by the
customer to or from a third party. Renewable resources on rental units are not
eligible for net metering under this policy.
   G.   The city reserves the right to modify or amend this policy, the city's
avoided cost rate, the displacement ratio, or the monthly service charge, upon
reasonable advance notice to the customer (30 days). (Ord. 2013-08)
13.08.440: LIABILITY:
The customer shall be responsible for any damage caused by the customer's
renewable resource to the city's distribution system and other customer
facilities. The customer shall be responsible for the installation and
maintenance of applicable protection equipment, and for any damage caused by
improper application, maintenance or faulty equipment. The city will not be
liable directly or indirectly for permitting or continuing to allow an
attachment of a renewable resource, or the acts or omissions of the customer's
renewable resource that cause loss or injury, including death, to any third
party.
Application for the customer's net metering, within a homeowners' association
("HOA"), must be accompanied by a letter of approval of the net metering
installation, signed by the chairman of the board at the time of application.
The letter must include a copy of the minutes showing a majority vote of
approval. The city is not liable for any violation of existing CCRs within an
HOA, related to the customer's installation of a renewable resource.
Neither the city nor the customer shall be subject to any liability or damages
due to the inability of the city to serve the customer's load, due to lack of
energy from either the city or the renewable resource.
Neither the city nor the customer shall be subject to any liability or claims
for damages due to the inability of equipment manufacturers or vendors to
provide equipment or repairs essential for the safe operation of the system in
a timely manner. (Ord. 2013-08)
13.08.450: FORMS:
Forms for the net metering program are on file in the city. (Ord. 2013-08)
CHAPTER 13.12
COLLECTION OF RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE FOR DISPOSAL OR RECYCLING
SECTION:
13.12.010: Definitions
13.12.020: Use Of Washington County Landfill
13.12.030: Required Use Of Automated/Semi-Automated Containers
13.12.040: Residential Waste Collection And Disposal Services Provided By City
13.12.050: Mandatory Use Of Service
13.12.060: Recycling Opt Out Rules And Guidelines
13.12.070: Residential Waste Collection Procedures
13.12.080: Establishment Of Residential Fees
13.12.090: Fee For Availability Of Service
13.12.100: Monthly Billing
13.12.110: Collection Of Commercial Waste
13.12.120: Commercial Or Private Haulers
13.12.130: Collection Vehicles
13.12.140: Transportation Of Waste
13.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
following meanings.
             The Residential Waste Collection Agreement, dated September 1, 2020, between
             Washington County Special Service District No. 1 and Allied Waste
AGREEMENT:   Transportation, Inc., a Delaware corporation, d/b/a Republic Services of St.
             George, licensed to do business in the State of Utah, a copy of which is
             attached to Ordinance 2021-02 as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by this
             reference.
AUTOMATED OR A waste receptacle approved by the District, with a capacity of sixty (60) to
SEMI-        ninety four (94) gallons, equipped with a tight-fitting, permanently attached
AUTOMATED    lid and wheels for easy movement, and specifically designed for automated and
CONTAINER:   semi-automated pick up.
             Residential waste materials with lengths, weights or volumes greater than those
             allowed for automated containers, including but not limited to stoves,
             refrigerators, dryers, dishwashers, televisions, hot water tanks, washing
             machines, household furniture, four (4) or fewer tires, air conditioners,
             Christmas trees, bicycles, large toys, tree limbs of three feet (3') to six feet
             (6') in length and up to six inches (6") in diameter, and bags used for seasonal
BULKY WASTE: disposal of leaves. Bulky waste does not include automobiles, more than four (4)
             tires, motorcycles, boats, construction/demolition waste, large dead animals,
             hazardous waste, special waste and trees (other than Christmas trees) or limbs
             exceeding six feet (6') in length and six inches (6") in diameter, and other
             similar items. All items must be free of extraneous materials and shall be
             capable of being lifted into Republic's collection vehicle by two (2) men. A
             resident may not place more than three bulky waste items out for collection per
             call.
CITY:        The City of Santa Clara.
             Shall mean or refer to property:
             A.   Used primarily in connection with the supply of goods or professional
             services on a regular basis or in the regular course of business, and for which
COMMERCIAL:  a business or other license is required by state law or local ordinance; and
             B.   A hotel, motel, recreational vehicle rental park used for overnight or
             short-term rental of less than thirty (30) days, or an apartment complex of more
             than eight (8) units used for a rental term of more than thirty (30) days.
COMMERCIAL   Any person or entity who in the regular course of business or for a fee collects
HAULER:      and disposes of commercial waste.
COMMERCIAL   Non-hazardous waste materials produced by businesses or resulting from normal
WASTE:       activities on or use of commercial property or premises.
             At or near any curb, sidewalk or other location immediately adjacent to any
CURBSIDE:    street, highway or road which is safely accessible to Republic's waste
             collection vehicles.
DISTRICT:    Washington County Special Service District No. 1.
DUMPSTER OR  Any metal container with a volume of one and one-half (1.5) cubic yards or more,
ROLL-OFF:    designed for storage of waste and to be compatible with collection equipment.
             A solid waste or combination of solid wastes, other than household waste, which
             because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious
             characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
HAZARDOUS    mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible
WASTE:       illness or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
             the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
             otherwise managed, and as further defined in R315-2-3 of the Utah Administrative
             Code.
             Any waste material, including garbage, trash, and sanitary wastes in septic
HOUSEHOLD    tanks, derived from households, including single-family and multiple-family
WASTE:       residences, apartments, hotels and motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew
             quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas.
             A solid waste that contains or may reasonably be expected to contain pathogens
INFECTIOUS   of sufficient virulence and quantity that exposure to the waste by a susceptible
WASTE:       host could result in an infectious disease. Infectious waste is included in
             household waste unless subject to regulation in accordance with R315-316(1) of
             the Utah Administrative Code.
             Any material or substance included in waste materials that can be put to
RECYCLABLES  beneficial re-use or sold in recognized markets for purposes other than
OR           disposal, including, without limitation, uncontaminated, non-hazardous
RECYCLABLE   corrugated cardboard, white paper, newsprint and other paper; plastics and
MATERIALS:   plastic film; ferrous and non-ferrous metals; and glass or such other items as
             may be specified from time to time.
REPUBLIC OR  Allied Waste Transportation, Inc., a Delaware corporation, d/b/a Republic
REPUBLIC     Services of St. George, licensed to do business in the State of Utah.
SERVICES:
             The use of property or premises containing a structure which is hooked to
             culinary water and power and is intended or used for human habitation, including
             but not limited to:
             A.   Single homes;
             B.   Mobile homes;
RESIDENCE OR C.   Town homes;
RESIDENTIAL: D.   Condominiums;
             E.   Short-term vacation rentals (VRBO's) of less than thirty (30) days;
             F.   Apartments not contained in or as part of an apartment complex of more than
             eight (8) units.
             Except as may be specified hereinafter, each residential unit or structure on
             property or premises classified as residential shall be considered a separate
             residence for purpose of billing and collection.
             Household waste, bulky waste, and other non-hazardous waste produced by or
             resulting from the normal activities on or use of residential property or
             premises. Residential waste includes but is not limited to waste wood, wood
             products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, seeds, leaves, chips,
             shavings, saw-dust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, plastic, aluminum cans,
RESIDENTIAL  flattened cardboard boxes, wooden boxes, rags, loose straw, used and discarded
WASTE:       mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots,
             combustible and waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging or
             wrapping crockery and glass, cold ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass,
             mineral or metallic substances and any and all other waste materials not
             included in the definition of bulky waste, construction/demolition waste, dead
             animals, garbage or hazardous waste. Residential waste does not include special
             waste or stable matter as defined herein.
             Discarded solid waste that may require special handling or other solid waste
             that may pose a threat to public safety, human health, or the environment.
             Special waste includes:
             A.   Ash;
             B.   Automobile bodies;
             C.   Infectious waste subject to regulation under R315-316(1) of the Utah
             Administrative Rules.
SPECIAL      D.   Waste tires;
WASTE:       E.   Dead animals;
             F.   Asbestos;
             G.   Waste exempt from the hazardous waste regulations under R315-261-4;
             H.   Very small quantity generator hazardous waste as defined by R315-260-10;
             I.   Waste containing PCBs:
             J.   Petroleum contaminated soils;
             K.   Waste asphalt;
             L.   Sludge;
             M.   Stable matter. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
 
13.12.020: USE OF WASHINGTON COUNTY LANDFILL:
All residential waste generated within the corporate limits of City shall be
transported to and disposed of at the Washington County Landfill or such other
waste disposal facility as may be approved by District. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord.
2020-18)
13.12.030: REQUIRED USE OF AUTOMATED/SEMI-AUTOMATED CONTAINERS:
Except for residential developments approved by City where density and lack of
access by waste collection vehicles requires the use of dumpsters or roll offs
as a means of residential waste collection, each residence or residential unit
within the incorporated areas of City shall be required to utilize for
residential waste collection service an automated/semi-automated container or
containers which have been approved and delivered to the property by City or
its authorized agent. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
13.12.040: RESIDENTIAL WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICES PROVIDED BY CITY:
City shall provide the following services to all residences within its
corporate limits in accordance with the Agreement:
   A.   Basic Residential Waste Collection Service: Once a week curbside
collection to all residences of residential waste placed in automated/semi-
automated containers or in dumpsters or roll offs, along with collection of
bulky waste; and
   B.   Collection Of Recyclable Materials: Every other week curbside
collection of recyclable materials placed in recycling containers by residences
participating in curbside residential recycling. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
13.12.050: MANDATORY USE OF SERVICE:
The use by all residences within the boundaries of City of the basic
residential waste collection services described in subsection
13.12.040A is hereby declared to be mandatory; however, participation in
curbside residential recycling as described in subsection
13.12.040B shall be determined in accordance with the opt out rules and
guidelines specified in section
13.12.060. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
13.12.060: RECYCLING OPT OUT RULES AND GUIDELINES:
Participation in curbside recycling collection services shall be mandatory for
any residential unit within the boundaries of City for which the election to
opt out of such services is not made by the owner, or such other person
designated in writing by the owner, on or before November 30, 2020, in
accordance with the following opt out rules and guidelines:
   A.   The election to opt out shall be made by the owner of the residence, or
by such other person designated in writing by the owner, or as otherwise
approved by the City.
   B.   For purposes of these rules and guidelines, all City residences/
residents who are not participants in curbside recycling collection services as
of the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed to have opted out of
receiving curbside recycling collection services.
   C.   Except as provided herein, all City residences/residents who do not opt
out by November 30, 2020 shall be deemed to be included in the curbside
recycling collection program for the term of the Agreement.
   D.   City residents/residences who opt out or who are deemed to have opted
out on or before November 30, 2020, as determined by City, may opt in at any
time but thereafter shall be included in the recycling program for the
remaining term of the Agreement.
   E.   City residents/residences who opt out or who are deemed to have opted
out on or before November 30, 2020, as determined by City, shall be entitled to
continue such opt out status in the event they move to another or new residence
within the boundaries of City.
   F.   New residents, i.e., people who move from outside of City to a
residence within the boundaries of City, regardless of a prior election to opt
out, shall be automatically included in the recycling program for the remainder
of the term of the Agreement.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon written request from the owner or occupant
of the residence, the City Council shall have authority to grant a variance to
the above provisions based on a showing of undue hardship or other
extraordinary circumstances. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
13.12.070: RESIDENTIAL WASTE COLLECTION PROCEDURES:
Except where the use of dumpsters or roll offs are authorized, residential
waste shall be placed for collection in accordance with the following:
   A.   All residential waste shall be placed for collection in automated/semi-
automated containers.
   B.   All residential waste shall be placed for collection by six o’clock (6:
00) A.M. of the day scheduled for collection.
   C.   No hazardous waste, infectious waste or special waste shall be placed
for collection in any automated/semi-automated container or any dumpster or
roll-off.
   D.   Only recyclable materials, as determined from time to time by City,
shall be placed for collection in recycling automated/semi-automated collection
containers.
   E.   Automated/semi-automated containers shall be placed within three feet
(3') of the curbside, blacktop or other roadway surface, with three feet (3')
clearance on either side of the container from parked cars or other objects,
and at other locations readily accessible to collection vehicles and personnel.
   F.   All empty waste containers shall be removed from the street as soon as
reasonably practicable but not later than twenty four (24) hours after being
emptied.
   G.   Bulky waste shall be placed at or near the curbside, blacktop or other
roadway surface, or at other locations readily accessible to collection
vehicles and personnel. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
13.12.080: ESTABLISHMENT OF RESIDENTIAL FEES:
There is hereby established a monthly residential waste collection and disposal
fee for each residence or residential unit in City, which shall include the
following amounts:
   A.   For basic residential waste collection service:
      1.   The amount to be paid to Republic in the amount of six dollars and
ninety cents ($6.90) per month per residence, which shall be subject to an
annual increase of two and one-half percent (2.5%); and
      2.   The amount to be paid to the District for administrative costs and
expenses in the amount of four dollars and fifty five cents ($4.55) per month
per residence, which shall be subject to an annual increase of ten cents
($0.10); and
      3.   Such amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of
the City Council for administrative costs and expenses incurred by the City in
billing and collection; and
   B.   For residences receiving curbside recycling collection services, the
following additional amounts:
      1.   The amount to be paid to Republic in the amount of four dollars and
ninety cents ($4.90) per month per residence, subject to an annual increase of
two and one-half percent (2.5%); and
      2.   The amount of seventy five cents ($0.75) per month per residence for
the cost of the recycling container. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
13.12.090: FEE FOR AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE:
The residential fee established hereby for basic collection service is for the
availability of service provided by City through the District and its
authorized agent, Republic, and said fee shall be due and owing when service is
available, regardless of whether said service is actually utilized. (Ord. 2021-
02: Ord. 2020-18)
13.12.100: MONTHLY BILLING:
Fees for residential waste collection and disposal services provided by City
shall be paid on a monthly basis, and shall be included in any billing for
other municipal services supplied by City, including water, power, sewer, etc.
Payments for residential waste collection and disposal services not received on
or before the twentieth day of the month following the month for which services
were provided shall be deemed delinquent and shall thereafter bear interest at
the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum until paid in full, and shall be
subject to all collection practices or procedures as may be established from
time to time by ordinance. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
13.12.110: COLLECTION OF COMMERCIAL WASTE:
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the owner or lessee of any commercial
property or premises from transporting his or her own commercial waste to the
landfill or contracting for its removal with a commercial hauler properly
licensed by District and authorized to conduct business within City. (Ord.
2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
13.12.120: COMMERCIAL OR PRIVATE HAULERS:
No private or commercial hauler shall be allowed to collect or dispose of
commercial solid waste generated by businesses or through the use of commercial
property within City without having first obtained from District a license to
operate as a private or commercial hauler. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
13.12.130: COLLECTION VEHICLES:
All trucks or other vehicles used by any private or commercial hauler to
collect or transport solid waste within City shall:
   A.   Be maintained in a good mechanical condition;
   B.   Be equipped with fully enclosed sides and bottom and otherwise
constructed as to prevent the contents of the vehicle from spilling or blowing
while the vehicle is in motion;
   C.   Clearly bear on the outside of the body of the vehicle the name and
telephone number of the hauler; and
   D.   Comply with all provisions of all applicable state or federal
regulations or laws concerning the collection, transportation or disposal of
solid waste. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
13.12.140: TRANSPORTATION OF WASTE:
All solid waste transported by any private or commercial hauler shall be
contained, tied or enclosed in such a manner that leaking, spilling or blowing
are prevented during transportation. (Ord. 2021-02: Ord. 2020-18)
CHAPTER 13.16
SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
Article I. Administration
13.16.010: Sewer Department And System
13.16.011: Definitions
13.16.020: Superintendent Of Sewer Department
13.16.030: Duties Of Superintendent
13.16.040: Application For Sewer Service
13.16.050: Nonowner Applicants; Agreement By Owner
13.16.060: Rates And Connection Fees
13.16.070: Special Rates
13.16.080: Board Of Equalization, Rates And Rebates
13.16.090: Use Of Sewer System Mandatory; Exception
13.16.100: Qualified Plumbing Necessary
13.16.110: Permits For Installations
13.16.120: When Permits Shall Not Be Issued
13.16.130: Revocation Of Permits
13.16.140: Pipes To Be Kept In Good Repair
13.16.150: Quality Of Service Pipe
13.16.160: Department To Have Free Access
13.16.170: Trial Sewer Survey
Article II. Regulation And Control Of Sewer
13.16.180: Prohibited Uses
13.16.190: Regulations
13.16.200: Ownership Of Connecting Lines
13.16.210: Sewer Manholes
13.16.220: Destruction
ARTICLE I. ADMINISTRATION
13.16.010: SEWER DEPARTMENT AND SYSTEM:
The sewer department is created. It shall comprise all of the property,
equipment and personnel necessary to the maintenance and operation of the
city's sewage collection and disposal system. The department shall administer
the operation and maintenance of the city sewer system. (Prior code § 14-211)
13.16.011: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain words and terms are defined as follows:
   PRIVATE SEWER LATERAL: Any sewer system tributary to the public sewer main
serving private residential or commercial projects not specifically designed
for general city use and not maintained by the city.
   PUBLIC SEWER MAIN: Any sewer system built to city standards and formally
accepted by the city which receives or transports wastewater from private sewer
laterals to treatment facilities. This shall include main, collector, trunk,
and outfall lines, lift stations, and accompanying manholes and support
features. (Ord. 2002-02 § 1: prior code § 14-211)
13.16.020: SUPERINTENDENT OF SEWER DEPARTMENT:
There is created the position of superintendent of the sewer department. (Prior
code § 14-212)
13.16.030: DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The superintendent of the sewer department shall manage and supervise the
city's sewer system under the direction of the city council which from time to
time shall by resolution or otherwise prescribe his or her powers and duties
and direct the manner and frequency with which he or she shall make reports to
the mayor relating to the sewer system. (Prior code § 14-213)
13.16.040: APPLICATION FOR SEWER SERVICE:
Any person who desires or is required to secure sewer service when such service
is available from the city sewer systems shall apply therefor to the recorder
and file an agreement with the city which shall be in substantially the below
stated form:
   APPLICATION FOR SEWER SERVICE
                                                
               (Date)
THE CITY OF SANTA CLARA:
   The under undersigned hereby applies for sewer services from the city for
premises located at                           and hereby agrees to pay charges
for such sewer services as shall be fixed by the city council of the city by
resolution or ordinance until such time as I shall direct such service to be
discontinued.
   In the event of a failure to pay for this service within the due dates fixed
by the city council or of a failure of the occupant of the premises to conform
to the ordinances and regulations established by the city council relating to
the use of the sewer system, the city shall have the right to discontinue my
water service from the city water system until all delinquencies and any
reconnection fees imposed are paid in full or until any failure to conform to
the sewer ordinances or regulations issued thereunder is eliminated.
   Additionally, I agree that the city shall have the right to institute
collection proceedings by all means available to it, including suit in a court
of proper jurisdiction. The applicant agrees to pay all costs of collection
including court costs and attorney's fees.
   The undersigned agrees to be bound by the rules, regulations resolutions or
ordinances enacted or adopted by the city council of the city applicable to the
city's sewer system.
                                                  
               (signed)
(Prior code § 14-214)
13.16.050: NONOWNER APPLICANTS; AGREEMENT BY OWNER:
Applications for sewer services made by the tenant or an owner must in addition
to the above requirement be guaranteed by an agreement signed by the owner of
the premises or his or her duly authorized agent to the following effect:
   In consideration of the acceptance of the application for sewer service
submitted by  (any present or future tenant) , I, or we, will pay for all sewer
services furnished to such tenant, or other occupant of  (premises) , in case
such tenant or occupant shall fail to pay for the same according to the
ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations of the city.
                                                
               (owner)
(Prior code § 14-215)
13.16.060: RATES AND CONNECTION FEES:
The rates, penalty fees for delinquency in payment and collection fees for
sewer services from the city sewer system shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution or ordinance of the city council. The city council may from time to
time enact rules for levying, billing, guaranteeing and collecting charges for
sewer services and all other rules necessary for the management and control of
the sewer system. (Prior code § 14-216)
13.16.070: SPECIAL RATES:
The city council may from time to time fix by agreement or resolution special
rates and conditions upon such terms as they may deem proper for users of the
sewer service discharging wastes of unusual characteristics or making use
thereof under exceptional circumstances. (Prior code § 14-217)
13.16.080: BOARD OF EQUALIZATION, RATES AND REBATES:
The city council is constituted a board of equalization of sewer rates to hear
complaints and make corrections of any assessments or charges deemed to be
illegal, unequal, or unjust. (Prior code § 14-218)
13.16.090: USE OF SEWER SYSTEM MANDATORY; EXCEPTION:
It is unlawful for the owner or any other person occupying or having charge of
any premises within the city which are located within three hundred feet (300')
of a sewer main to dispose of sewage therefrom by any means other than by use
of the city sewer system. It is unlawful to construct or to continue the use of
any other sewage disposal system such as a privy, vault, cesspool, or septic
tank on the property except by written approval of the city council in cases of
undue hardship; provided, however, that use of a temporary sewage disposal
system shall be provided for use on the sites of all construction of
residential, business and other facilities within the city. All construction
sites shall have placed thereon at least one Port-A-John facility which shall
be maintained by the owner of the property and the contractor, and used by all
construction personnel during the construction, unless the contractor has first
arranged for other such facilities, acceptable to the building inspector, which
is located within two hundred feet (200') of the construction site, to be used
during the construction by all construction personnel. (Ord. 93-84 § 1: prior
code § 14-220)
13.16.100: QUALIFIED PLUMBING NECESSARY:
It is unlawful for any person to connect any drain or sewer pipe with the city
sewer system unless the person is a duly licensed plumber or unless, in the
absence of a duly licensed plumber, any proposed connection to, alteration of,
or change of connection to the sewer system shall be first submitted to the
sewer superintendent for review and approval. After such approval, the
installation or work done shall be subject to inspection by the superintendent
or his or her agent. (Prior code § 14-221)
13.16.110: PERMITS FOR INSTALLATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly engage in the laying,
repairing, altering or connecting of any drain or sewer pipe connected with or
part of the city sewer system without first having received a permit from the
office of the recorder or the sewer superintendent. (Prior code § 14-222)
13.16.120: WHEN PERMITS SHALL NOT BE ISSUED:
Permits to connect to the city sewer system shall not be issued unless the
plumbing in the house or building to be connected is in accordance with the
provisions of the building and plumbing codes of the city. (Prior code § 14-
223)
13.16.130: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
All construction permits for sewer connections or installations shall be issued
to the plumber who is to do the work or to the owner of the property, subject
to the supervision and inspection by the superintendent or his agents. The
recorder or superintendent may at any time revoke a permit because of defective
work or because of undue delay in completing the permitted work. (Prior code §
14-224)
13.16.140: PIPES TO BE KEPT IN GOOD REPAIR:
All users of the sewer services shall keep their service pipes, connections,
and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at their own
expense. No person, except under the direction of the sewer superintendent,
shall be allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of removing or
repairing any sewer service pipe or main. (Prior code § 14-225)
13.16.150: QUALITY OF SERVICE PIPE:
All service and other pipes used in conjunction with the sewer services of the
city shall be of such material, quality and specifications as the city council
may from time to time by resolution provide and shall be installed at such
distances below ground as may be specified by regulations relating to the sewer
department. All work, alterations or extensions affecting sewer pipes shall be
subject to the acceptance of the sewer superintendent, and no connections with
sewer mains shall be made without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
recorder. (Prior code § 14-226)
13.16.160: DEPARTMENT TO HAVE FREE ACCESS:
The sewer superintendent and his or her agents shall at all ordinary hours have
free access to places supplied with sewer services from the city system for the
purpose of examining the apparatus, ascertaining the sewer service being used
and the manner of its use. (Prior code § 14-227)
13.16.170: TRIAL SEWER SURVEY:
In order to determine the feasibility of connecting a basement or proposed
basement to the sanitary sewer, the owner or plumber may make an application
for a trial sewer survey, the cost of which shall be as established from time
to time by resolution of the city council. The result of a trial sewer survey
shall not constitute a permit to connect to the sewer and is merely for
information purposes. (Prior code § 14-228)
ARTICLE II. REGULATION AND CONTROL OF SEWER
13.16.180: PROHIBITED USES:
   A.   Inflammables: It is unlawful for any person to injure, break or remove
any part or portion of any sewer appliance or appurtenance, or to discharge
into a sewer any inflammable gas, gasoline or oil, any calcium carbide or
residue therefrom, or any liquid or other materials or substance which will
emit an inflammable gas when in contact with water, sewage or fire. Oil
separators installed in any building where volatile fluids are used must not be
connected directly or indirectly with a sewer.
   B.   Waste Pipes From Enumerated Establishments: The contents of waste pipes
from water filters, gas engines, air compressors, vacuum or dry cleaners,
garages, wash racks, stores or warehouses containing inflammable substances,
car barns, buildings for the stabling or keeping of horses, cows and other
animals, or plants using milk or processing milk products, and all similar
establishments shall not be disposed of through connection with a sanitary
sewer unless such contents are discharged into settling tanks properly trapped
and vented. The construction of such tanks must be approved by the city
engineer, and must be subject to his or her inspection, approval, or
condemnation before cement is poured and at all times thereafter until
completion of such construction. Upon condemnation by the city engineer, the
sewage from the tanks shall not be allowed to flow into the sewer until
satisfactory alterations have been made and the construction approved by the
city engineer.
   C.   Obstructive Material: It is unlawful for any person to empty or
discharge into the public sanitary sewer any garbage, refuse or other similar
matter or substance likely to obstruct the sewer, or any substance, solid or
liquid other than the waste products for which the sewer is provided.
   D.   Drainage Waters And Destructive Materials: It is unlawful for any
person to connect with a public sanitary sewer any drain or pipe which
discharges rainwater, cellar or surface water, acids, alkalies, lye or other
injurious liquids, or the contents of any spring, flowing well, creek, ditch,
or other watercourses. No boiler or heating plant shall be directly connected
to the sanitary sewer. The overflow from boilers or heating plants, when cooled
to a temperature not to exceed one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F),
will be allowed to run to a sump, which sump shall be connected to the sewer.
The discharge of the contents of waste pipes from water filters, gas engines,
air compressors, vacuum or dry cleaners, garages, wash racks, stores or
warehouses which contain inflammable substances, buildings, for the stabling or
keeping of horses, cows and other animals, and all similar establishments,
shall not be made into or connected with a sanitary sewer, unless such contents
are discharged into settling tanks properly trapped and vented. Settling tanks
shall be constructed of a material approved by the superintendent and shall be
at all times subject to his or her inspection and approval or condemnation.
Upon condemnation by the superintendent, the sewage from said tanks shall not
be allowed to flow into sewer until satisfactory alterations have been made and
the construction approved by the superintendent. (Prior code § 14-231)
13.16.190: REGULATIONS:
The city council shall have power to and retains the right to adopt regulations
controlling the manner and circumstances under which the sewer system may be
used in addition to the regulatory provisions set forth expressly in this
chapter. (Prior code § 14-232)
13.16.200: OWNERSHIP OF CONNECTING LINES:
The city shall operate and maintain all public sewer mains. Property owners
shall be responsible for maintaining private sewer laterals from the public
sewer main to the building regardless of whether the lateral is within a public
street, easement or on private property. (Ord. 2002-02 § 1: prior code § 14-
233)
13.16.210: SEWER MANHOLES:
It is unlawful for any person to open any sewer manhole without permission from
the superintendent. (Prior code § 14-234)
13.16.220: DESTRUCTION:
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, injure or interfere with the
operation of any part or appurtenance of the sewer system. (Prior code § 14-
235)
CHAPTER 13.20
WATER SYSTEM
SECTION:
13.20.010: Water Department And System
13.20.020: Superintendent
13.20.030: Duties Of Superintendent
13.20.040: Application For Water Connection
13.20.050: Application For Water Connection By Subdivider
13.20.060: Application For Water Service
13.20.070: Nonowner Applicants; Agreement Of Owner
13.20.080: Rates And Connection Fees
13.20.090: Special Rates
13.20.100: Board Of Equalization, Rates And Rebates
13.20.110: Use Without Payment Prohibited
13.20.120: Turning On Water After Being Turned Off Prohibited
13.20.130: Separate Connections
13.20.140: Unauthorized Users
13.20.150: Pipes To Be Kept In Good Repair
13.20.160: Quality Of Service Pipe
13.20.170: Faulty Equipment
13.20.180: Sprinkling Vehicles
13.20.190: Department To Have Free Access
13.20.200: Nonliability For Damages
13.20.210: Water Not Supplied For Motors, Syphons, Etc.
13.20.220: Sprinklers
13.20.230: Scarcity Of Water
13.20.240: Waste Of Water
13.20.250: Water Meters
13.20.260: Permits For Installation
13.20.270: Applications For Installation Permit
13.20.280: Moving Or Replacement Of Water Lines
13.20.290: When Permits Shall Not Be Issued
13.20.300: Discontinuance Of Service
13.20.310: Fire Hydrants
13.20.320: Extension Of Water Mains Within The City
13.20.330: Cost Of Extensions Determined
13.20.340: Amount Of Cost To Be Deposited With Recorder
13.20.350: Return Of Any Money; Forfeiture
13.20.360: Ownership Of Extension
13.20.370: Supply Of Water Services To Persons Outside The City Limits
13.20.380: Petition For Service
13.20.390: Extensions May Be Master Metered
13.20.400: Cost Of Extensions To Be Determined By Water Superintendent
13.20.410: Purpose For Control Of Cross Connections Policy
13.20.420: Definitions For Cross Connection Control
13.20.430: Responsibility; Water Department
13.20.440: Responsibility; Consumer
13.20.450: Responsibility; Building Inspector
13.20.460: Responsibility; Certified Backflow Technician, Surveyor Or Repair
Person
13.20.470: Testing And Repair Of Backflow Assemblies
13.20.480: Requirements For Control Of Cross Connections
13.20.490: Violations Of The Cross Connection Policy
13.20.500: Water Use Efficiency In Landscape Irrigation
13.20.010: WATER DEPARTMENT AND SYSTEM:
The water department of the city is created. It shall administer the operation
and maintenance of the water system of the city. For purposes of this chapter,
the "water system" of the city shall include both the culinary water system and
the secondary irrigation water system of the city. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1: prior
code § 14-110)
13.20.020: SUPERINTENDENT:
There is created the position of superintendent of the water department. (Prior
code § 14-111)
13.20.030: DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The superintendent of the water system shall manage and supervise the city
water system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to
resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the city council from time to
time prescribing his or her powers and duties and directing the manner and
frequency with which he or she shall make reports to the mayor relating to the
water system. All of the functions and activities of the superintendent shall
be carried on under the direction of the mayor. (Prior code § 14-112)
13.20.040: APPLICATION FOR WATER CONNECTION:
Any person, other than a subdivider or developer seeking multiple connections,
who desires or is required to secure a new connection to the city water system,
shall file with the water department for each such connection a written and
signed connection application in substantially the following form:
   SANTA CLARA, UTAH
   APPLICATION FOR WATER CONNECTION
TO THE CITY OF SANTA CLARA,
   I hereby apply to the city of Santa Clara for permission to connect my
premises at                                  with the city of Santa Clara
(select one)            culinary water system, or            secondary
irrigation water system and hereby agree as follows:
   1.   (a)   The city shall make the requested connection from its water main
to and including the water meter and up to my property line or to the meter if
the meter is installed within my property. I agree to pay the city the
connection charges, special assessments, and fees as may be fixed by the city
council by resolution or ordinance including a reservoir charge if so provided.
If this application is for secondary irrigation water service, I also agree to
transfer such water rights or water shares to the city as are required to
service my property with secondary irrigation water, as may be required by
ordinance.
   Additionally, I agree to pay $                for inspection and overhead
charges and other miscellaneous costs of the city as may be fixed by the city
council by resolution or ordinance.
   The work of extending the water connection from the point to which the city
installs it to the place at which the water is to be used shall be my
responsibility and shall be performed at my sole cost.
      (b) The connection so made by the city, including the meter, shall remain
the property of the city at all times, and the city shall have access thereto
at all times.
   2.   The location of the meter, whether on my premises or at some point near
my premises, may be decided solely by the city.
   3.   Before making connection with the water system, I shall cause the
plumbing upon my premises to be inspected by the city and if the plumbing is
not approved, I will cause the plumbing to be rectified at my own expense to
meet the requirements of the city or of any other governmental agency having
jurisdiction to regulate the water system within the city.
   4.   I will be bound by the rules, regulations, resolutions or ordinances
enacted now or hereafter by the city applicable to the city's water system.
   5.   The purpose for which the water connection will be used is
               .
   6.   The city shall have free access to the lines and meters installed under
this agreement and, at reasonable times, through my property if necessary.
         Dated this            day of          , 19     .
                                               
               (Applicant)
(Ord. 2019-10 § 1: prior code § 14-113)
13.20.050: APPLICATION FOR WATER CONNECTION BY SUBDIVIDER:
Whenever a subdivider or developer desires or is required to install water
connections and extensions for a subdivision or development, the subdivider or
developer shall enter into a written extension agreement which shall constitute
an application for permission to make the extensions and connections and an
agreement specifying the terms and conditions under which the water extensions
and connections shall be made and the payments that shall be required. (Prior
code § 14-114)
13.20.060: APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE:
Any person who desires or is required to secure water service when such service
is available from the city water system shall file a written request for the
service on an application form provided by the city. (Ord. 98-08 § 2: prior
code § 14-115)
13.20.070: NONOWNER APPLICANTS; AGREEMENT OF OWNER:
Applications for water service made by the tenant of an owner must in addition
to the above requirements be guaranteed by an agreement signed by the owner of
the premises or his or her duly authorized agent in substantially the following
form:
   In consideration of the acceptance of the application for water service
submitted by  (tenant) , I or we will pay for all water services for any such
tenant or any other occupant of                 premises in case such tenant or
occupant shall fail to pay for the same according to the ordinances, rules
regulations or resolutions enacted by the city.
         Dated this             day of           , 19     .
                                                
               (Owner)
(Prior code § 14-116)
13.20.080: RATES AND CONNECTION FEES:
There shall be one schedule of rates, fees, and charges for culinary water use,
and one schedule of rates, fees, and charges for secondary irrigation water use
(not including any special assessment for water acquisition as may be
established by ordinance). The rates, penalty fee for delinquency in payment,
connection fee, reservoir fee, inspection fee and other charges incidental to
connection and services from the city water system shall be fixed from time to
time by resolution enacted by the city council. The city council may from time
to time promulgate rules for levying, billing, guaranteeing and collecting
charges for water services and all other rules necessary for the management and
control of the water system. Rates for services furnished shall be uniform with
respect to each class or classes of service established or that may hereafter
be established. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1: prior code § 14-117)
13.20.090: SPECIAL RATES:
The city council may from time to time fix by agreement or resolution special
rates and conditions for users using exceptionally large amounts of water
service or making use of the water system under exceptional circumstances, upon
such terms and conditions as they may deem proper. (Prior code § 14-118)
13.20.100: BOARD OF EQUALIZATION, RATES AND REBATES:
The city council is constituted a board of equalization of water rates to hear
complaints and make corrections of any assessments deemed to be illegal,
unequal, or unjust. They may, if they see fit, rebate all or any part of the
water bill of any indigent person. (Prior code § 14-119)
13.20.110: USE WITHOUT PAYMENT PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person by himself, herself, family, servants, or agents
to utilize the city water or sewer system without paying therefor, as herein
provided or, without authority, to open any fire hydrant, stopcock, valve, or
other fixtures attached to the system of water supply unless it is done
pursuant to proper application, agreement, or resolution. It is unlawful to
injure, deface, or impair any part or appurtenance of the water or sewer
system, or to cast anything into any reservoir or tank belonging to the water
system. (Prior code § 14-120)
13.20.120: TURNING ON WATER AFTER BEING TURNED OFF PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person, after the water has been turned off from the
premises for nonpayment of water charges or other violation of the ordinances,
rules, regulations, or resolutions pertaining to the water supply, to turn on
or allow the water to be turned on or used without authority from the
superintendent or recorder. (Prior code § 14-122)
13.20.130: SEPARATE CONNECTIONS:
It is unlawful for two (2) or more families or service users to be supplied
from the same service pipe, connection or water meter unless special permission
for such combination usage has been granted by the city council and the
premises served are owned by the same owner. In all such cases, a failure on
the part of any one of the users to comply with this section, shall warrant a
withholding of a supply of water through the service connections until
compliance or payment has been made, and in any event, the property owner shall
be primarily liable to the city for all water services utilized on all such
premises. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the power of the city to
require separate pipes, connections, or meters at a subsequent time. Exceptions
to the requirements of this section for service from the secondary irrigation
water system may be granted by the superintendent where a single service pipe,
connection or water meter was already installed or established prior to the
city's establishment of its secondary irrigation water system in August 2019.
For example, and only as an example, the superintendent may permit two (2) or
more families or service users to be supplied from the same service pipe,
connection or water meter if the same were already installed as part of a
private irrigation company system prior to August 2019, and thereafter that
system or part of a system was dedicated to the city and accepted by the city
as part of its own secondary irrigation water system. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1: prior
code § 14-123)
13.20.140: UNAUTHORIZED USERS:
It is unlawful for any water service user to permit any person from other
premises or any unauthorized person to use or obtain water services regularly
from his or her premises or water facilities, either outside or inside his or
her premises. (Prior code § 14-124)
13.20.150: PIPES TO BE KEPT IN GOOD REPAIR:
All users of water services shall keep their service pipes and connections and
other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at their own expense.
No person except under the direction of the water superintendent shall be
allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of laying, removing or repairing
any service pipe. (Prior code § 14-125)
13.20.160: QUALITY OF SERVICE PIPE:
   A.   All service and other pipe used in conjunction with the water services
of the city shall be of such material, quality, and specifications as the city
council may from time to time by resolution provide, and shall be installed at
such distances below ground as may be specified by regulations relating to the
water department. All work, alterations, or extensions affecting water pipes
shall be subject to the acceptance of the water superintendent, and no
connections with any water mains shall be made without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the recorder.
   B.   No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water pipes across lots or
buildings to adjoining premises without permission from the water
superintendent and subject to such requirements relating to controls as may be
imposed by him or her. (Prior code § 14-126)
13.20.170: FAULTY EQUIPMENT:
It is unlawful for any water user to:
   A.   Waste water;
   B.   Allow it to be wasted by stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes, or
to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow;
   C.   Wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets, or stops or through
basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus;
   D.   Use the water for purposes other than for those which he or she has
applied, or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations for
controlling the water supply. (Prior code § 14-127)
13.20.180: SPRINKLING VEHICLES:
Vehicles for sprinkling shall be regulated and controlled by the water
department through the superintendent of the water department. (Prior code §
14-128)
13.20.190: DEPARTMENT TO HAVE FREE ACCESS:
The water superintendent and his or her agents shall at all ordinary hours have
free access to any place supplied with water services from the city system for
the purpose of examining the apparatus and ascertaining the amount of water
service being used and the manner of its use. (Prior code § 14-129)
13.20.200: NONLIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
The city shall not be liable for any damage to a water service user by reason
of stoppage or interruption of his or her water supply service caused by fires,
scarcity of water, accidents to the water system or its mains, or which occurs
as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any other
unavoidable cause. This section shall not be construed to extend the liability
of the city beyond that provided in the governmental immunity act. (Prior code
§ 14-130)
13.20.210: WATER NOT SUPPLIED FOR MOTORS, SYPHONS, ETC.:
No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the city water system for the
purpose of driving motor, syphon, turbine, or other wheels, or any hydraulic
engines, or elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind
whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such purpose
except by special permission of the city council. (Prior code § 14-131)
13.20.220: SPRINKLERS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to use such number of outlets
simultaneously or to use such sprinkler or combinations of sprinkler or outlets
as will in the opinion of the city council materially affect the pressure or
supply of water in the city water system or any part thereof, and the city
council may from time to time, by resolution, specify combinations or numbers
of outlets which may have such effect.
   B.   The city council shall, after determining that such improper use
exists, notify the affected water user or the owner of the premises whereon
such use occurs of such determination in writing, order such use discontinued
and advise that such continued usage constitutes a violation of this part.
(Prior code § 14-132)
13.20.230: SCARCITY OF WATER:
If a culinary water shortage or drought is expected, the city will implement
the following 4-stage culinary water conservation management plan. The
implementation will be under the approval and direction of the city council and
city manager. The city staff (city department heads and city manager) shall
meet on a regular basis to discuss the culinary water conditions and ensure all
city departments are doing their part to comply, enforce and encourage the
outlined water conservation measures. Nonessential water use refers to those
uses not necessary to preserve the public health and sanitation and provide
fire protection services.
   A.   Conservation Stages: The stages for culinary water conservation are as
follows:
      1.   Stage 1: If total culinary supply (wells and springs) exceeds the
total daily demand by less than three percent (3%) (i.e., water tanks cannot
recover each day).
      2.   Stage 2: Total culinary demand exceeds supply by less than five
percent (5%).
      3.   Stage 3: Total culinary water demand exceeds supply by five percent
(5%) to ten percent (10%) or more.
      4.   Stage 4: Total culinary water demand exceeds supply by ten percent
(10%).
   B.   Management Plan:
      1.   Stage 1: Voluntary restriction on nonessential water use:
Estimated reduction goal: Up to five percent (5%).
         a.   Procedure: Publish news release in local newspaper, on web site
and have radio stations announce same.
      2.   Stage 2: Mandatory restrictions on nonessential water use:
Estimated reduction goal: Five percent (5%) to ten percent (10%) of peak use.
         a.   Procedure: By authority of the city manager and the city council,
the following water conservation measures along with those of stage 1 will be
implemented:
            (1)   Work with St. George City to ensure Snow Canyon Compact
members are allocated their percentage allocation of the water being produced
from Snow Canyon well system;
            (2)   All parks, schools or other areas having large grassed area
such as the city cemetery currently on culinary water will be allowed to water
at a reduced level of demand of ten percent (10%) reduction target;
            (3)   Residential and commercial users will be allowed to water
outside areas based on odd/even concept between the hours of eight o'clock (8:
00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. (the address of the property, as is even
or odd will determine the day of watering);
            (4)   The use of fire hydrants for purpose other than fire
protection will not be allowed for use by municipal departments, contractors
and all others;
            (5)   Water use for the following nonessential uses will not be
allowed:
   (A) Noncommercial washing of automobiles and trucks;
   (B) The washing of streets, driveways, and sidewalks;
   (C) The use of water to fill and top off swimming pools, hot tubs etc.;
   (D) Use of water for ornamental fountains, waterfalls, or reflection pools
will not be allowed if not previously filled. Adding additional water to the
same will not be allowed.
         b.   Enforcement: If any person or entity violates these restrictions,
it shall be considered a class B misdemeanor, or lessor offense at the
discretion of the city.
      3.   Stage 3: Mandatory restriction on all culinary water uses:
Estimated reduction goal: Ten percent (10%) to twenty five percent (25%) of
peak uses.
         a.   Procedure: By authority of the city manager and the city council,
the following additional water conservation measures will be implemented along
with those in stage 1 and stage 2:
            (1)   During this stage the approval of any new building permits
and subdivision approvals will be delayed until the conservation restrictions
are lifted.
         b.   Enforcement: If any person or entity violates these restrictions,
it shall be considered a class B misdemeanor, or lessor offense at the
discretion of the city.
      4.   Stage 4: Water rationing plan for all available culinary water
resources:
Estimated reduction goal: Twenty five percent (25%) to sixty percent (60%) of
peak use.
         a.   Procedure: By the authority of the city manager and city council,
the following water rationing plan will be implemented:
            (1)   General: It is imperative that water customers within Santa
Clara City and surrounding areas achieve an immediate and further reduction in
the water use in order to extend existing water supplies and, at the same time,
assure that sufficient water is available to preserve the public health and
sanitation, and provide fire protection service.
The objective of this local water rationing plan is to effect an immediate
twenty five (25) percentage reduction in water usage. Should drought conditions
continue, further reductions in usage might be required. If it is necessary to
implement further reductions, this plan will be modified to reduce the levels
more. It is the city public service department's responsibility to continually
monitor on hand quantities to determine if amendments are required.
The plan provides for equitable reductions in water usage on the part of each
water customer. The success of this plan depends on the cooperation of all
water customers.
No outdoor use of water except the watering of outdoor gardens, landscaped
areas, trees, shrubs, and other outdoor plants, except by means of a bucket
pail, or handheld hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle. Such watering
can only take place between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M.
            (2)   Prohibited Nonessential Water Uses: The following water uses
are declared nonessential and will not be allowed within Santa Clara City along
with those of stage 1, stage 2 and stage 3:
               (A)   The watering of lawns;
               (B)   The use of water for flushing sewers or hydrants by
municipalities or any public or private individual or entity except as deemed
necessary and approved in the interest of public health or safety by the city;
               (C)   The use of fire hydrants of the fire department for
testing fire apparatus and for fire department drills, except as deemed
necessary and approved in the interest of public health or safety by the city;
               (D)   No exporting of culinary water outside of city boundaries.
         b.   Enforcement: If any person or entity violates these restrictions,
it shall be considered a class B misdemeanor lessor offense at the discretion
of the city.
   C.   Exemptions Or Variance: If compliance with the nonessential use of
water restrictions found in stages 2, 3 and/or 4 would result in extraordinary
hardship upon a water user, the water user may apply for an exemption or
variance. For purpose of this section, extraordinary hardship means a permanent
damage to property or other personal or economic loss, which is substantially
more severe than the sacrifice borne by other water users subject to the
nonessential use of water restrictions.
A person or business entity believing he/she suffers an extraordinary hardship
and desiring to be wholly or partially exempt from the restrictions on the
nonessential use of water shall submit a written request with full
documentation supporting the need for the requested relief to the city.
The application shall contain information specifying:
      1.   The nature of the hardship claimed and reasons for the requested
exemption or variance.
      2.   The efforts taken by the applicant to conserve water and extent to
which water use may be reduced by the applicant without extraordinary hardship.
The city shall advise the applicant of its decision regarding the application.
Applicant will be invited to a hearing. An exemption or variance will be
granted only to the extent necessary to relieve extraordinary hardship. Should
variance be denied, an appeal can be made to the Santa Clara city council.
Appeal will be heard during a regular or special meeting of city council. (Ord.
2002-08 § 1: prior code § 14-133)
13.20.240: WASTE OF WATER:
   A.   Users of water from the city water system shall not permit water to
continue to run wastefully and without due efforts to conserve water. If, in
the judgment of the water superintendent or of any of the officers of the city,
a user of city water engages in practices which result in the needless waste of
water and continues so to do after reasonable notice to discontinue
wastefulness has been given, the superintendent or any officer may refer the
matter to the city council.
   B.   The city council may thereupon consider terminating the right of the
individual to use culinary and/or secondary water. If it elects to consider the
matter of termination, it shall give notice to the water user of the intention
to terminate his or her water connection at least five (5) days prior to the
meeting of the city council at which termination of water service is to be
considered. The notice shall inform him or her of the time and place of the
meeting and of the charges which lead to the consideration of the termination.
   C.   A water user whose right to utilize city water is being reviewed shall
have opportunity to appear with or without counsel and present his or her
reasons why his or her water service should not be discontinued.
   D.   After due hearing, the city council may arrive at a determination. If
the determination is to discontinue the water user's service connection, it
shall notify him or her of the decision and of the period during which the
service will remain discontinued. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1: prior code § 14-134)
13.20.250: WATER METERS:
   A.   Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, all
structures, dwelling units, establishments and persons using water from the
city water system must have such number of water meters connected to their
water system as are necessary in the judgment of the superintendent to
adequately measure use and determine water charges to the respective users.
   B.   Meters will be furnished by the city upon application for a connection,
and upon payment of such connection fees and other costs as may be established
by the city council from time to time by resolution.
   C.   Meters shall be deemed to be and remain the property of the city,
whenever a dispute between superintendent and the property owner arises as to
the appropriate number of meters to be installed on any premises, the matter
shall be heard and determined by the city council after due notice in writing
to the parties involved.
   D.   The superintendent shall cause meter readings to be taken regularly and
shall advise the recorder thereof for the purpose of recording the necessary
billings for water service.
   E.   Meters may be checked, inspected or adjusted at the discretion of the
city, and they shall not be adjusted or tampered with by the customer. Meter
boxes shall not be opened for the purpose of turning on or off the water except
by an authorized representative of the city unless special permission is given
by the city through its representatives to the customer to do so.
   F.   If a customer submits a written request to the superintendent to test
his or her water meter, the city may, if under the circumstances it deems it
advisable and in its discretion, order a test of the meter measuring the water
delivered to such customer. If such request is made within twelve (12) months
after the date of the last previous test, the customer may be required to pay
the cost of such test. If the meter is found in such test to record from ninety
seven percent (97%) to one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy under
methods of testing satisfactory to the city council, the meter shall be deemed
to accurately measure the use of water.
   G.   If the city's meters fail to register at any time, the water delivered
during the period of failure shall be estimated on the basis of previous
consumption during a period which is not questioned. In the event a meter is
found to be recording less than ninety seven percent (97%) or more than one
hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy, the city shall make such adjustments
in the customer's previous bills as are just and fair under the circumstances.
   H.   All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other materials of the
city on or near the customer's premises caused by any act or neglect of the
customer shall in the discretion of the city be repaired by and at the expense
of the customer, and the customer shall pay all costs and expenses, including a
reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or accrue to the city through its
efforts to repair the damage to the lines, meters or to other equipment of the
department or collect such costs from the customer. (Prior code § 14-135)
13.20.260: PERMITS FOR INSTALLATION:
It is unlawful for any person to lay, repair, alter or connect any water line
to any city water system without first having received a construction permit
from the office of the recorder or from the water superintendent. (Ord. 2019-10
§ 1: prior code § 14-136)
13.20.270: APPLICATIONS FOR INSTALLATION PERMIT:
   A.   Applications for permits to make water connections or other alteration
or for laying or repairing lines connected directly or indirectly to the city
water system must be made in writing by a licensed plumber, his or her
authorized agent, or by the owner of the premises who shall describe the nature
or the work to be done for which the application is made.
The application shall be granted if the superintendent determines that:
      1.   The connection, repair, alteration or installation will cause no
damage to the street in which the water main is laid, or that it will not be
prejudicial to the interests of persons whose property has been or may
thereafter be connected to the water main.
      2.   The connection conforms to the ordinances, regulations,
specifications and standards of materials required by the city.
All connections, alterations or installations shall be to the line and grade
designated by the water superintendent.
   B.   Fees for permits or for inspection services shall be of such amounts as
the city council shall from time to time determine by resolution. (Prior code §
14-137)
13.20.280: MOVING OR REPLACEMENT OF WATER LINES:
In the event that the city in its sole discretion determines that any water
line of the city must be moved or replaced, the city shall bear that portion of
the cost of such move or replacement which applies to main lines up to the
property line of the customer. The cost of reconnecting such new line or lines
from the customer's water system(s) to his or her property line shall be borne
by the customer. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1: prior code § 14-138)
13.20.290: WHEN PERMITS SHALL NOT BE ISSUED:
Permission to connect with the city water system shall not be given unless the
plumbing in the customer's water system(s) to be connected meets the provisions
of the building and plumbing codes of the city. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1: prior code §
14-139)
13.20.300: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
Any customer desiring to discontinue service shall notify the city in writing
of such fact at least ten (10) days before the date when such service shall be
discontinued. On giving such written notice, the customer shall not be
responsible for water bills incurred after the date specified in the notice.
Any credit balance in favor of the customer as a result of an advance payment
of bills or a deposit will be refunded upon discontinuance of service. (Prior
code § 14-140)
13.20.310: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Water for fire hydrants will be furnished free of charge by the city.
Installation and repairs on such hydrants shall be at the expense of the city
and shall be made under the direction of the city. All customers shall grant
the city, upon demand, a right of way or easement to install and maintain such
hydrants on their premises if the city concludes that hydrants shall be so
installed for the protection of the residents of the city. (Prior code § 14-
141)
13.20.320: EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS WITHIN THE CITY:
Any person or persons, including any subdivider, who desires to have the water
mains extended within the city, and is willing to advance the whole expense of
such extension and receive the return of an agreed portion thereof, as
hereinafter provided, may make application to the city council by petition. The
petition shall contain a description of such proposed extension accompanied by
a map showing the location of the proposed extension together with an offer to
advance the whole expense thereof, which cost shall be verified by the water
superintendent. The city council may grant or deny the petition as in its
discretion seems best for the welfare of existing water users in the city.
(Prior code § 14-142)
13.20.330: COST OF EXTENSIONS DETERMINED:
Upon the receipt of such petition and map and before the petition is granted,
the city council shall obtain from the water superintendent a certified
statement showing the whole cost of expense of making such extension. (Prior
code § 14-143)
13.20.340: AMOUNT OF COST TO BE DEPOSITED WITH RECORDER:
If the city council grants the petition, the amount of the cost of making the
extension, as certified by the superintendent shall be deposited with the
recorder before any work shall be done on such extension. The deposit shall be
made within thirty (30) days, or such other time as the city council shall
indicate, after the granting thereof. (Prior code § 14-144)
13.20.350: RETURN OF ANY MONEY; FORFEITURE:
   A.   At the time the city council decides whether or not to grant petition
for an extension, it shall also decide whether or not any portion of the costs
is to be refunded and the manner and circumstances under which such refund
shall be made or credited to the applicant, his or her successors or
representatives. Such determination shall be duly recorded in writing and a
copy thereof furnished to the applicant.
   B.   In the event any deposit remains unclaimed for a period of five (5)
years after the depositor has discontinued water service, the deposit may be
forfeited and then transferred to the water utility fund. (Prior code § 14-145)
13.20.360: OWNERSHIP OF EXTENSION:
Any such extension shall be deemed the property of the city. (Prior code § 14-
146)
13.20.370: SUPPLY OF WATER SERVICES TO PERSONS OUTSIDE THE CITY LIMITS:
The city may furnish water service from its water system to persons outside the
city in accordance with the provision of this chapter. (Prior code § 14-151)
13.20.380: PETITION FOR SERVICE:
Any person located outside the city limits who desires to be supplied with
water services from the city water system and is willing to pay in advance the
whole expense of extending the water system to his or her property, including
the cost of extending the water main beyond its present location, may make
application to the city council by petition containing:
   A.   A description of the proposed extension;
   B.   A map showing the location thereof;
   C.   An offer to pay the whole expense incurred by the city in providing
such extension and to advance such expenses as shall be verified to by the
water superintendent. The city council and the person or persons seeking such
extension may enter into an agreement providing in detail the terms under which
the extension may be utilized by others in the future and the terms under which
all or any portion of the cost of installing such extension may be refunded;
   D.   An acknowledgment that the city in granting the petition need supply
only such water to the petitioner which from time to time the city council
deems beyond the requirements of water users within the city limits, and that
such extension shall be the property of and subject to the control of the city.
(Prior code § 14-152)
13.20.390: EXTENSIONS MAY BE MASTER METERED:
When an extension supplying more than one house or user outside the city limits
is connected to city water mains, the water superintendent may require a master
meter to be installed near the point where the connection is to be made to the
city main. This installation will be at the expense of the persons served by
such extension according to the regular rates for meter installation.
Responsible parties must agree to pay all bills for water served through the
meter at the applicable water rates. (Prior code § 14-153)
13.20.400: COST OF EXTENSIONS TO BE DETERMINED BY WATER SUPERINTENDENT:
Upon receipt of such petition and map and before the petition is granted, the
city council shall determine what portion, if any, of the extension of the city
water mains to the city limits the city shall construct, and shall obtain from
the water superintendent a verified statement showing the whole cost and
expense of making such extension. Such costs and expenses shall include
administrative and supervisory expenditures of the city water department, which
shall in no event be deemed to be less than ten percent (10%) of the cost of
materials and labor. (Prior code § 14-154)
13.20.410: PURPOSE FOR CONTROL OF CROSS CONNECTIONS POLICY:
   A.   Numerous parcels of property, primarily in the "valley" area of the
city, have access to secondary, nonpotable water via a pressurized irrigation
system that was installed in the spring and early summer of 2004. Lots that
have access to secondary, nonpotable water and the city's drinking water
distribution system risk cross connecting the two (2) water systems; thereby,
potentially compromising the integrity of the public drinking water supply.
   B.   To protect the public drinking water supply of Santa Clara City from
the possibility of contamination or pollution by requiring compliance with the
Utah state rules for public drinking water systems and the uniform plumbing
code, that require a cross connection control protection of all public drinking
water systems in the state of Utah.
   C.   To promote the reasonable elimination or control of cross connections
in the plumbing fixtures, residential and commercial, of the consumer, as
required by the state and plumbing regulations to assure water system safety.
   D.   To provide for the administration of a continuing program for the
control of cross connections, which will systematically examine risk and
effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the drinking water
system. (Ord. 2004-16 § 2)
13.20.420: DEFINITIONS FOR CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
   APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: An assembly accepted by the Utah state
department of environmental quality, division of drinking water, as meeting an
applicable specification or as suitable for the proposed use.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the purveyor's public water supply will be considered as an
auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as well,
spring, river, stream, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids". These
waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and
constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not
have authority for sanitary control.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent
backflow, specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained
within the uniform plumbing code and in the cross connection control program
for Utah maintained by the division of drinking water.
   CONTAMINATION: A degradation of the quality of the potable water supply by
nonpotable water, sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or
other materials that may create a health hazard.
   CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping of
fixtures which may allow nonpotable water or industrial fluids or other
material of questionable quality to come into contact with potable water inside
a water distribution system. This would include temporary conditions, such as
swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy
sections of pipe, swivel or change over devices or sliding multiport tubes or
other plumbing arrangements.
   CROSS CONNECTION CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved backflow
assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is
physically and economically infeasible to permanently eliminate or control all
actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water distribution
system; or, it means the installation of an approved backflow prevention
assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's
water system where there are actual or potential cross connections which cannot
be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross connection
(isolation).
   CROSS CONNECTION CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system and
a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly
property installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the
protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   WATER PURVEYOR: The person designated to be in charge of the water
department of Santa Clara City, is invested with the authority and
responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control
program and for the enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance codified in
this chapter. (Ord. 2004-16 § 2)
13.20.430: RESPONSIBILITY; WATER DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Santa Clara City shall be responsible for the protection of the
drinking water distribution system from the foreseeable conditions leading to
the possible contamination or pollution of the drinking water system resulting
from cross connections between the pressurized irrigation system or other
auxiliary water supplies and the drinking water distribution system.
   B.   Drinking water system surveys/inspections of the consumer's water
distribution system(s) shall be conducted or caused to be conducted by
individuals deemed qualified by and representing Santa Clara City. Survey
records shall indicate compliance with the state of Utah regulations. All such
records will be maintained by Santa Clara City.
   C.   Santa Clara City shall schedule and notify in writing, all consumers of
the need for the periodic system survey to ensure compliance with existing
applicable minimum health and safety standards.
   D.   Selection of an approved backflow prevention assembly for containment
control required at the service entrance shall be determined from the results
of the system survey. (Ord. 2004-16 § 2)
13.20.440: RESPONSIBILITY; CONSUMER:
   A.   To comply with this chapter as a term and condition of water supply and
consumer's acceptance of service is admittance of his or her awareness of his
or her responsibilities as a water system user.
   B.   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to purchase, install,
and arrange testing (annual testing and other testing times as deemed necessary
by water purveyor) and maintenance of any backflow prevention device/assembly
required to comply with this chapter. Failure to comply with this chapter shall
constitute grounds for discontinuation of service.
   C.   To attend a training session, and provide documentation thereof to
water purveyor, approved by water purveyor, prior to utilizing and connecting
to the pressurized irrigation system and/or using an auxiliary water supply.
Subsequent first time users of the pressurized irrigation system are also
required to attend a training course prior to their use of the pressurized
irrigation system and/or use of an auxiliary water supply. The purpose of the
training course is to inform consumer of regulations governing backflow and
cross connections as well as to impart an understanding of the potential risks
of contamination to the city's drinking water distribution system. (Ord. 2004-
16 § 2)
13.20.450: RESPONSIBILITY; BUILDING INSPECTOR:
   A.   The building inspector's responsibility to enforce the applicable
sections of the plumbing code begins at the point of service (downstream or
consumer side of the meter) and continues throughout the length of the
consumer's water system.
   B.   The plumbing official will review all plans to ensure that unprotected
cross connections are not an integral part of the consumer's water system. If a
cross connection cannot be eliminated, it must be protected by the installation
of an air gap or an approved backflow prevention device/assembly, in accordance
with the uniform plumbing code. (Ord. 2004-16 § 2)
13.20.460: RESPONSIBILITY; CERTIFIED BACKFLOW TECHNICIAN, SURVEYOR OR REPAIR
PERSON:
   A.   Whether employed by the consumer or a utility to survey, test, repair,
or maintain backflow prevention assemblies, the certified backflow technician,
surveyor or repair person will have the following responsibilities:
      1.   Ensuring that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used
for testing, repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies;
      2.   Make reports of such testing and/or repairs to the consumer and the
water purveyor on form approved for such use by the water purveyor within time
frames as described by the division of drinking water;
      3.   Include the list of materials or replacement parts being used on the
reports;
      4.   Ensuring that replacement parts are equal in quality to parts
originally supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being repaired;
      5.   Not changing the design, material or operational characteristics of
the assembly during testing, repair or maintenance;
      6.   Performing all tests of the mechanical devices/assemblies and shall
be responsible for the competence and accuracy of all test and reports;
      7.   Ensuring that his or her license is current, the testing equipment
being used is acceptable to the state of Utah, and is in proper operating
condition;
      8.   Being equipped with, and competent to use, all necessary tools,
gauges, and other equipment necessary to property test, and maintain backflow
prevention assemblies. (Ord. 2004-16 § 2)
13.20.470: TESTING AND REPAIR OF BACKFLOW ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   In the case of a consumer requiring an assembly to be tested, any
currently certified backflow technician is authorized to make the test and
report the results to the consumer and the water purveyor. If any residential
tested assembly is in need of repair R309-305 of the Utah administration code
requires that an individual certified for such work make actual repairs. If any
commercially tested assembly is in need of repair the construction trade
license act, title 58, chapter 55-2-(21), requires a licensed plumber to make
actual repairs on any assembly within a building. (Ord. 2004-16 § 2)
13.20.480: REQUIREMENTS FOR CONTROL OF CROSS CONNECTIONS:
   A.   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as
required by state laws, regulations, codes, and this chapter. Service of water
to a consumer found to be in violation of this chapter shall be discontinued by
the water department after due process of written notification of violation and
an appropriate time suspense for voluntary compliance, if:
      1.   A backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter for the
control of backflow and cross connection is not installed, tested, and
maintained;
      2.   If it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed
or bypassed;
      3.   If an unprotected cross connection exist on the premises; or
      4.   If the periodic system survey has not been conducted.
Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
   B.   The customer's system(s) shall be open for inspection at all reasonable
times to authorized representatives of the water purveyor to determine whether
cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violation
of this chapter exist and to audit the results of the required survey (R309-
102-5 of the Utah administration code). In order to make such determination,
the inspection shall include access to above ceiling areas, pits, paneled
interior areas, or other locations where cross connections might exist. The
customer shall be responsible to provide a route of access across the property
for inspection purposes that is free from litter, overgrowth, the threat of a
vicious animal, or other hindrance that may be detrimental to the safety of the
inspector or obstructive to his or her ease of access.
   C.   Whenever the public water purveyor deems a service connection's water
usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water supply, an approved backflow
prevention assembly shall be installed on the service line of the identified
consumer's water system, at or near the property line or immediately inside the
building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading
off the service line.
   D.   The type of protective assembly required under subsection C of this
section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exist at the point of
cross connection (whether direct or indirect), applicable to local and state
requirements or resulting from the required survey.
   E.   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer at any premises where
backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified survey/
inspections, and operational test made at least once per year at the consumer's
expense. In those instances where the public water purveyor deems the hazard to
be great, he or she may require certificate surveys/inspections and test at a
more frequent interval. It shall be the duty of the purveyor to see that these
tests are made according to the standards set forth by the state department of
environment quality, division of drinking water.
   F.   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten (10)
working days of initial installation.
   G.   No backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so as to create a
safety hazard (example: installed over an electrical panel, boilers, or above
ceiling level). (Ord. 2004-16 § 2)
13.20.490: VIOLATIONS OF THE CROSS CONNECTION POLICY:
If violations of this chapter exist or if there has not been any corrective
action taken by the consumer within ten (10) days of the written notification
of the deficiencies noted within the survey or test results, then the water
purveyor shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by
providing a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected
the condition(s) in conformance with all state and local regulations and
statutes relating to plumbing, safe drinking water suppliers, and the ordinance
codified in this chapter. If the nature of the violation presents immediate and
serious implications to the integrity of the public drinking water supply as
established by the water purveyor, water purveyor is authorized to immediately
discontinue water service after making a reasonable attempt to notify water
customer. Other penalties may apply per
chapter 1.16 of this code. (Ord. 2004-16 § 2)
13.20.500: WATER USE EFFICIENCY IN LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION:
   A.   Time Of Day Watering Parameters:
      1.   Sprinkler irrigation of all lawns and landscapes using potable
(treated) water is prohibited between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. and
eight o’clock (8:00) P.M.
      2.   Secondary (untreated or reclaimed wastewater) water systems have
limited capacity and are therefore exempt from this section. Facilities
irrigated with secondary water systems include public amenities (parks, golf
courses, schools, cemeteries) and some residential neighborhoods. Using
secondary water for irrigation extends our water resources and saves residents
millions of dollars in annual treatment costs.
   B.   Applicability Of Time Of Day Watering Regulations: The provisions of
this section shall apply to all landscapes watered with potable water within
the city. This section does not apply in the following situations:
      1.   New lawn, that requires frequent irrigation for establishment
purposes within ninety (90) days of planting.
      2.   Short cycles required for testing, inspecting, and maintaining
irrigation systems.
      3.   Other situations as permitted by the city.
   C.   Effective Date: This section shall be effective as of June 1, 2021.
(Ord. 2021-05)
CHAPTER 13.22
WATER PRETREATMENT
SECTION:
Article 0. General Provisions
13.22.010: Purpose And Policy
13.22.020: Administration
13.22.030: Abbreviations
13.22.040: Definitions
Article 1. General Sewer Use Requirements
13.22.100: Prohibited Discharge Standards
13.22.110: National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
13.22.120: State Pretreatment Standards
13.22.130: Local Limits
13.22.140: SGRWRF's Right Of Revision
13.22.150: Dilution Prohibition
13.22.160: Wastewater System
Article 2. Pretreatment Of Wastewater
13.22.200: Pretreatment Facilities
13.22.210: Additional Pretreatment Measures
13.22.220: Accidental Discharge/Slug Discharge Control Plans
13.22.230: Hauled Wastewater
Article 3. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits
13.22.300: Wastewater Analysis
13.22.310: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
13.22.320: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting; Existing Connections
13.22.330: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting; New Connections
13.22.340: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents
13.22.350: Application Signatories And Certifications
13.22.360: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
Article 4. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance
13.22.400: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
13.22.410: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
13.22.420: Permit Appeals
13.22.430: Permit Modification
13.22.440: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
13.22.450: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
13.22.460: Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance
13.22.470: Regulation Of Waste Received From Other Jurisdictions
Article 5. Reporting Requirements
13.22.500: Baseline Monitoring Reports
13.22.505: Compliance Schedule Progress Reports
13.22.510: Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline
13.22.515: Periodic Compliance Reports
13.22.520: Reports Of Changed Conditions
13.22.525: Reports Of Potential Problems
13.22.530: Reports From Unpermitted Users
13.22.535: Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting
13.22.540: Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous Waste
13.22.545: Analytical Requirements
13.22.550: Sample Collection
13.22.555: Date Of Receipt Of Reports
13.22.560: Recordkeeping
13.22.565: Certification Statements
Article 6. Compliance Monitoring
13.22.600: Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling
13.22.610: Search Warrants
Article 7. Confidential Information
13.22.700: Release Of Confidential Information
Article 8. Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
13.22.800: Publication Of Significant Noncompliance
Article 9. Administrative Enforcement Remedies
13.22.900: Notification Of Violation
13.22.910: Consent Orders
13.22.920: Show Cause Hearing
13.22.930: Compliance Orders
13.22.940: Cease And Desist Orders
13.22.950: Administrative Fines
13.22.960: Emergency Suspensions
13.22.970: Termination Of Discharge
Article 10. Judicial Enforcement Remedies
13.22.1000: Injunctive Relief
13.22.1010: Civil Penalties
13.22.1020: Criminal Prosecution
13.22.1030: Remedies Nonexclusive
Article 11. Supplemental Enforcement Action
13.22.1100: Performance Bonds
13.22.1110: Liability Insurance
13.22.1120: Water Supply Severance
13.22.1130: Public Nuisances
Article 12. Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations
13.22.1200: Upset
13.22.1210: Bypass
Article 13. Fats, Oils, Grease, And Soil (FOGS) Control
13.22.1300: General
13.22.1310: Definitions
13.22.1320: Interceptor And Trap Installation Specifications
13.22.1330: General FOGS Waste Discharge Limits And Requirements
13.22.1340: Kitchen Best Management Practices (BMP) Requirements
13.22.1350: Interceptor Operation And Maintenance Requirements
13.22.1360: Grease Trap Operation And Maintenance Requirements
13.22.1370: Notification Requirements
13.22.1380: Record-Keeping Requirements
13.22.1390: Inspections And Sampling
Article 14. Miscellaneous Provisions
13.22.1400: Pretreatment Charges And Fees
13.22.1410: Severability
13.22.1420: Effective Date
ARTICLE 0. GENERAL PROVISIONS
13.22.010: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned
treatment works for the St. George Regional Water Reclamation Facility and
enables the City of Santa Clara City to comply with all applicable State and
Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code [USC]
section 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (title 40 of
the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) part 403), and the Utah Administrative
Code R317-8-8. This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned
treatment works. This chapter authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater
discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement
activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user
reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution
of costs resulting from the program established herein. The objectives of this
chapter are:
   A.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation or contaminate the
resulting sludge;
   B.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, the atmosphere, or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;
   C.   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is
maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations found in 40 CFR part 503;
   D.   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment, and the
general public;
   E.   To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and sludge from the
publicly owned treatment works;
   F.   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works;
and
   G.   To enable SGRWRF to comply with its Utah Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and
any other Federal or State laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is
subject. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.020: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Santa Clara Public Services Director
(hereinafter "Manager") shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Manager may
be delegated by the Manager to a duly authorized St. George Regional Water
Reclamation Facility employee. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.030: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
BMP    Best Management Practice
BMR    Baseline Monitoring Report
BOD    Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR    Code of Federal Regulations
COD    Chemical oxygen demand
DWQ    State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Water
       Quality
EPA    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
FOG    Fats, oils and grease
FOGS   Fats, oils, grease and soil
gpd    Gallons per day
IU     Industrial user
mg/L   Milligrams per liter
POTW   Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SGRWRF St. George Regional Water Reclamation Facility
SIU    Significant industrial user
TSS    Total suspended solids
UPDES  Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
USC    United States Code
 
(Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.040: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   ACT OR THE ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq., and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY: The State of Utah, Department of Environmental Quality,
Division of Water Quality (DWQ), or its successor agency.
   AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER: A. If the user is
a corporation:
      1.   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
      2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating
facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions
that govern the operation of the regulated facility, and is authorized to sign
documents on behalf of the corporation in accordance with corporate procedures,
and where the manager has the duty to:
         a.   Make major capital investment recommendations;
         b.   Initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-
term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; or
         c.   Ensure that necessary systems are established or actions taken to
gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge
permit requirements;
   B.   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
   C.   If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or its designee.
   D.   The individuals described in subsections A through C of this
definition, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge
originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, and the written authorization is submitted to the Manager.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMP: The schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to
implement the prohibitions listed in subsections
13.22.100A and B of this chapter. BMPs include, but are not limited to,
treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage, leaks, sludge, waste disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage. BMPs may be developed by the Pretreatment Program as a local
limit to control discharges from SIU as needed.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR BOD: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/L).
   BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user's treatment facility.
   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER OR CIU: An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA, in accordance with
sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC section 1317), that apply to a
specific category of users, and that appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N,
parts 405 - 471.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR COD: A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize
all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
   CITY: The City of Santa Clara City, State of Utah.
   COLOR: The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption,
relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%) transmittance is
equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE: The samples resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time, to minimize the effect or the variability of the individual
samples. This sampling should be in accordance with 40 CFR part 403 appendix E
sub-part I - Composite Method.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY: The St. George Regional Water Reclamation Facility or
SGRWRF.
   DAILY MAXIMUM: The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT: The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant
during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of
mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the
day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the
daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant
concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director,
the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge that is not a "new source".
   GRAB SAMPLE: A sample that is taken from a wastestream, without regard to
the flow in the wastestream, and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen
(15) minutes.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE: Waste as defined in 40 CFR 261.3, incorporated herein and
made a part hereof.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any nondomestic source which is regulated under section 307(b), (c)
or (d) of the Act (including septage waste discharged into the POTW).
   INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT: The maximum or minimum concentration (or load) of a
pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of
any discrete, grab or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE: A discharge that alone, or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; therefore,
it is a violation of SGRWRF's UPDES permit, or of the prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/
regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent State
or local regulations, including, but not limited to: a) section 405 of the Act;
b) the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II commonly referred to as the
RCRA; c) any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; d) the Clean
Air Act; e) the Toxic Substances Control Act; and f) the Marine Protection,
Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
   LOCAL LIMIT: Specific discharge limits developed to protect the POTW in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.5 and enforced by SGRWRF upon industrial or
commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge
prohibitions listed in subsections
13.22.100A and B of this chapter. The technically based local limits and
development documents are kept on file at the SGRWRF office and can be reviewed
if requested.
   MANAGER: The person designated by the City to supervise the operation of the
POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this
chapter. Manager also means a duly authorized representative of the Manager.
   MEDICAL WASTE: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE: The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that
month.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT: The highest allowable average of "daily discharges"
over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured
during a calendar month, divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured
during that month.
   NEW SOURCE: A. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided
that:
      1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
      2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at
an existing source; or
      3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
   B.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create
a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of
subsection A2 or A3 of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds
to existing process or production equipment.
   C.   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
      1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
         a.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
         b.   Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation,
or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary
for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or
equipment; or
      2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
paragraph.
   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling that does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
   PASS THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the State in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
SGRWRF's UPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, limited liability company, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal,
State, and local governmental entities.
pH: A measure of the acidity or basicity of a solution, expressed in standard
units.
   POLLUTANT: Any pollutant, including, but not limited to: dredged spoils;
solid waste; incinerator residue; filter backwash; sewage; garbage; sewage
sludge; munitions; medical wastes; chemical wastes; biological materials;
radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar
dirt; Municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes; and, certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color,
BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
   PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties, in
wastewater, prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by: a) physical, chemical, or
biological processes; b) process changes; or c) other means. Pretreatment
cannot be obtained by diluting the concentration of the pollutants, unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR: The person designated by SGRWRF to coordinate the
SGRWRF Pretreatment Program, charged with certain duties and responsibilities
under the ordinance as directed and delegated by the Manager. A technically
skilled position, the Pretreatment Coordinator, or his or her designee,
performs surveillance, administrative duties, and related work in monitoring
compliance, and is a liaison with IUs of the SGRWRF.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: Pretreatment standards shall mean any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to IUs, which
includes, but is not limited to, prohibited discharge standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, and local limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in section 13.22.100 of this chapter.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW: A treatment works, as defined by
section 212 of the Act (33 USC section 1292), which is owned by the SGRWRF.
This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature, and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances if they convey
wastewater to a POTW. The term also means the Municipality as defined in
section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges
to, and the discharges from, such a treatment works.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU): Except as provided in subsection C of
this definition, a significant industrial user is:
   A.   An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
   B.   An industrial user that:
      1.   Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or more
of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non- contact cooling,
and boiler blowdown wastewater);
      2.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent (5%)
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
      3.   Is designated as such by SGRWRF on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
   C.   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection B of this
definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, SGRWRF
may at any time, on its own initiative, or in response to a petition received
from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)
(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial
user.
   SLUG LOAD OR SLUG DISCHARGE: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration,
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section
13.22.100 of this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine,
episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-
customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
interference or pass through, or in any other way violates the POTW's
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
   STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS, OR TSS, OR SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended
matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or
other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
   UPSET: Any exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. Upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
   USER, OR INDUSTRIAL USER, OR IU: A source of indirect discharge.
   WASTEWATER: Liquid and water-carried industrial waste and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT: The portion of the POTW which
is designed to provide treatment of Municipal sewage and industrial waste.
   WATERS OF THE STATE 1 : All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water- courses,
waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other
bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon this State or any portion thereof. Waters of the State does not
include bodies of water confined to, and retained within, the limits of private
property, and which do not develop into or constitute a nuisance, or a public
health hazard, or a menace to fish and wildlife. (Ord. 2018-09)
 
Notes
1 1. See UCA § 19-5-102.
ARTICLE 1. GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
13.22.100: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
   A.   General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or
interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   B.   Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      1.   Pollutants which will create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed- cup flashpoint of
less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      2.   Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW,
including, but not limited to, discharges with a pH lower than 5.0, unless the
works is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges;
      3.   Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW,
including, but not limited to, discharges with a pH greater than 12.0;
      4.   Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference;
      5.   Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which
will cause interference with the POTW;
      6.   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred forty
degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in
the SGRWRF resulting in interference, but in no case in such quantities that
cause the temperature at the SGRWRF headworks to exceed one hundred four
degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (40°C);
      7.   Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      8.   Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, exceeding one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/L);
      9.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety
problems;
      10.   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW, see section 13.22.230 of this chapter;
      11.   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or prevent entry into
the sewers for maintenance or repair;
      12.   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating SGRWRF's UPDES permit;
      13.   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except
in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;
      14.   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Manager;
      15.   Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
      16.   Any discharge of medical waste that causes or contributes to pass
through or interference;
      17.   Any wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test; or
      18.   Any waste containing detergents, surface-active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
   C.   Discharge: Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.110: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   National categorical pretreatment standards, specifying quantities or
concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to
a POTW by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial
subcategories, have been established by EPA in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N,
parts 405 - 471 and are hereby incorporated.
   B.   Users must comply with categorical pretreatment standards found at 40
CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 - 471.
   C.   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Manager shall impose an
alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e). (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.120: STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
State of Utah pretreatment standards, established by the Utah Administrative
Code R317-8-8, are hereby incorporated. Any user subject to a State
pretreatment standard is required to comply with the applicable standard. (Ord.
2018-09)
13.22.130: LOCAL LIMITS:
   A.   The Manager is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
   B.   Local limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to
the POTW. All limits set for metallic substances are for total metal unless
indicated otherwise. The Manager may impose mass limitations in addition to the
concentration-based limitations. The development documents for local limits are
kept at SGRWRF offices and may be reviewed upon request.
   C.   The Manager may develop Best Management Practices (BMPs), by ordinance,
or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and
the requirements of section 13.22.100 of this article.
   D.   No user shall discharge pollutants in excess of the local limits
established by the Manager. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.140: SGRWRF'S RIGHT OF REVISION:
The SGRWRF reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter. In
addition, the Manager is authorized to temporarily or permanently revoke or
suspend issuance of any type of permit at any time, in order to protect the
POTW from pass through or interference, or in order to maintain compliance with
any UPDES permit requirement or Pretreatment Program requirement. The Manager
shall also have the right to deny new or increased contributions, or to set
additional conditions on such contributions, to protect the POTW, including
limits that may be more stringent than the approved local limits. (Ord. 2018-
09)
13.22.150: DILUTION PROHIBITION:
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment,
to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized
by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The Manager may impose
mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in any other case when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.160: WASTEWATER SYSTEM:
   A.   Application For Wastewater Service: Any person desiring to secure, or
required to secure, wastewater service, when such service is available from the
City, shall apply to the Water Services Director, or to such other person
designated by the Water Services Director, and shall pay the required fees
before any wastewater connection is approved. By applying for a wastewater
connection, such person agrees to be bound by this chapter and all applicable
policies and regulations pertaining to the City POTW.
   B.   Mandatory Use Of Wastewater System:
      1.   Residential:
         a.   Residential Subdivisions: Residential subdivision developments
are subject to City policy regarding use of, and connection to, the POTW, as
well as this chapter.
         b.   Residential Dwelling Unit: It is mandatory that any residential
dwelling unit shall be connected to the wastewater system at the expense of the
owner or occupant thereof.
            (1)   The sole exception shall be for single residential lot not
within a platted subdivision where said lot is one acre or greater in size. In
such case, a private wastewater disposal system may be utilized if a delay
improvement agreement is approved and executed with the City, and easements are
provided where required. Before commencement of construction of any private
wastewater disposal system, the property owner or person seeking to install a
private wastewater system shall submit plans, specifications, and other
information deemed necessary to the Utah Department of Health, and obtain a
written permit from it for installation thereof. The type, capacity, location,
and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all
requirements of the Utah Department of Health. The owner of a private
wastewater disposal system shall at all times operate and maintain the same in
a sanitary manner and at no expense to the City.
            (2)   When, in the discretion of the Wastewater Manager, a private
wastewater disposal system ceases to operate effectively or creates a
sanitation hazard, direct connection to the public wastewater system may be
required by the Manager, in which case the private wastewater disposal system
shall be closed, and its facilities disconnected and properly decommissioned.
      2.   Commercial, Industrial, And Other Buildings: It is mandatory that
all commercial, industrial, and other buildings with wastewater service be
connected to the public wastewater system. Private wastewater disposal systems
shall not be allowed.
      3.   Disconnecting Or Refusing Supply: In addition to other available
enforcement actions, the City may enforce the wastewater connection
requirements imposed in this section by disconnecting or refusing to supply the
culinary water servicing the premises until proper connection to the wastewater
system has been made.
   C.   Ownership Of Connecting Lines: Unless provision is expressly made
otherwise for ownership of laterals or lines by the owner of the adjacent
property through a written agreement, all lines and laterals connecting the
City POTW to a landowner or user's premises shall be deemed to be the property
of the landowner/user, and all operation and maintenance shall be at the
landowner's/user's expense. The City shall not be liable for blockage or flow
interference in laterals or connecting lines before they connect to the City
wastewater line.
   D.   POTW Connections: Connection to, or extension of, the City wastewater
main for use by a user shall be the sole responsibility of the user. Acceptance
of any wastewater facility by the City for public use and maintenance, shall
not occur until such facility has been inspected and approved for compliance
with all City, State, and Federal requirements.
   E.   Inspection Of POTW Connections: Any connection to, extension of, or
modification of, the wastewater system shall be under the direction of the
Water Services Director, and inspection of such shall be made by the
appropriate inspector after installation in every case. No backfilling shall be
done until the inspection is made, and the work accepted. In the event of an
installation, repair, or alteration, where no building permit is required,
there shall be no connection, directly or indirectly, with the wastewater
system without notification to, and approval in advance from, the Water
Services Director or his designated representative, as well as the inspection
after installation required above. A reasonable inspection fee shall be paid
for any inspection made under this subsection.
   F.   Quality Of Installations And Maintenance: All wastewater mains,
manholes, service laterals and other materials used in conjunction with the
wastewater system shall be of such quality and specifications as required by
the "City of Santa Clara Standard Specifications for Design and Construction",
as last revised. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any drain or
service line to the POTW system unless such person is a contractor properly
licensed by the State. After installation, all private service pipes,
connections and other apparatus shall be maintained in good repair at the
user's expense. No person shall be allowed to dig into the street for purposes
of installing, repairing or maintaining any service pipes, connections or other
apparatus except under the direction of the Water Services Director or his
designated personnel who shall at all reasonable times have free access to
drains and wastewater lines connecting with the wastewater system for the
purpose of examination and inspection. (Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 2. PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
13.22.200: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
chapter, and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 13.22.100 of
this chapter, within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the
Manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance
shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed
plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the Manager for review, and shall be acceptable to the Manager before such
facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures
shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such
facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to SGRWRF under the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.210: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
   A.   Whenever deemed necessary, SGRWRF may require users to restrict their
discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW, and determine the
user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The Manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to install
and maintain, on their property, and at their expense, a suitable storage and
flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   C.   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors, such as described by the
International Plumbing Code, shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing
excessive amounts of liquid waste, floatable grease, oil, or sand; except, such
interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Manager, and shall be
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection, and away from
building entrances and exits. Such interceptors shall be cleaned, repaired, and
maintained by the user at its expense.
   D.   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   E.   Sampling manholes shall be located in an area to allow for ease of
cleaning, sampling and inspection by the user and SGRWRF. If located in a
parking area, parking shall not be allowed on or over the sampling manhole.
(Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.220: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLANS:
The Pretreatment Coordinator shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an
accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan, or other actions to control
slug discharges. The Pretreatment Coordinator may require any user to develop,
submit for approval, and implement, such a plan, or take such other action that
may be necessary to control slug discharges. An accidental discharge/slug
discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
   A.   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
   B.   List and description of stored chemicals;
   C.   Procedures for immediately notifying the Manager of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by section
13.22.525 of this chapter; and
   D.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.230: HAULED WASTEWATER:
   A.   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the Manager, and at such times as are established by the Manager.
Such waste shall not violate article 1 of this chapter or any other
requirements established by SGRWRF. The Manager may require septic tank waste
haulers to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits.
   B.   The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as "industrial septage"
requires prior approval and an individual wastewater discharge permit from the
SGRWRF. The Manager shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of such
wastes, if disposal would interfere with the treatment plant operations or
violate article 1 of this chapter. Waste haulers are subject to all other
sections of this chapter.
   C.   Waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This
form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler,
truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste. (Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 3. INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS
13.22.300: WASTEWATER ANALYSIS:
When requested by the Pretreatment Coordinator, a user must submit information
on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) days of
the request. The Pretreatment Coordinator is authorized to prepare a form for
this purpose, and periodically may require users to update this information. If
the user changes or adds a process, the user automatically is required to
update the information provided to the Pretreatment Coordinator thirty (30)
days prior to the process being changed or added. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.310: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
   A.   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit from the
Manager, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely
application pursuant to section
13.22.320 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period
specified therein, unless the Manager has determined the SIU meets the
requirements of subsection C of the definition of significant industrial user
(SIU) in section
13.22.040 of this chapter.
   B.   The Manager may require other users to obtain individual wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   C.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections
13.22.900 through
13.22.1130 of this chapter. Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and
State pretreatment standards or requirements, or with any other requirements of
Federal, State, and local law. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.320: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; EXISTING CONNECTIONS:
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
chapter, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall,
within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the Pretreatment Coordinator
for an individual wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section
13.22.340 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW
to continue after one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this
chapter, except in accordance with an individual wastewater discharge permit
issued by the Manager. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.330: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; NEW CONNECTIONS:
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW, shall obtain such
permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for an
individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section
13.22.340 of this article, shall be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to
the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.340: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS:
   A.   All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall submit a permit application. All permittees that will be continuing to
discharge are required to complete an application sixty (60) days prior to the
permit expiring. The SGRWRF may require users to submit all or some of the
following information as part of a permit application:
      1.   Identifying Information:
         a.   The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
         b.   Contact information for the authorized representative and the
duly authorized representative for the facility, and
         c.   The description of activities, facilities, and plant production
processes on the premises.
      2.   Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      3.   Description Of Operations:
         a.   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of
production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process
diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes;
         b.   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
         c.   Number and type of employees, proposed hours of operation, and
actual hours of operation;
         d.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day); and
         e.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points of discharge.
      4.   Time And Duration Of Discharges: Time and duration of discharges.
      5.   Monitoring Locations: The location for monitoring all wastes covered
by the permit.
      6.   Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in subsection
 13.22.110C of this chapter (40 CFR 403.6(e)).
      7.   Measurement Of Pollutants:
         a.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing
sources;
         b.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
Pretreatment Coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process;
         c.   Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported;
         d.   The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall
be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section
13.22.545 of this chapter. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or
pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as
required by the Pretreatment Coordinator, or the applicable standards to
determine compliance with the standard; and
         e.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in section
13.22.550 of this chapter.
      8.   Other Information: Any other information as may be deemed necessary
by the Pretreatment Coordinator to evaluate the permit application.
   B.   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
   C.   Based on information provided by the permittee as required in
subsection A of this section, the SGRWRF will determine, within thirty (30)
days: 1) if additional information is needed; 2) if a permit is not necessary;
or 3) if a permit will be required to be issued before the IU discharge is
allowed to the POTW.
   D.   Should any of the information requested or supplied be considered by
the user to be of a confidential nature, the user should request confidential
status of specific information in accordance with article 7 of this chapter.
Information regarding sampling and analysis of the discharge is not considered
confidential information. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.350: APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS:
   A.   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports, and
certification statements shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
user, and contain the certification statement required in section
13.22.565 of this chapter.
   B.   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate, because for any reason a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters of the company, a new written
authorization must be submitted to the Pretreatment Coordinator, satisfying the
requirements of this section, prior to or together with any reports being
signed by an authorized representative. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.360: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
The Pretreatment Coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a
complete permit application, the Manager will determine whether to issue an
individual wastewater discharge permit. The Manager may approve, conditionally
approve, or deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 4. INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE
13.22.400: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION:
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. An
individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
five (5) years, at the discretion of the Manager. Each individual wastewater
discharge permit will indicate a specific effective date and expiration date.
(Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.410: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS:
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include conditions deemed
reasonably necessary by the Manager to prevent pass through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal,
and protect against damage to the POTW.
   A.   Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      1.   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, effective date, and expiration date.
      2.   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to, and approval from, the SGRWRF, and provisions
for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater
discharge permit.
      3.   Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards in part 403 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, State and local
law.
      4.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants (or Best Management Practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type, based on Federal, State, and local law.
      5.   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable Federal, State, and local law.
      6.   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the Manager
to be necessary.
      7.   Requirements to report to the Manager any slug discharge.
      8.   Requirements to notify the Manager of changes to the industrial
user's discharge thirty (30) days prior to the change. The Manager shall
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the change prior to the user making the
change at the facility that may impact the discharge at the facility to the
POTW.
   B.   Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      2.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW;
      3.   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control
plans, or other special conditions, including management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
      4.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      5.   The schedule of user charges and fees, for the management of the
wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      6.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
      7.   A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, and local standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the individual
wastewater discharge permit; and
      8.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Manager to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.420: PERMIT APPEALS:
An interested person or entity, including the industrial user, may petition the
SGRWRF to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within fifteen
(15) days of the issuance date.
   A.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review is a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
   B.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge provision objected to, the reason for the objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge
permit.
   C.   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit is not stayed
pending the appeal.
   D.   If the SGRWRF fails to act within fifteen (15) days of a petition for
reconsideration, it is deemed denied. Denials and decisions not to reconsider a
wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not
to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
   E.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Fifth Judicial District Court in and for Washington County, State of Utah.
(Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.430: PERMIT MODIFICATION:
The Manager may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   A.   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
   B.   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character, since the time of the
individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   C.   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; or
   D.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the POTW, related personnel, receiving waters, or sludge;
   E.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
   F.   Misrepresentations or intentional or unintentional failure to fully
disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or
in any required reporting;
   G.   Revision of, or a grant of variance from, categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
   H.   To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater
discharge permit; or
   I.   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.440: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER:
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner and/or operator
only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days advanced notice to the
Manager, and the Manager approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer.
Failure to provide advance notice of such transfer to, and approval from, the
Manager, renders the wastewater discharge permit void on the date of facility
transfer. The notice to the Manager must include a written certification by the
new owner and/or operator which:
   A.   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
   B.   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
   C.   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit; and
   D.   Acknowledges the conditions of the permit will not change. (Ord. 2018-
09)
13.22.450: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION:
   A.   The Manager may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      1.   Failure to notify the Manager of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      2.   Failure to provide prior notification to the Manager of changed
conditions pursuant to section
13.22.520 of this chapter;
      3.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
      4.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      5.   Falsifying certification statements;
      6.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      7.   Refusing to allow the Manager and/or his or her designee timely
access to the facility premises and/or records;
      8.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      9.   Failure to pay fines;
      10.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      11.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      12.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey, or the wastewater
discharge permit application or reapplication;
      13.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility;
      14.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms
of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter; or
      15.   Upon request by the permittee due to a change in ownership, or the
business is moving, or going out of business.
   B.   Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual
wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a
new individual wastewater discharge permit to that user.
   C.   Non-compliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed
termination of their wastewater permit, and will be offered the opportunity to
show cause under these standards why the proposed action should not be taken.
However, notwithstanding this or any other provision of this chapter, the
Manager may in his or her sole discretion, immediately revoke any discharge
permit where the discharge reasonably appears to present an imminent danger to
the health or welfare of persons. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.460: INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE:
A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application, in accordance with section
13.22.340 of this chapter, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration
of the user's existing individual wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.470: REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
   A.   If another municipality, or user located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Manager shall enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
   B.   Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection A of this
section, the Manager shall request the following information from the
contributing municipality:
      1.   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      2.   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
      3.   Such other information as the Manager may deem necessary.
   C.   An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection A of this
section, shall contain the following terms and conditions:
      1.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use
ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits,
including required Baseline Monitoring Reports (BMRs) which are at least as
stringent as those set out in section
13.22.130 of this chapter. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance
and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City's
ordinance or local limits;
      2.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis;
      3.   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities,
including individual wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection,
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by: a) the contributing
municipality; b) the Manager; and c) jointly by the contributing municipality
and the Manager;
      4.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Manager with access to all information that the contributing municipality
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      5.   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      6.   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
      7.   A provision ensuring the Manager or his or her designee access to
the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Manager; and
      8.   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the intermunicipal agreement. (Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 5. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
13.22.500: BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS:
   A.   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of
a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical industrial users currently discharging to, or scheduled to
discharge to, the POTW shall submit to the Pretreatment Coordinator a report
which contains the information listed in subsection B of this section. At least
ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and
sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation
of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the Pretreatment
Coordinator a report which contains the information listed in subsection B of
this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends
to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   B.   Users described above shall submit the following information:
      1.   Information Required: All information required in section
13.22.340 of this chapter.
      2.   Measurement Of Pollutants:
         a.   The user shall provide the information required in subsections
13.22.340A7a through A7e of this chapter;
         b.   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph;
         c.   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment facility exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the
regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows
and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula
in 40 CFR 403.6(e), to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards.
Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit shall be submitted to the
control authority, along with supporting data;
         d.   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
sections
13.22.545 and
13.22.550 of this article;
         e.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data if the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures; and
         f.   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
      3.   Compliance Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative as defined in section
13.22.040 of this chapter, and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis,
and, if not, whether additional operations and maintenance (O&M), and/or
additional pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.
      4.   Compliance Schedule: After it is determined that additional
pretreatment and/or O&M will be required, user must submit a compliance
schedule within thirty (30) days. The compliance schedule shall specify the
shortest timeline for the user to provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out
in section
13.22.505 of this article.
      5.   Signature And Report Certification: All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with section
13.22.565 of this article, and signed by an authorized representative as
defined in section
13.22.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.505: COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS:
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
subsection
13.22.500B4 of this article:
   A.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   B.   The user shall submit a progress report to the Pretreatment Coordinator
no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate,
the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
   C.   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the Pretreatment Coordinator. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.510: REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE:
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Pretreatment Coordinator a report containing the information described in
subsections
13.22.340A6 and A7 of this chapter and subsection
13.22.500B2 of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-
term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards, expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section
13.22.565 of this article. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with sections
13.22.545 and 13.22.550 of this article. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.515: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS:
   A.   All significant industrial users, at a frequency determined by the
Pretreatment Coordinator, must submit reports, no less than twice per year
(June and December), indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards, and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases
where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a Best Management
Practice (BMP), or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit
documentation required by the Pretreatment Coordinator or the pretreatment
standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
   B.   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with section
13.22.565 of this article.
   C.   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   D.   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently
than required by the Pretreatment Coordinator, using the procedures prescribed
in section
13.22.550 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.520: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
   A.   Each user must notify the Pretreatment Coordinator of any significant
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the
change, including changes that may affect slug discharges to the POTW.
Significant changes shall be considered to be changes beyond the typical
operating range of the user, or changes that would have significant impact on
POTW operations.
      1.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
section
13.22.340 of this chapter.
      2.   The Manager may issue an individual wastewater discharge permit
under section
13.22.460 of this chapter, or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under section
13.22.430 of this chapter, in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
   B.   The Manager may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the change
based on the effect the change may have on the POTW and/or the Pretreatment
Program. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.525: REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS:
   A.   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch
discharge, a slug discharge, or slug load, that might cause potential problems
for the POTW, the user shall immediately notify either in person or via a phone
conversation with the Pretreatment Coordinator of the incident. A phone message
does not satisfy this notification requirement. This notification shall include
the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if
known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
   B.   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the Manager, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s)
of the discharge, and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees of the notification procedures in the
event of a discharge described in subsection A of this section. Employers shall
ensure that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
   D.   Significant industrial users are required to notify the Pretreatment
Coordinator immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential
for a slug discharge. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.530: REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS:
All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports as required by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
(Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.535: NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify
the Pretreatment Coordinator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the Pretreatment Coordinator within
thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the
industrial user is not required if: a) SGRWRF performs scheduled sampling at
the facility at least once a month; b) if SGRWRF performs sampling at the
facility, between the time when the initial sampling was conducted, and the
time when the user receives the results of the initial sampling; or, c) if
SGRWRF has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user,
then SGRWRF will perform the repeat sampling and analysis, unless it notifies
the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling
and analysis. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.540: NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
   A.   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one
hundred kilograms (100 kg) of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information: 1) an identification
of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 2) an estimation of the
mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged
during that calendar month; and 3) an estimation of the mass of constituents in
the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12)
months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty
(180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section
13.22.520 of this article. The notification requirement in this section does
not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections
13.22.500,
13.22.510, and
13.22.515 of this article.
   B.   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this
section, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen
kilograms (15 kg) of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than
fifteen kilograms (15 kg) of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or
of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the
user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   C.   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA,
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user shall notify the Manager,
the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous
waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of
the effective date of such regulations.
   D.   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated.
   E.   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable Federal, State, or local law. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.545: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application, report, permit or other
requirement by this chapter, shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the part 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods,
or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures approved by the
Pretreatment Coordinator.
   B.   All laboratory samples collected for this chapter shall be analyzed by
a laboratory that is either certified by the Utah Bureau of Laboratory
Improvements or approved by the Manager. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.550: SAMPLE COLLECTION:
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data
obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period
covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
   A.   Except as indicated in subsections B and C of this section, the user
must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow- proportional composite
sampling techniques, unless time- proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the Pretreatment Coordinator. Where time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by SGRWRF, the samples must
be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance,
multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior
to the analysis as follows: 1) for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; and 2) for
volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters, unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies, may be
authorized by SGRWRF, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required
to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
   B.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds, must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
   C.   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in sections
13.22.500 and
13.22.510 of this article, a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for
pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist. For
facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the Pretreatment
Coordinator may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by section
13.22.515 of this article, the industrial user is required to collect the
number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.555: DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS:
Written reports are deemed submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which
are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United
States Postal Service, the date the report is received shall govern. (Ord.
2018-09)
13.22.560: RECORDKEEPING:
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and
make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained
pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any additional
records obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user
independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with BMPs
established under subsection 13.22.130C of this chapter. Records shall include:
a) the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the
person(s) taking the samples; b) the dates analyses were performed; c) who
performed the analyses; d) the analytical techniques or methods used; and e)
the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period
of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for
the duration of any litigation concerning the user or SGRWRF, or where the user
has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Pretreatment
Coordinator. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.565: CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS:
Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring
waiver. The following certification statement, signed by an authorized
representative as defined in section
13.22.040 of this chapter, shall be submitted by users submitting permit
applications under section
13.22.350 of this chapter: a) users submitting baseline monitoring reports
under subsection
13.22.500B5 of this article; b) users submitting reports in compliance with the
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under section
13.22.510 of this article; and c) users submitting periodic compliance reports
required by subsections
13.22.515A through D of this article:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
(Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 6. COMPLIANCE MONITORING
13.22.600: RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The Manager or his or her designee shall have the right to enter the premises
of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of
this chapter, and any individual wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder. Users shall allow the Manager or his or her designee ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and/or the performance of any additional duties.
Inspections and monitoring shall be conducted as frequently as determined by
the SGRWRF and may be announced or unannounced.
   A.   Where a user has security measures in force that require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards, so, upon presentation of
suitable identification, the Manager shall be permitted to enter without delay
for the purpose of performing his or her duties.
   B.   The Manager shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or
require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the user's operations.
   C.   The Manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated at least annually, or as required per the manufacturer's
recommendations and specifications to ensure their accuracy.
   D.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be removed promptly by the user
at the verbal or written request of the Manager and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such obstruction and providing safe and easy access shall be
borne by the user.
   E.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Manager or his or her designee
access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
   F.   The location of the monitoring facility shall provide ample room in or
near the monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples and analysis. Whether constructed on public or private property, the
monitoring facility should be provided in accordance with the SGRWRF's
requirements, and all applicable local construction standard and
specifications. Such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in a manner
that enables the Manager to perform independent monitoring activities.
   G.   All significant industrial users will be inspected at least annually
including review of facilities and reports.
   H.   SGRWRF may use a camera to photograph areas of the facility as
necessary for carrying out the duties of the Industrial Pretreatment Program
including, but not limited to, documentation of the user's compliance status
and for reinforcement of written reports. The user shall be allowed to review
copies of the photographs for confidentiality claims. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.610: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If the Manager or his or her designee has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of SGRWRF designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, the Manager may seek issuance of a
search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 7. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
13.22.700: RELEASE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the Manager inspection and sampling activities,
shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Manager, that the release of specific information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
user furnishing a report that specific information should be held confidential,
the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall be redacted and not made available for inspection by the public.
Regardless of any such assertion of confidentiality, all information,
unredacted, shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the UPDES Program or Pretreatment Program, and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person or entity furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics, and other effluent data, as
defined at 40 CFR 2.302, shall not be recognized as confidential information
and shall be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 8. PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
13.22.800: PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The Manager shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that
provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by POTW, a
list of the users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months,
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all
significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates
subsection C, D or H of this section) and shall mean:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in article 1 of this chapter;
   B.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by article 1 of this chapter multiplied by the
applicable TRC criteria (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and TRC
= 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   C.   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by article 1 of this chapter (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Manager determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;
   D.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Manager exercise of
its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   E.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
   F.   Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   H.   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, which the Manager determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local Pretreatment Program. (Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 9. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
13.22.900: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION:
When the Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Manager may serve upon that user a written Notice of Violation, personally or
by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested). Within fifteen (15)
days of receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for
the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, including specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Manager. Submission of such a
plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation. Nothing in this section
shall limit the authority of the Manager to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, before or without issuing a
Notice of Violation. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.910: CONSENT ORDERS:
The Manager may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the
user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the
document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to sections
13.22.930 and
13.22.940 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.920: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
The Manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear
before the Manager and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place
for the show cause hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for
such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested)
at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on
any authorized representative of the user as defined in section
13.22.040 of this chapter. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.930: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Manager may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing
that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does
not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be
a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.940: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
When the Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Manager may issue an order
to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing
the user to:
   A.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   B.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.950: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
   A.   When the Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Manager may fine such user an amount not to exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation,
per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge
limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
   B.   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after sixty (60) calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the unpaid
balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one point five
percent (1.5%) per month. A lien against the user's real and/or personal
property shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
   C.   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the Manager to reconsider the fine, along with full payment of the fine amount,
within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has
merit, the Manager may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's
appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereon,
shall be returned to the user. The Manager may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
   D.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.960: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The Manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears
to present, or cause, an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Manager may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted
as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension of a permit and/or
discharge to the POTW.
   A.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Manager may take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to persons or the environment. The Manager may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of
the Manager, that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in section
13.22.970 of this article are initiated against the user.
   B.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution, and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence. The written statement shall be submitted to the
Manager prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under
section
13.22.920 or
13.22.970 of this article. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.970: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
   A.   Violations Subject To Discharge Termination: In addition to the
provisions in section
13.22.450 of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
      1.   Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      2.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      3.   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
      4.   Refusal of access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      5.   Violation of the pretreatment standards in article 1 of this
chapter.
   B.   Notice Of Discharge Termination: User will be notified of the proposed
termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under
section
13.22.920 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise
of this option by the Manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 10. JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
13.22.1000: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the Manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Manager may petition the Washington County Fifth District Court through the
City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
individual wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement, imposed by
this chapter on activities of the user. The Manager may also seek such other
and further relief in law or equity, including a requirement for the user to
conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1010: CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the City
for a maximum civil penalty of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation,
per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
   B.   The SGRWRF may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs,
interest, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any other actual damages
incurred by the City.
   C.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent
of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation,
any economic benefit gained by the user from the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
   D.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1020: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION:
The SGRWRF will refer to the State of Utah criminal violations of any
pretreatment standards or permit conditions. The Attorney General's Office for
Utah will offer the City of St. George, wherein the violation occurred, the
option to prosecute the violator. Should the local entity decline, the State or
EPA, at their discretion, may initiate appropriate criminal action. The SGRWRF
will assist the Attorney General's Office or EPA any way it can with
appropriate support for the action. The penalties set forth herein are in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage
available under State or Federal law.
   A.   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, upon conviction, shall be
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for
not more than one year, or both.
   B.   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage, upon conviction, shall be
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of not more than
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
   C.   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a third degree
felony, and be subject to a penalty of not more than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than five
(5) years, or both.
   D.   In the event of a second or subsequent conviction, a user shall be
punished by a fine of not more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per
violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than five (5) years, or both.
(Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1030: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The SGRWRF may
take any, all, or any combination of these actions, against a noncompliant
user, simultaneously or otherwise. Enforcement of pretreatment violations
generally will be in accordance with the SGRWRF's enforcement response plan.
However, SGRWRF may take other action against a user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, SGRWRF is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against a noncompliant user. (Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 11. SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
13.22.1100: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The Manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter,
a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files
a satisfactory bond, payable to the City of St. George, in a sum not to exceed
a value determined by the Manager to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1110: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The Manager may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter,
a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first
submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore
or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge, including, but not
limited to, liability insurance. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1120: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE:
Whenever a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user
may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user's expense, only after the
user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1130: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
Whenever a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, it hereby is declared a
public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Manager.
Any person or entity creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of the City of St. George ordinance (title 4, chapter 2) governing
such nuisances, including, but not limited to, reimbursing the City for any
costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. (Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 12. AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
13.22.1200: UPSET:
   A.   For the purposes of this section, upset means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. Upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
   B.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards, if the requirements
of subsection C of this section, are met.
   C.   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      2.   The facility at the time was being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner, and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and
      3.   The user has submitted the following information to the Manager
within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset, and, if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five (5) days:
         a.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times, or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   D.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   E.   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   F.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility, and until the facility
is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other situations, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1210: BYPASS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section:
   BYPASS: Means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of
a user's treatment facility.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Means substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   B.   Allowable Bypass: A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses
are not subject to the provision of subsections C and D of this section.
   C.   Bypass Notifications:
      1.   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Manager, at least ten (10) days before the date of the
bypass.
      2.   A user shall submit oral notice to the Manager of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty four (24)
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain: a) a description of the bypass;
b) its cause; c) the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times;
d) if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and e) steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The Manager, in his or her sole discretion, may
waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within twenty four (24) hours, and the facts merit the waiver.
   D.   Bypass:
      1.   Bypass is prohibited, and the Manager may take an enforcement action
against a user, unless:
         a.   Bypass was unavoidable in order to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         c.   The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this
section.
      2.   The Manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the Manager determines that it will meet the conditions
listed in subsection D1 of this section.
      3.   Bypass shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards, if the requirements
of this subsection D are met. (Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 13. FATS, OILS, GREASE, AND SOIL (FOGS) CONTROL
13.22.1300: GENERAL:
The following sections are applicable to commercial and industrial users that
have the potential to discharge deleterious wastewaters containing elevated
levels of fat, oils, grease and/or soil to the POTW. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1310: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are supplemental to the St. George pretreatment
ordinance and applicable to this article:
   COMMERCIAL USER: Any business or public or private entity, except for
significant industrial users (SIU), who causes or permits the contribution or
discharge of wastewater into the POTW; and who may be regulated, where
necessary, to comply with the St. George pretreatment ordinance.
   COMMON INTERCEPTOR: One or more interceptors receiving deleterious
wastewater from more than one establishment.
   FOG: Fats, oil and grease of vegetable and animal origin.
   FOGS: Fats, oil, grease (of vegetable and animal origin), petroleum oils (or
crude oil origin), and soil (sand, dirt, etc.).
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE): Means any building, vehicle, place, or
structure, or any room or division in a building, vehicle, place, or structure,
where: a) food is prepared, served, or sold for immediate consumption on or in
the vicinity of the premises; b) called for or taken out by customers; or c)
prepared prior to being delivered to another location for consumption.
   GREASE INTERCEPTOR: A structure or device designed for the purpose of
removing and preventing fats, oils, and grease from entering the sanitary sewer
collection system. These devices are below-ground units in outside areas with a
minimum capacity of one thousand (1,000) gallons.
   GREASE TRAP: A device designed for the purpose of removing and preventing
fats, oils, and grease from entering the sanitary sewer collection system.
These devices are typically compact, under-the-sink units located near food
preparation areas. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1320: INTERCEPTOR AND TRAP INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Grease and sand/oil interceptors, as described by the International
Plumbing Code (IPC), shall be required of any commercial user when the SGRWRF
determines they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing
FOGS in excessive amounts, except such interceptors shall not be required for
residential dwelling units.
   B.   Any commercial user utilizing a three (3) compartment sink shall be
required to have either a grease interceptor or grease trap installed at its
own expense and shall be required to comply with maintaining the device as
outlined in the St. George City pretreatment operating plan.
   C.   All construction plans for interceptors shall be submitted to SGRWRF
for review and approval prior to installation. All interceptors shall be of a
type, construction, and capacity approved by SGRWRF.
   D.   All interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable
of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of
substantial construction, water tight, and equipped with easily removable
covers which are gas and water tight.
   E.   All newly constructed commercial structures, strip malls, multi-tenant
planned-occupied buildings, or planned-un-occupied buildings, shall install
independent six inch (6") wastewater discharge lines stubbed out within each
designated future food establishment unit. If a new source commercial
structure, strip mall, or multi-tenant building has planned occupancy by one or
more businesses that do not generate FOG, and therefore do not need a grease
interceptor, and the owner of the structure does not facilitate the
installation of independent six inch (6") wastewater discharge line and install
a common interceptor, then no future food establishments shall be permitted,
unless facilities are retrofitted for independent lines.
   F.   All newly constructed "stand alone" commercial structures, strip malls,
multi-tenant planned-occupied buildings, where a three (3) compartment sink
will be utilized, will be required to install a grease interceptor.
   G.   All existing commercial or industrial businesses shall have one year to
install an interceptor upon notification by SGRWRF, where required by SGRWRF
standards.
   H.   Interceptors for businesses that have closed shall be dewatered and
cleaned by the owner of said establishment. A representative of SGRWRF may
inspect and verify this process has been completed to the satisfaction of
SGRWRF.
   I.   Grease traps are only allowed in place of grease interceptors when in
the opinion of the Manager it is physically impossible to install a grease
interceptor outside of the building or business. As such, a variance request
from the owner or lessee of the property must be made to SGRWRF with a
certification letter from a duly licensed Utah plumber or engineer. (Ord. 2018-
09)
13.22.1330: GENERAL FOGS WASTE DISCHARGE LIMITS AND REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to discharge within SGRWRF jurisdiction, any sanitary
wastewater, commercial and industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of the
St. George City pretreatment ordinance. The following are general requirements
and prohibitions applicable to this section:
   A.   The discharge of any substance into the sewer system that exceeds or
violates general or specific prohibitions listed in section
13.22.100 of this chapter is prohibited.
   B.   The discharge into the sewer system of FOGS that may accumulate and/or
cause or contribute to blockages in the sewer system, or at the sewer system
lateral, except as provided herein, is prohibited.
   C.   Installation and use of food grinders in new and/or remodeled FSEs is
not recommended.
   D.   Emulsifiers, enzymes, or degreasers shall not be added as sewer aids to
any plumbing that leads to any interceptor directly or indirectly.
   E.   The disposal of cooking oil (yellow grease) into the sewer system is
prohibited. All waste cooking oils shall be collected, stored, and labeled
properly in receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other
acceptable methods of disposal.
   F.   The discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of one hundred
forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) to any FOGS control device, including
interceptors and traps, is prohibited.
   G.   The discharge of waste from toilets, urinals, washbasins, and other
fixtures containing fecal materials into sewer lines intended for interceptor
service, is prohibited.
   H.   The discharge to the sewer system of any waste including FOGS and solid
materials, that were otherwise removed from an interceptor or other FOGS
control device, is prohibited. Wastes removed from interceptors must be hauled
off and properly disposed of periodically in compliance with operation and
maintenance requirements.
   I.   Operation of an interceptor with FOGS and solids (floating + settled)
accumulation, exceeding twenty five percent (25%) of the design hydraulic depth
of the interceptor, is prohibited.
   J.   Commercial users, during regular business hours, shall provide to the
Pretreatment Coordinator or his or her designee immediate and safe access to
the users premises, FOGS handling facilities, and BMP facilities.
   K.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require visual monitoring at the
expense of the commercial user to observe conditions of the user's sewer
lateral and lines downstream. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1340: KITCHEN BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) REQUIREMENTS:
All food service establishments (FSEs) shall be required, at a minimum, to
implement and comply with the following kitchen BMPs, whenever applicable:
   A.   Drain Screens: Drain screens (strainers) shall be installed on all
drainage pipes in food preparation areas.
   B.   Waste Cooking Oil: All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored
properly in recycling receptacles such as barrels or drums. Such recycling
receptacles shall be maintained properly to ensure they do not leak.
   C.   Garbage And Food Waste: All garbage and food waste shall be disposed of
directly into trash bins or containers, and not in sinks, drainage pipes, or
the sewer system. Food waste should be disposed of in lined trash bins.
   D.   Employee Training: Employees of FSEs shall be trained twice each
calendar year in the following areas:
      1.   How to "dry wipe/scrape" pots, pans, dishware, and work areas before
washing to remove FOG.
      2.   How to properly dispose of garbage, food waste, and solids in lined
plastic bags prior to disposal in trash bins or containers, to prevent leaking
and odors.
      3.   The location and use of absorbent products to clean under fryer
baskets and other locations where FOG may be spilled or accumulated.
      4.   How to properly dispose of cooking oil from fry equipment into a FOG
receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling.
      5.   Training shall be documented, and employee signatures recorded,
indicating each employee's attendance and understanding of the practices
reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time
by the Pretreatment Coordinator, or designee.
   E.   Exhaust Filters: Exhaust filters shall be maintained in good operating
condition utilizing frequent cleaning practices. Wastewater generated from
cleaning exhaust filters shall be disposed properly.
   F.   Signs Or Similar Information: Kitchen BMP and "NO GREASE" signs,
posters, or similar information, in appropriate language(s), shall be
prominently displayed in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all
times.
   G.   Absorbant Materials Under Fryers: Absorbent materials shall be placed
under fryers and other areas where FOG typically or frequently drips or spills.
   H.   Covered Devices: Covered devices shall be used in transporting FOG to
prevent spills.
   I.   Emptying FOG Containers:   FOG containers shall be emptied before they
are full to avoid accidental or incidental spills.
   J.   Spill Kits: "Spill kits" (e.g., absorbent materials) shall be provided
and readily available in the event of a spill. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1350: INTERCEPTOR OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All existing and newly constructed interceptors shall be operated in accordance
with the manufacturer's specifications. The maintenance frequency for all
commercial users with interceptors shall be determined by the following:
   A.   Where installed, an interceptor shall be fully maintained by the user,
at its sole expense, in a continuous and efficient manner, and at all times
subject to SGRWRF inspection and approval.
   B.   Interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by
the periodic removal of the full contents of the interceptor. Interceptors
shall be fully emptied and cleaned at a frequency such that the combined
floating and settled FOGS accumulation does not exceed twenty five percent
(25%) of the design hydraulic depth of the interceptor. This is to ensure that
the minimum hydraulic retention time, and required available volume, is
maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOGS.
   C.   If an interceptor at any time is observed by the Pretreatment
Coordinator or his or her designee to contain floating and settled FOGS
accumulation in excess of twenty five percent (25%), the user shall be required
to have the interceptor serviced as soon as possible, but no later than ten
(10) days from the date the notice of violation was given, such that all FOGS,
sludge, and other materials, are completely removed from the interceptor.
   D.   The owner of the property on which a common interceptor, and/or the
facilities discharging to a common interceptor, are located shall be primarily
responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, and repair of the interceptor.
   E.   No commercial user shall increase the use of water or in any other
manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a way of achieving compliance with the
St. George City pretreatment ordinance. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1360: GREASE TRAP OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Where installed, a grease trap shall be fully maintained by the user,
at its sole expense, in a continuous and efficient manner, and at all times
subject to SGRWRF inspection and approval.
   B.   An FSE may use, or be required to install, grease traps, in lieu of
installation of a grease interceptor, when, in the opinion of the Manager: 1)
installation of an interceptor cannot physically be accomplished; 2) there is
not adequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and a
proposed grease interceptor and/or between the grease interceptor and the
private collection lines or the public sewer; or 3) no alternative pretreatment
can be installed. Sizing of grease traps shall be performed by a professional
engineer or plumber registered in the State of Utah, but shall conform to
SGRWRF design standards and construction specifications as a minimum.
   C.   Grease traps shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications.
   D.   Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by
removing accumulated grease on an as needed basis, or the frequency specified
by the manufacturer, but no less than weekly.
   E.   Grease traps shall be fully emptied of all food residues, and any FOG
waste, during the cleaning and scraping process.
   F.   Grease traps shall be inspected periodically, but in no event less than
once a month, to check for leaking seams and pipes, and for effective operation
of the baffles and flow-regulating device. Grease traps and their baffles shall
be maintained free of all caked-on FOG and waste. Removable baffles shall be
removed and cleaned during the maintenance process.
   G.   Automatic dishwashers and/or food grinder units shall not be connected
to, or discharged to, any grease trap.
   H.   No FSE shall increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt
to dilute a discharge as a way of achieving compliance with the St. George
pretreatment ordinance. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1370: NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A commercial and industrial user shall comply with the following notification
requirements:
   A.   Notification of spills and/or sanitary sewer overflows (SSO):
      1.   In the event a user is unable to comply with the FOGS control
requirements due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error, or the
user has reasonable belief that its discharge will violate the St. George City
pretreatment ordinance, the user or its representative shall immediately notify
the Pretreatment Coordinator by telephone.
      2.   If the material discharged has the potential to cause, or results
in, sewer blockage or SSO, the user shall immediately notify the SGRWRF and the
Pretreatment Coordinator by telephone at: (435) 634-5849.
      3.   Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the
Pretreatment Coordinator no later than five (5) workings days from the date of
the incident, to the following address: Pretreatment Coordinator, SGRWRF - 3780
S. 1550 W., St. George, Utah 84790. The written notification shall state the
date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were
taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to
prevent a recurrence.
      4.   Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage or
otherwise arising out of a violation of the St. George City pretreatment
ordinance, or other applicable law.
   B.   Commercial users shall notify the Pretreatment Coordinator in writing
at least sixty (60) days prior to any facility expansion, and/or remodeling or
process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOGS
discharges, or a change in the nature of the discharge. The user shall submit
any information requested by the Pretreatment Coordinator for evaluation of the
effect of such expansion and/or remodeling or process modifications on the
user's FOGS discharge to the sewer system. The written notification shall state
the FSE name, name of the title of the user's contact person or person most
knowledgeable concerning the facility expansion and/or remodeling or process
modifications, address and telephone number of the user, date of the proposed
facility expansion and/or remodeling or process modifications, and the reasons
for the same. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1380: RECORD-KEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
The following records shall be maintained for no less than three (3) years, and
the commercial user shall make them available to Pretreatment Coordinator, or
designee:
   A.   A record or logbook of interceptor or trap cleaning and maintenance
practices and activities. The record or logbook shall include:
      1.   Dates cleaned;
      2.   Name of wastehauler;
      3.   Any observations concerning the effectiveness of the interceptor or
trap in controlling FOGS; and
      4.   Any other maintenance performed on the trap or interceptor;
   B.   A record or logbook of FSE kitchen BMPs being implemented including
employee training;
   C.   Any other information deemed appropriate by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to ensure compliance with the St. George City pretreatment
ordinance; and
   D.   Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral or sewer system.
(Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1390: INSPECTIONS AND SAMPLING:
Commercial users are inspected on a regular basis by SGRWRF to determine if the
businesses are in compliance with the St. George City pretreatment ordinance.
The purpose of inspections is as follows:
   A.   To verify if users are complying with the St. George City pretreatment
ordinance;
   B.   To collect and analyze samples and compare results to established
discharge limitations;
   C.   To provide evidence in support of enforcement actions;
   D.   To verify correction of problems; and
   E.   To maintain records of user discharge constituents. (Ord. 2018-09)
ARTICLE 14. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
13.22.1400: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The SGRWRF may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up
and operating SGRWRF's Pretreatment Program, which may include:
   A.   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of
processing such applications;
   B.   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users;
   C.   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   D.   Fees for filing appeals;
   E.   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs not included in
subsection B of this section associated with any enforcement activity taken by
the Manager to address IU noncompliance; and
   F.   Other fees as SGRWRF may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable
by the SGRWRF. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1410: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue
in full force and effect. (Ord. 2018-09)
13.22.1420: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately following its
passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law. (Ord. 2018-09)
CHAPTER 13.24
STORMWATER
SECTION:
13.24.010: General Provisions
13.24.020: Definitions
13.24.030: Land Disturbance Permits
13.24.040: Stormwater System Design And Management Standards
13.24.050: Postconstruction
13.24.060: Waivers
13.24.070: Illicit Discharges
13.24.080: Enforcement
13.24.090: Violations And Penalties
13.24.100: Appeals
13.24.110: Fees
13.24.010: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to:
      1.   Protect, maintain, and enhance the environment of Santa Clara City.
      2.   Establish responsibilities for controlling and managing stormwater
runoff.
      3.   Protect the public health, safety and the general welfare of the
citizens of the city, by controlling discharges of pollutants to the city's
stormwater system and to maintain and improve the quality of the receiving
waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation,
lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the city.
      4.   Enable the city to comply with the national pollution discharge
elimination system permit (NPDES/UPDES) and applicable regulations, 40 CFR
section 122.26 for stormwater discharges.
      5.   Allow the city to exercise the powers granted by Utah code, which
provides that, among other powers municipalities have with respect to
stormwater facilities, is the power by ordinance or resolution to:
         a.   Exercise general regulation over the planning, location,
construction, and operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities in the
municipality, whether or not owned and operated by the municipality;
         b.   Adopt any rules and regulations deemed necessary to accomplish
the purposes of this chapter, including the adoption of a system of fees for
services and permits;
         c.   Establish standards to regulate the quantity of stormwater
discharged and to regulate stormwater contaminants as may be necessary to
protect water quality;
         d.   Review and approve plans and plats for stormwater management in
proposed subdivisions or commercial developments;
         e.   Issue permits for stormwater discharges, or for the construction,
alteration, extension, or repair of stormwater facilities;
         f.   Suspend or revoke permits when it is determined that the
permittee has violated any applicable ordinance, resolution, or condition of
the permit;
         g.   Regulate and prohibit discharges into stormwater facilities of
sanitary, industrial, or commercial sewage or waters that have otherwise been
contaminated; and
         h.   Expend funds to remediate or mitigate the detrimental effects of
contaminated land or other sources of stormwater contamination, whether public
or private. The expression of this power does not create an obligation on the
part of the city to make any such expenditures.
         i.   Establish a viable and fair method of financing the construction,
operation and maintenance of the stormwater system.
   B.   Administering Entity: The public services director shall administer the
provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any person
from responsibility for damage to other persons or property, nor impose upon
Santa Clara City, its officers, agents or employees, any liability for damage
to other persons or property. (Ord. 2020-11 § 1: Ord. 2009-06 § 1)
13.24.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Words
used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The
word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive.
Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the meaning given
by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of "Webster's
Dictionary".
   AS BUILT PLANS: Drawings depicting conditions as they were actually
constructed. Also known as "record drawings".
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPs: Physical, structural, and/or managerial
practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution
of water, that have been approved by Santa Clara City and that have been
incorporated by reference into this chapter as if fully set out herein. (For
purposes of this title, the relevant BMPs are more particularly defined in the
Santa Clara City stormwater management program.)
   CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks
that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically.
   CITY STORMWATER SYSTEM: Storm system that receives runoff from public rights
of way, natural waterways and systems identified in a city easement.
   COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE: One plan for development or sale,
separate parts of which are related by any announcement, piece of documentation
(including a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement,
drawing, plat, blueprint, contract, permit application, zoning request,
computer design, etc.), physical demarcation (including contracts) that
identify the scope of the project. A plan may still be a common plan of
development or sale even if it is taking place in separate stages or phases, is
planned in combination with other construction activities, or is implemented by
different owners or operators.
   COMMUNITY WATER: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes,
reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells and other bodies
of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming
a part of the boundaries of Santa Clara City.
   CONTAMINANT: Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance
or matter in water.
   DESIGN STORM EVENT: A hypothetical storm event, of a given frequency
interval and duration, used in the analysis and design of a stormwater
facility.
   DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has construction of improvements and is
connected to the city's utility system and receives a monthly utility bill.
   DISCHARGE: Dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place
by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected,
seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including any direct or indirect
entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate stormwater
system.
   EASEMENT: An acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a person,
party, firm, corporation, municipality or other legal entity has in the land of
another.
   EQUIVALENT SERVICE UNIT (ESU): The average amount of impervious surface,
expressed in square feet, on developed single-family residential parcels; three
thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of impervious surface.
   EROSION: The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or
other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction
with or promoted by anthropogenic activities or effects (human caused).
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A written plan (including drawings or
other graphic representations) that is designed to minimize the accelerated
erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities.
   GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER PERMIT: Permit required by the Utah
department of environmental quality, division of water quality.
   HOT SPOT (PRIORITY AREA): An area where land use or activities generate
highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of
those typically found in stormwater.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the
municipal separate stormwater system whether or not such connections result in
discharges into that system.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater and not specifically
exempted under subsection
13.24.030B of this chapter.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities or at a greater rate of flow than
the natural surface.
   IRRIGATION DITCHES: Gravity irrigation ditches used by irrigation
shareowners having a right of water passageway by right of way, easement or
prescription.
   LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT: Santa Clara City land disturbance permit as adopted
by the city. Also known as excavation/grading permit.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any activity on property that results in a change
in the existing soil cover (both vegetative and nonvegetative) and/or the
existing soil topography. Land disturbing activities include, but are not
limited to, development, redevelopment, demolition, construction,
reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation.
   LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): Refers to engineered systems, either
structural or natural, that use or mimic natural processes to promote
infiltration, evapotranspiration, and/or reuse of storm water as close to its
source as possible to protect water quality and aquatic habitat.
   MAINTENANCE: Any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater facility in
good working order so as to function as designed. Maintenance shall include
complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed in
order to restore the facility to its original operational design parameters.
Maintenance shall also include the correction of any problem on the site
property that may directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility.
   MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A document recorded in the land records that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long term maintenance of
stormwater management practices.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) (MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER
SYSTEM): The conveyances owned or operated by the municipality for the
collection and transportation of stormwater, including the roads and streets
and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, and storm drains.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT OR NPDES PERMIT: The
provisions of the federal clean water act for the control of stormwater
discharges, also a permit issued pursuant to 33 USC 1342.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV): Whenever the public services director finds that
a person is in noncompliance with this chapter, the public services director
will order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person.
Requirements in this notice are at the discretion of the public services
director, and may include monitoring, payment to cover costs relating to the
noncompliance, and the implementation of best management practices.
   OFF SITE FACILITY: A structural BMP located outside the subject property
boundary described in the permit application for land development activity.
ON SITE FACILITY: A structural BMP located within the subject property boundary
described in the permit application for land development activity.
   PARCEL: A portion into which something is divided, especially a piece of
land that was originally part of a larger area, also a parcel of land occupied
by one or more buildings, together with parking, open space, yard area and
having frontage on a dedicated and improved city street or private street.
   PEAK FLOW: The maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a particular
point resulting from a storm event.
   PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm or association and any municipal or private corporation
organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.
   PREEXISTING CONDITIONS: Conditions of property in its native state or
changed under approval by the city or changed property that is grandfathered.
   PRIORITY AREA: See definition of Hot Spot (Priority Area).
   PROPERTY OWNER: Landowner of property within the boundary of Santa Clara
City.
   PUBLIC SERVICES DIRECTOR: The public services director of Santa Clara City
or authorized designee.
   RUNOFF: That portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that is
discharged from the area into the municipal separate stormwater system. Water
produced by storms, surface drainage, snow and ice melt, and other water
handled by the storm sewer drainage system.
   SEDIMENT: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water,
gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface either above or
below sea level.
   SEDIMENTATION: Soil particles suspended in stormwater that can settle in
streambeds and disrupt the natural flow of the stream.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PARCEL: A parcel of land occupied or to be
occupied by a main building or group of buildings designed to be occupied by
one family, together with such yards, open space and having frontage upon a
dedicated and improved city street or private street.
   SOILS REPORT: A study of soils on a subject property with the primary
purpose of characterizing and describing the soils. The soils report shall be
prepared by a qualified soils engineer, who shall be directly involved in the
soil characterization either by performing the investigation or by directly
supervising employees.
   STABILIZATION: Providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural,
that will prevent erosion from occurring.
   STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, surface runoff, street wash
waters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration and drainage.
   STORMWATER DESIGN STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS: Current Santa Clara City
stormwater standards and regulations as adopted by the city.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The programs to maintain quality and quantity of
stormwater runoff to predevelopment levels.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES SYSTEM: The drainage structures, conduits,
ditches, combined sewers, sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of
which stormwater is collected, transported, pumped, treated or disposed of.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: The set of drawings and other documents that
comprise all the information and specifications for the programs, drainage
systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques intended to maintain or
restore quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to predevelopment levels.
   STORMWATER MASTER PLAN: Current "Santa Clara City Storm Water Master Plan"
as adopted by the city.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF: Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from
precipitation.
   STORMWATER UTILITY: The stormwater utility created by ordinance of the city
to administer the stormwater management ordinance, and other stormwater rules
and regulations adopted by the municipality.
   STRUCTURAL BMPs: Devices that are constructed to provide control of
stormwater runoff.
   SURFACE WATER: Includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds
created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other
watercourses, lakes and reservoirs.
   UPDES: Utah pollution discharge elimination system.
   WATERCOURSE: A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water,
either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water.
   WATERSHED: All the land area that contributes runoff to a particular point
along a waterway. (Ord. 2020-11 § 1: Ord. 2010-15: Ord. 2009-06 § 1)
13.24.030: LAND DISTURBANCE PERMITS:
   A.   When Required: Every person will be required to obtain a land
disturbance permit from the public services director in the following cases:
      1.   Land disturbing activity generally disturbs one or more acres of
land;
      2.   Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land if such
activity is part of a larger common plan of development that affects one or
more acres of land;
      3.   Land disturbing activity of less than one acre of land, if in the
discretion of the public services director such activity poses a unique threat
to water, or public health or safety;
      4.   The creation and use of borrow pits;
      5.   Processing of earthen materials such as topsoil and gravel
screening.
   B.   Exemptions: The following activities are exempt from the permit
requirement:
      1.   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources.
      2.   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted main or accessory use.
   C.   Drainage Channels, Waterways And Sensitive Areas:
      1.   Property owners shall not alter or restrict natural channels and
waterways without proper federal, state and city permits.
      2.   Modifications of sensitive areas are subject to and governed by the
hillside protection overlay zone ordinance (title 17,
chapter 17.80 of this code). These actions will require a land disturbance
permit and approval from all other governing agencies.
   D.   Redirect Runoff Outside City Limits: Property owners proposing to
redirect runoff, surface and/or pipe flow to properties or facilities outside
Santa Clara City boundaries must provide written approval from the state,
county or municipality or their agents.
   E.   Protection Of Canals: Property owners are responsible for the
protection of canals per the relevant sections of this chapter.
   F.   Discharges Or Modifications: Discharges or modifications to the canals
require written approval from the canal owners and applicable governing
agencies.
   G.   Building Permit: No building permit shall be issued until the applicant
has obtained a land disturbance permit where the same is required by this
chapter.
   H.   Application For A Land Disturbance Permit: Each application shall
include the following:
      1.   Name of applicant;
      2.   Business or residence address of applicant;
      3.   Name, address or telephone number of the owner of the property of
record;
      4.   Address and legal description of subject property including the tax
reference number and parcel number of the subject property;
      5.   Name, address and telephone number of the contractor and any
subcontractor(s) who shall perform the land disturbing activity and who shall
implement the erosion and sediment control plan;
      6.   A statement indicating the nature, extent and purpose of the land
disturbing activity, including the size of the area for which the permit shall
be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates of the land
disturbing activity.
   I.   Environmental Permits: The applicant shall obtain from any other state
or federal agency any other appropriate environmental permits that pertain to
the property. However, the inclusion of those permits in the application shall
not foreclose the public services director from imposing additional development
requirements and conditions, commensurate with this chapter, on the development
of property covered by those permits.
      1.   Each application shall be accompanied by:
         a.   A sediment and erosion control plan.
         b.   A stormwater management plan providing for stormwater management
during the land disturbing activity and after the activity has been completed.
      2.   Each application for a land disturbance permit shall be accompanied
by payment of land disturbance permit and other stormwater management fees, as
adopted by resolution and found in the city fee schedule.
   J.   Review And Approval Of Application:
      1.   The public services director will review each application for a land
disturbance permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
chapter. Within fifteen (15) days after receiving an application, the public
services director shall provide one of the following responses in writing:
         a.   Approval of the permit application;
         b.   Approval of the permit application, subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this
chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
         c.   Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for
the denial.
      2.   If the public services director has granted conditional approval of
the permit, the applicant shall submit a revised plan that conforms to the
conditions established by the public services director. However, the applicant
shall be allowed to proceed with his land disturbing activity so long as it
conforms to conditions established by the public services director. No
development plans will be released until the land disturbance permit has been
approved.
   K.   Permit Duration: Every land disturbance permit shall expire and become
null and void if substantial work authorized by such permit has not commenced
within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of issuance, or is not complete
within eighteen (18) months from the date of the commencement of construction
or the permit is extended. Permit extensions may be granted by the public
services director as per city policy.
   L.   Notice Of Construction: The applicant must notify the public services
director ten (10) working days in advance of the commencement of construction.
Regular inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be
conducted by the public services director. All inspections shall be documented
and written reports prepared that contain the following information:
      1.   The date and location of the inspection;
      2.   Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater
management plan;
      3.   Variations from the approved construction specifications;
      4.   Any violations that exist.
   M.   Performance Bonds: The public services director may, at his discretion,
require the submittal of a performance security or performance bond prior to
issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater practices are
installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater
management plan. The amount of the installation performance security or
performance bond shall be one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the total
estimated construction cost of the structural BMPs approved under the permit
plus any reasonably foreseeable additional related costs, e.g., for damages or
enforcement. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for
failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. The
applicant shall provide an itemized construction cost estimate complete with
unit prices which shall be subject to acceptance, amendment or rejection by the
public services director. Alternatively, the public services director shall
have the right to calculate the cost of construction cost estimates. The
performance security or performance bond shall be released in full only upon
submission of record drawings and a written report sealed by a registered
professional engineer licensed to practice in the state of Utah that the
structural BMP has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and
other applicable provisions of this chapter. The public services director will
make a final inspection of the structural BMP to ensure that it is in
compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this chapter. The
public services director shall have the discretion to adopt provisions and set
policy for a partial pro rata release of the performance security or
performance bond on the completion of various stages of development. (Ord.
2020-11 § 1: Ord. 2010-15: Ord. 2009-06 § 1)
13.24.040: STORMWATER SYSTEM DESIGN AND MANAGEMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Irrigation Ditches:
      1.   Discharges to private ditches require written approval from the
ditch owners and design shall comply with the terms of private approvals and
the "Santa Clara City Construction Design Standards" and the land disturbance
permit.
      2.   Piping of ditches and modification to the diversion boxes require
documented coordination and written approval with ditch owners or
representative. Design and coordination requirements shall comply with the
"Santa Clara City Construction Design Standards" and the land disturbance
permit documents.
   B.   Stormwater Design And BMP Manuals:
      1.   Adoption: The municipality adopts as its stormwater design and best
management practices (BMPs) manuals the following publications, which are
incorporated by reference in this chapter as is fully set out herein:
         a.   "Santa Clara City Storm Water Management Program And
Regulations".
         b.   "Santa Clara City Storm Water Master Plan".
         c.   "Santa Clara City Construction Design Standards".
         d.   “Santa Clara City Construction Design Standards for Low Impact
Development”.
      2.   Content And Revision Of Manuals: These manuals include a list of
acceptable BMPs and include specific design performance criteria and operation
and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manuals may be
updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the governing body
of the city, upon the recommendation of the public services director, based on
improvements in engineering, science, monitory and local maintenance
experience. Stormwater facilities that are designed, constructed and maintained
in accordance with these BMP criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum
water quality performance standards.
   C.   General Performance Criteria For Stormwater Management: Unless granted
a waiver or judged by the public services director to be exempt, the following
postconstruction performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater
management at all sites:
      1.   Design of storm drain systems in boundaries and discharges into a
Santa Clara City storm drain system requires direct supervision of a Utah
registered professional engineer, and shall carry the seal of the same
supervising professional engineer.
      2.   All site designs shall control the peak flow rates of stormwater
discharge associated with design storms specified in this chapter or other city
ordinances and generally reduce the generation of postconstruction stormwater
runoff to preconstruction levels.
      3.   To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel
protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the BMP manual.
      4.   Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources
(i.e., fisheries, recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to
additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain
stormwater management practices.
      5.   Stormwater discharges from "hot spots" may require the application
of specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices.
      6.   Prior to or during the site design process, applicants for land
disturbance permits shall consult with the public services director to
determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements.
      7.   The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the Santa
Clara City design standards shall be used for sizing all stormwater facilities.
   D.   Minimum Control Requirements:
      1.   Stormwater discharge during all construction activities shall comply
with the terms of the land disturbance permit, the Santa Clara City design
standards, and the state of Utah UPDES requirements.
      2.   Stormwater designs shall meet the multistage storm frequency storage
requirements as identified in the Santa Clara City design standards unless the
public services director has granted the applicant a full or partial waiver for
a particular BMP under this section.
      3.   Runoff rates from one parcel to another may not exceed preexisting
conditions or in such a manner that may unreasonably and unnecessarily cause
more harm than formerly.
      4.   If hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than
that provided by the minimum control requirements, the public services director
may impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the
volume, timing, and rate of runoff.
   E.   Stormwater Management Plan Requirements: Property owners are
responsible to manage stormwater runoff and sediment whether in conduit systems
or on the surface that traverse or originate on their property, unless this
responsibility is relinquished through the terms and conditions of an easement.
The stormwater management plan shall include sufficient information to allow
the public services director to evaluate the environmental characteristics of
the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the
site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness
and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at
the project site. To accomplish this goal the stormwater management plan shall
include the following:
      1.   Topographic Base Map: A one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200')
minimum topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of five
hundred feet (500') beyond the limits of the proposed development and
indicates:
         a.   Existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds,
culverts, ditches, sinkholes, wetlands; and the type, size, elevation, etc., of
nearest upstream and downstream drainage structures;
         b.   Current land use including all existing structures, locations of
utilities, roads, and easements;
         c.   All other existing significant natural and artificial features;
         d.   Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface
area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities,
roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading;
         e.   Proposed structural BMPs;
         f.   A written description of the site plan and justification of
proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required.
      2.   Calculations: Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for the design storms specified
in the Santa Clara construction design standards. These calculations must show
that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling
runoff from the site in compliance with this chapter and the guidelines of the
Santa Clara construction design standards. Such calculations shall include:
         a.   A description of the design storm frequency, duration, and
intensity where applicable;
         b.   Time of concentration;
         c.   Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients including assumed soil
moisture conditions;
         d.   Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed
area;
         e.   Infiltration rates, where applicable;
         f.   Culvert, stormwater sewer, ditch and/or other stormwater
conveyance capacities;
         g.   Flow velocities;
         h.   Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design
storms referenced in the Santa Clara construction design standards; and
         i.   Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field
test results.
      3.   Soils Information: If a stormwater management control measure
depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then
a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles and soil survey reports. The number and
location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based on
what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types
present at the location of the control measure.
      4.   Maintenance And Repair Plan: The design and planning of all
stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair
procedures to ensure their continued performance. These plans will identify the
parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be
maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for
the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance
program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall
be included in the plan. A permanent elevation benchmark shall be identified in
the plans to assist in the periodic inspection of the facility.
      5.   Landscaping Plan: The applicant must present a detailed plan for
management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including
who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what
practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is
preserved.
      6.   Maintenance Easements: The applicant must ensure access to the site
for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance
easements needed. These easements must be binding on the current property owner
and all subsequent owners of the property and must be properly recorded in the
land record.
      7.   Maintenance Agreement: The owner of property to be served by an on-
site stormwater management facility must execute an inspection and maintenance
agreement that shall operate as a deed restriction binding on the current
property owner and all subsequent property owners which agreement shall be
filed as a covenant to run with the affected land, in the office of the
Washington County recorder. The maintenance agreement shall:
         a.   Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the
stormwater facility to the owner of the property upon which the facility is
located and be recorded as a deed restriction for the property.
         b.   Provide for a periodic inspection as required by the Santa Clara
City stormwater management program by the property owner for the purpose of
documenting maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the purpose
and requirements of this chapter. The property owner will arrange for this
inspection to be conducted by a registered professional engineer licensed to
practice in the state of Utah who will submit a sealed report of the inspection
to the public services director. It shall also grant permission to the city to
enter the property at reasonable times and to inspect the stormwater facility
to ensure that it is being properly maintained.
         c.   Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair needs include,
but are not limited to: the removal of silt, litter and other debris, the
cutting of grass, grass cuttings and vegetation removal, and the replacement of
landscape vegetation, in detention and retention basins, and inlets and
drainage pipes and any other stormwater facilities. It shall also provide that
the property owner shall be responsible for additional maintenance and repair
needs consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the Santa Clara City
stormwater management program.
         d.   Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely
manner, on a schedule to be determined by the public services director.
         e.   Provide that if the property is not maintained or repaired within
the prescribed schedule, the public services director shall perform the
maintenance and repair at its expense, and bill the same to the property owner.
The maintenance agreement shall also provide that the public services
director's cost of performing the maintenance shall be a lien against the
property.
         f.   The municipality shall have the discretion to accept the
dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility, provided
such facility meets the requirements of this chapter, and includes adequate and
perpetual access and sufficient areas, by easement or otherwise, for inspection
and regular maintenance. Any stormwater facility accepted by the municipality
must also meet the municipality's construction standards and any other
standards and specifications that apply to the particular stormwater facility
in question.
      8.   Sediment And Erosion Control Plans: The applicant must prepare a
sediment and erosion control plan for all construction activities that complies
with subsection F of this section.
   F.   Sediment And Erosion Control Plan Requirements: The sediment and
erosion control plan shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion
and sedimentation problems resulting from land disturbing activity and shall
explain and illustrate the measures that are to be taken to control these
problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to be commensurate with the
size of the project, severity of the site condition, and potential for off-site
damage. The plan shall be sealed by a registered professional engineer licensed
in the state of Utah. The plan shall also conform to the requirements found in
the Santa Clara City stormwater management program, and shall include at least
the following:
      1.   Brief description of the intended project and proposed land
disturbing activity including number of units and structures to be constructed
and infrastructure required.
      2.   A topographic map with contour intervals of two feet (2') or less
showing present conditions and proposed contours resulting from land disturbing
activity.
      3.   All existing drainageways, including intermittent and wet weather.
Include any designated floodways or floodplains.
      4.   A general description of existing land cover. Individual trees and
shrubs do not need to be identified.
      5.   Stands of existing trees as they are to be preserved upon project
completion, specifying their general location on the property. Differentiation
shall be made between existing trees to be preserved, trees to be removed and
proposed planted trees. Tree protection measures must be identified, and the
diameter of the area involved must also be identified on the plan and shown to
scale. Information shall be supplied concerning the proposed destruction of
exceptional and historic trees in setbacks and buffer strips, where they exist.
Complete landscape plans may be submitted separately. The plan must include the
sequence of implementation for tree protection measures.
      6.   Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading and filling.
      7.   Approximate flows of existing stormwater leaving any portion of the
site.
      8.   A general description of existing soil types and characteristics and
any anticipated soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from existing
characteristics.
      9.   Location, size and layout of proposed stormwater and sedimentation
control improvements.
      10.   Proposed drainage network.
      11.   Approximate flows leaving site after construction and incorporating
water runoff mitigation measures. The evaluation must include projected effects
on property adjoining the site and on existing drainage facilities and systems.
The plan must address the adequacy of outfalls from the development: when water
is concentrated, what is the capacity of waterways, if any, accepting
stormwater off site; and what measures, including infiltration, sheeting into
buffers, etc., are going to be used to prevent the scouring of waterways and
drainage areas off-site, etc.
      12.   The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, drainage
and sedimentation and erosion control plans as related to other major items of
construction, beginning with the initiation of excavation and including the
construction of any sediment basins or retention facilities or any other
structural BMPs.
      13.   Specific remediation measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation
runoff. Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control measures used;
stabilization measures including vegetation and nonvegetation measures, both
temporary and permanent, will be detailed. Detailed construction notes and a
maintenance schedule shall be included for all control measures in the plan.
      14.   Specific details for the construction of rock pads, wash down pads,
and settling basins for controlling erosion; road access points; eliminating or
keeping soil, sediment, and debris on streets and public ways at a level
acceptable to the public services director. Soil, sediment, and debris brought
onto streets and public ways must be removed by the end of the workday by
machine, broom or shovel to the satisfaction of the public services director.
Failure to remove the sediment, soil or debris shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter.
      15.   Proposed structures; location (to the extent possible) and
identification of any proposed additional buildings, structures or development
on the site. (Ord. 2020-11 § 1: Ord. 2009-06 § 1)
13.24.050: POSTCONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Projects Greater Than Or Equal To One (1) Acre: Newly developed and
redeveloped projects that disturb greater than or equal to one (1) acre,
including projects less than one (1) acre that are of a larger common plan of
development or sale, are required to submit a low impact development (LID)
approach to be evaluated by the City of Santa Clara. A LID approach promotes
the implementation of BMPs that allow storm water to infiltrate, evapotranspire
or harvest and use storm water on site to reduce runoff from the site and
protect water quality. Guidance for implementing LID can be found in State of
Utah DWQ’s LID controls which are appropriate for use in the State of Utah and
can be found in A Guide to Low Impact Development within Utah (the Guide),
available on DWQ’s website or Green Infrastructure and Low Impact Development
Application Guidance for Washington County Utah, available from the City of
Santa Clara.
   B.   Specific Criteria: Newly developed and redeveloped projects must meet
the required best management practices (BMPs) that are designed to manage
rainfall on-site, and prevent the off-site discharge of the precipitation from
all rainfall events less than or equal to the 80th percentile rainfall event or
a predevelopment hydrologic condition, whichever is less. This objective must
be accomplished by the use of practices that are designed, constructed, and
maintained to infiltrate, evapotranspire and/or harvest and reuse rainwater and
must be incorporated into the permittee’s development plans and long term
stormwater management plan which includes the LID approach. If meeting the 80th
percentile standard is infeasible an alternative design approach may be used
provided that the permittee documents that infiltration, evapotranspiration,
and rainwater harvesting have been used to the maximum extent feasible and that
full employment of these controls are infeasible due to constraints. For
guidance including alternative design approaches see “A Guide to Low Impact
Development within Utah” published by the DWQ, and “Green Infrastructure and
Low Impact Development Application Guidance for Washington County Utah.”
   C.   Inspections Of Storm Water Management Facilities: Owners/operators
shall perform necessary maintenance to protect water quality and reduce the
discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Owners/operators of newly developed and
redeveloped projects shall conduct inspections at least every other year and
provide certification that adequate maintenance has been performed and the
structural controls are operating as designed to protect water quality. This
required inspection shall be conducted by the property owner/operators or
qualified third parties. On sites where the property owner/operator is
conducting maintenance, the permittee shall allow municipal inspections to
conduct inspections at least once every five (5) years, or more frequently as
needed to show that adequate maintenance is being performed. The owner shall
grant access to the City of Santa Clara to inspect storm water control measures
on private properties that discharge to the MS4 to ensure that adequate
maintenance is being performed. The findings of each inspection shall be
documented in an inspection report, and must contain the following:
      1.   Inspection date;
      2.   Name and signature of inspector;
      3.   Project location;
      4.   Current ownership information;
      5.   A description of the condition of the storm water control measure
including the quality of: vegetation and soils; inlet and outlet channels and
structures; catch basins; spillways; weirs, and other control structures; and
sediment and debris accumulation in storage as well as in and around inlet and
outlet structures; and
      6.   Specific maintenance issues or violations found that need to be
corrected by the property owner or operator along with deadlines and re-
inspection dates. If there is an observed failure of a facility to perform as
designed, the failure must be corrected and documented in the inspection
report.
   D.   Record Drawings: All applicants are required to submit actual record
drawings for any structures located on site after final construction is
completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and must be sealed by a registered
professional engineer licensed to practice in Utah. A final inspection by the
public services director is required before any performance security or
performance bond will be released. The public services director shall have the
discretion to adopt provisions for a partial pro rata release of the
performance security or performance bond on the completion of various stages of
development. In addition, occupation permits shall not be granted until
corrections to all BMPs have been made and accepted by the public services
director.
   E.   Landscaping And Stabilization Requirements: Any area of land from which
the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared by
development activities shall be revegetated according to a schedule approved by
the public services director. The following criteria shall apply to
revegetation or stabilization efforts:
      1.   Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established
over ninety percent (90%) of the seeded area or stabilization put in place.
      2.   Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable
of controlling erosion or stabilization put in place.
      3.   Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of
seventy five percent (75%) of the cover crop throughout the year immediately
following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until
the minimum seventy five percent (75%) survival for one year is achieved.
      4.   In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be
submitted with the final design describing the vegetative or other
stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction
is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized
after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of
vegetation or other stabilization at the site and what practices will be
employed to ensure that adequate cover is preserved.
   F.   Records Of Installation And Maintenance Activities: Parties responsible
for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall
make records of the installation of the stormwater facility, and of all
maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for at
least three (3) years. These records shall be made available to the public
services director during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable
times upon request.
   G.   Failure To Meet Or Maintain Design Or Maintenance Standards: If a
responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance standards
required for stormwater facilities under this chapter, the public services
director, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design
standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the
facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater
management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the
public services director shall notify in writing the party responsible for
maintenance of the stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice,
the responsible person shall have fifteen (15) days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in an approved manner. In the event that corrective
action is not undertaken within that time, the public services director may
take necessary corrective action. The cost of any action by the public services
director under this section shall be charged to the responsible party. (Ord.
2020-11 § 1: Ord. 2009-06 § 1)
13.24.060: WAIVERS:
   A.   General: Every applicant shall provide for postconstruction stormwater
management as required by this chapter, unless a written request is filed to
waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan
requirements shall be submitted to the public services director for approval.
   B.   Conditions For Waiver: The minimum requirements for stormwater
management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the
applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
      1.   It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter.
      2.   Alternative minimum requirements for on site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan
that has been approved by the public services director.
      3.   Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility.
The off-site facility must be in place and designed to provide the level of
stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be
afforded by on-site practices. Further, the facility must be operated and
maintained by an entity that is legally obligated to continue the operation and
maintenance of the facility.
   C.   Downstream Damage: In order to receive a waiver, the applicant must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the public services director that the waiver
will not lead to any of the following conditions downstream:
      1.   Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures;
      2.   Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
      3.   Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation;
      4.   Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property.
   D.   Land Disturbance Permit: No land disturbance permit shall be issued
where a waiver has been requested until the waiver is granted. (Ord. 2020-11 §
1: Ord. 2009-06 § 1)
13.24.070: ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
   A.   Scope: This section shall apply to all water generated on developed or
undeveloped land entering the municipality's separate storm sewer system.
   B.   Prohibition Of Illicit Discharges: No person shall introduce or cause
to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge
that is not composed entirely of stormwater. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any nonstormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm
sewer system is prohibited except as described as follows:
      1.   Uncontaminated discharges from the following sources:
         a.   Water line flushing or other potable water sources,
         b.   Landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
         c.   Diverted stream flows,
         d.   Rising groundwater,
         e.   Groundwater infiltration to storm drains,
         f.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
         g.   Foundation or footing drains,
         h.   Crawl space pumps,
         i.   Air conditioning condensation,
         j.   Springs,
         k.   Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
         l.   Swimming pools (if dechlorinated; typically less than 1 ppm
chlorine),
         m.   Firefighting activities, and
         n.   Any other uncontaminated water source.
      2.   Discharges specified in writing by the public services director as
being necessary to protect public health and safety.
      3.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge if the public services
director has so specified in writing.
      4.   The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under a UPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the state of Utah division
of water quality, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   C.   Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the separate municipal storm sewer system is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
   D.   Reduction Of Stormwater Pollutants By The Use Of Best Management
Practices: Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the
person's expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all
terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section.
   E.   Notification Of Spills: Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as
soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in,
illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into the city stormwater system,
the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment,
and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials the person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous materials, the person shall notify the public services director in
person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the public services director within three (3) business
days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates
from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and
the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least three (3) years. (Ord. 2020-11 § 1: Ord. 2009-06 § 1)
13.24.080: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement Authority: The public services director or his designees
shall have the authority to issue notices of violation, stop work orders, and
citations, and to impose the civil penalties provided in this section.
      1.   With the issuance of a land disturbance permit, the public services
director shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to this
chapter at all reasonable times and as often as necessary to determine
compliance. Failure to comply with the terms of this chapter may result in
punitive actions by Santa Clara City ordinance enforcement or by other means
identified in permits or terms set forth in development applications.
   B.   Notification Of Violation:
      1.   Written Notice: Whenever the public services director finds that any
permittee or any other person discharging stormwater has violated or is
violating this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, the director may
serve upon such person written notice of the violation. Within ten (10) days of
this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall
be submitted to the public services director. Submission of this plan in no way
relieves the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or
after receipt of the notice of violation.
      2.   Consent Orders: The public services director is empowered to enter
into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the
noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the
person to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the
order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative
orders issued pursuant to subsections B4 and B5 of this section.
      3.   Show Cause Hearing: The director may order any person who violates
this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the person
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action
and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why
this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
      4.   Compliance Order: When the director finds that any person has
violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued
hereunder, he may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a
specific time period, adequate structures, devices, be installed or procedures
implemented and properly operated. Orders may also contain such other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the
noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate structures,
installation of devices, self-monitoring, and management practices.
      5.   Cease And Desist Orders: When the director finds that any person has
violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder, the director may issue an order to cease and desist all such
violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
         a.   Comply forthwith; or
         b.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge.
   C.   Conflicting Standards: Whenever there is a conflict between any
standard contained in this chapter and in the Santa Clara City stormwater
management program adopted by the municipality under this chapter, the
strictest standard shall prevail. (Ord. 2020-11 § 1: Ord. 2009-06 § 1)
13.24.090: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations: Any person who shall commit any act declared unlawful under
this chapter, who violates any provision of this chapter, who violates the
provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who fails or
refuses to comply with any lawful communication or notice to abate or take
corrective action by the public services director, shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.
   B.   Penalties: Any person who violates this chapter or any lawful notice or
order issued pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed a penalty of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
in a civil proceeding, and in a criminal proceeding is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). In the case of a continuing violation, each day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   C.   Measuring Civil Penalties: In assessing a civil penalty, the public
services director may consider:
      1.   The harm done to the public health or the environment;
      2.   Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic
deterrent to the illegal activity;
      3.   The economic benefit gained by the violator;
      4.   The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this
violation;
      5.   Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by the
municipality;
      6.   The amount of penalty established by ordinance or resolution for
specific categories of violations; and
      7.   Any equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of imposing
any penalty or damage assessment.
   D.   Recovery Of Damages And Costs: In addition to the civil penalty in
subsection B of this section, the municipality may recover:
      1.   All damages caused by the violator to the municipality, which may
include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations of, and
enforcing compliance with, this chapter, or any other actual damages caused by
the violation.
      2.   The costs of the municipality's maintenance of stormwater facilities
when the user of such facilities fails to maintain them as required by this
chapter.
   E.   Other Remedies: The municipality may bring legal action to enjoin the
continuing violation of this chapter, and the existence of any other remedy, at
law or equity, shall be no defense to any such actions.
   F.   Remedies Cumulative: The remedies set forth in this section shall be
cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil
or criminal, that one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought
or granted. (Ord. 2020-11 § 1: Ord. 2009-06 § 1)
13.24.100: APPEALS:
Pursuant to Utah code, any person aggrieved by the imposition of a civil
penalty or damage assessment as provided by this chapter may appeal said
penalty or damage assessment to the municipality's governing body.
   A.   Appeals To Be In Writing: The appeal shall be in writing and filed with
the municipal recorder or clerk within fifteen (15) days after the civil
penalty and/or damage assessment is served in any manner authorized by law.
   B.   Hearing: Upon receipt of an appeal, the municipality's governing body
shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) days. Ten (10) days' notice by
registered mail shall be provided to the aggrieved party, such notice to be
sent to the address provided by the aggrieved party at the time of appeal. The
decision of the governing body of the municipality shall be final.
   C.   Appealing Decisions Of The Municipality's Governing Body: Any alleged
violator may appeal a decision of the municipality's governing body pursuant to
the provisions of the Utah code. (Ord. 2020-11 § 1: Ord. 2009-06 § 1)
13.24.110: FEES:
Each developed parcel of real property in Santa Clara City shall be charged a
stormwater utility fee.
   A.   ESU: The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent service units
(ESUs) contained in the parcel. The city council finds that the ESU is the most
accurate measurement for determining the amount that each parcel contributes
to, benefits from and otherwise uses the storm sewer utility.
   B.   Calculation: Santa Clara City council finds that each single-family
residential parcel contributes approximately the same amount of stormwater
runoff; therefore each developed single-family residential parcel shall pay a
base rate of one ESU. All developed nonsingle-family residential parcels shall
pay a multiple of this base rate, expressed in ESUs, according to the measured
impervious area on the parcel.
   C.   Charge Per ESU: The amount charged for each ESU shall be established by
resolution of the Santa Clara City council.
   D.   Exemptions And Credits: Santa Clara City council may establish
exemptions and credits to the stormwater utility fee by resolution.
   E.   Policies: The public services department may adopt policies, consistent
with this chapter and any resolution passed by the Santa Clara City council, to
assist in the application, administration and interpretation of this chapter
and any resolutions related to the stormwater utility.
   F.   Appeals: Any person or entity that believes that any decision made
under the stormwater utility rate resolution was interpreted or applied
incorrectly may appeal to the public services director ("director") or the
director's designee. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state any facts
supporting the appeal and shall be made within ten (10) days of the decision,
action, or bill being appealed. The public services director shall decide the
appeal within ten (10) days of when the appeal was filed. If the person or
entity is not satisfied with the public services director's decision, a further
appeal may be made to the city council. The appeal to the city council shall
follow the same procedure as the appeal to the public services director. The
city council's decision shall be final and binding on all parties. (Ord. 2020-
11 § 1: Ord. 2009-06 § 1)
CHAPTER 13.28
PUBLIC STREETS
SECTION:
13.28.010: Streets Supervisor
13.28.020: Powers And Duties Of Streets Supervisor
13.28.010: STREETS SUPERVISOR:
   A.   There is created the position of streets supervisor, which shall have
general supervision of streets, sidewalks, bridges, and other public ways.
   B.   This position shall come under the general supervision of the public
services director. (Ord. 2010-13)
13.28.020: POWERS AND DUTIES OF STREETS SUPERVISOR:
The streets supervisor shall:
   A.   Have charge of the construction, maintenance and repair of streets,
sidewalks, bridges, curbs, gutters, culverts, drains, waterways and other
public ways; and shall have control of all waters flowing on the streets,
sidewalks and public ways whether originating from storm, flood, drainage or
irrigation waters;
   B.   Keep a record of and promptly investigate all complaints of defective
streets, culverts, drains, ditches, sidewalks, and other public ways and, when
proper, repair, replace or take such action as deemed best, and shall record
the action taken on each complaint;
   C.   Enforce the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances
relating to the maintenance and use of streets, culverts, drains, ditches,
waterways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other public ways;
   D.   Repair, or cause to be repaired, all defects coming to the city's
attention and take responsible precautions to protect the public from injuries
due to such defects pending their repair. (Ord. 2010-13)
TITLE 14
RESERVED
TITLE 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 15.04
GENERAL BUILDING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
15.04.010: Permit Required; Exceptions
15.04.020: Application For Permit
15.04.030: Approval Of Plan
15.04.040: Variations Of Plan Prohibited
15.04.050: Fee Schedule
15.04.010: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   It shall be a class C misdemeanor for any homeowner and a class B
misdemeanor for any person who receives payment or anything of value to
construct or alter any building or structure, except a livestock pasture fence,
without first securing the permit required by this chapter.
   B.   This section shall not apply where the retail cost of the materials
used in the construction or alteration is less than five hundred dollars
($500.00), except that it shall apply in the cases where the construction or
alteration results in an enlarged structure or affects the walls of the
building or structure and complies with adopted state codes. (Ord. 2009-10 § 1)
15.04.020: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A building permit shall be secured from the city upon written application,
accompanied by plans and specifications in duplicate and with one PDF digital
copy; which must state the specific nature of the construction or alterations
to be made. The plan must be verified by the person who will perform or be in
charge of the construction or alteration, unless waived by the building
official. (Ord. 2010-06)
15.04.030: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
The application and plans shall be forwarded to the building official, who
shall review the plan to determine whether the proposed construction or
alteration conforms to the building codes and ordinances of this city. The
building official shall return the plans to city staff within ten (10) days
with the statement "approved" if the plans do conform or "disapproved" if the
plans do not conform. If the plans are disapproved, the reasons therefor shall
be annexed to the plans. On receipt of an approved plan and payment of the
required fee, the city staff shall issue a permit to the applicant together
with one set of the approved plan. One set of the plans shall be retained by
the city. The building official may revoke at any time a permit which has been
issued for any building constructed or being constructed or which would be or
result, if constructed, a violation of any ordinance of this city. (Ord. 2009-
10 § 1)
15.04.040: VARIATIONS OF PLAN PROHIBITED:
No material variation from the approved plan shall be allowed unless such
variations shall first have been approved in writing by the building official.
(Ord. 2009-10 § 1)
15.04.050: FEE SCHEDULE:
The city shall collect a fee for the application of a permit in the amount set
forth by the city. (Ord. 2009-10 § 1)
CHAPTER 15.06
CONSTRUCTION SITE SANITATION AND DEBRIS CONTROL
SECTION:
15.06.010: Sanitary Facilities
15.06.020: Disposal Of Waste; Burning By Permit
15.06.030: Penalty
15.06.010: SANITARY FACILITIES:
No construction of any type shall be permitted within the city unless adequate
sanitary facilities are provided at the job site and available at all times
that workers are present unless approved by the building official. Such
sanitary facilities shall be available within two hundred feet (200') of any
construction area, and in the event such facilities are already so located, the
contractor shall have written consent for use of the same by workers on the
job. Such facilities shall not be placed on city streets or sidewalks and shall
not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic at any time. (Ord. 2006-03 § 1)
15.06.020: DISPOSAL OF WASTE; BURNING BY PERMIT:
No construction of any type shall be permitted within the city unless a bin,
receptacle or other adequate enclosure is provided within one hundred feet
(100') of any construction activity for the disposal of garbage, waste and
construction debris of all types. Such bin, receptacle or enclosure shall be
considered adequate only if it is able to fully protect its contents from being
scattered or disbursed by the wind or otherwise, and it must be amenable to
ready transfer of its contents to the landfill when full. Burning at a
construction site shall be unlawful unless expressly made the subject of a
permit by the fire chief. Such bin, receptacle or enclosure shall not be placed
on city streets or sidewalks and shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular
traffic at any time. (Ord. 2006-03 § 1)
15.06.030: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1.16.010 of this code, and each day that a violation continues shall be
considered to be a separate offense. (Ord. 2006-03 § 1)
CHAPTER 15.08
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
15.08.010: Adoption
15.08.020: Permit Fee Schedule
15.08.010: ADOPTION:
   A.   The edition of the International Building Code, as currently adopted by
the State of Utah, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of
all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical elements and conditions essential
to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use;
and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and
use; and the demolition of such structures; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building code, is hereby
referred to and adopted as the Building Code for Santa Clara City, together
with the additions, insertions, and changes specifically set forth in this
chapter.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Santa Clara City.
Section 1612.3: Insert: Santa Clara City, April 2, 2009 - LOMR December 31,
2019.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2014-05)
15.08.020: PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE:
The building permit fee schedule for Santa Clara City shall be assessed by
applying the current building valuation data published by International Code
Council as it relates to area, classification, and occupancy. (Ord. 2022-24:
Ord. 2002-12 § 1)
CHAPTER 15.10
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
SECTION:
15.10.010: Adoption
15.10.010: ADOPTION:
   A.   The edition of the International Energy Conservation Code, as currently
adopted by the State of Utah, regulating and governing energy efficient
building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting
and power systems, is hereby referred to and adopted as the Energy Conservation
Code for Santa Clara City.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: Santa Clara City.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2014-05)
CHAPTER 15.12
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
15.12.010: Adoption Of Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings Code
15.12.020: Application
15.12.030: Alterations, Additions And Repairs
15.12.040: Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings
15.12.050: Establishment Of A Board Of Appeals
15.12.060: Dangerous Building; Nuisances
15.12.010: ADOPTION OF ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE:
The "uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings", 1997 edition,
printed as a code in book form by the International Conference Of Building
Officials (providing for a just, equitable and practicable method whereby
buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health,
morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants,
may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished), three (3) copies of
which have been filed for the use and examination by the public in the office
of the city recorder of this city, is approved and adopted as the abatement of
dangerous buildings code of this city. (Ord. 98-08 § 2: prior code § 10-341)
15.12.020: APPLICATION:
The provisions of the abatement of dangerous buildings code shall apply to all
dangerous buildings as herein defined, which now exist or which may exist or
hereafter be constructed in this city. (Prior code § 10-342)
15.12.030: ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS AND REPAIRS:
All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the
provisions of the abatement of dangerous buildings code shall be subject to the
provisions of the international building code. (Ord. 2010-06)
15.12.040: ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the
building official to be dangerous, as defined in the abatement of dangerous
buildings code, are declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by
repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with procedures
specified in section 401 of the abatement of dangerous buildings code. (Prior
code § 10-344)
15.12.050: ESTABLISHMENT OF A BOARD OF APPEALS:
In order to interpret provisions of the abatement of dangerous buildings code
and to hear appeals provided for thereunder, there is established an abatement
of dangerous building board of appeals consisting of five (5) members who shall
not be employees of the municipality. The building official shall be an ex
officio member of and shall act as secretary to the board. The board may adopt
reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its business and shall render
all decisions and findings in writing to the applicant with a copy to the
building official. Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with
the provisions contained in the adopted codes, copies of all rules and
regulations adopted by the board shall be delivered to the building official
who shall make them accessible to the public without cost. (Prior code § 10-
345)
15.12.060: DANGEROUS BUILDING; NUISANCES:
All dangerous buildings within the terms of this chapter are declared to be
public nuisances and shall be vacated or demolished as hereinbefore and
hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 10-346)
CHAPTER 15.14
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
15.14.010: Adoption
15.14.010: ADOPTION:
   A.   The edition of the International Existing Building Code, as currently
adopted by the State of Utah, for regulating and governing the repair,
alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing
buildings, including historic buildings, is hereby adopted, and referred to as
the Existing Building Code for Santa Clara City.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: Santa Clara City.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2014-05)
CHAPTER 15.16
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
15.16.010: Adoption
15.16.020: Permits
15.16.030: Permit Fees
15.16.010: ADOPTION:
The edition of the National Electrical Code, as published by the National Fire
Protection Agency and currently adopted by the State of Utah, regulating
minimum electrical standards to ensure the protection of life and property by
regulating the installation and repair of all electrical, wiring, equipment is
hereby referred to and adopted as the Electrical Code for Santa Clara City.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2014-05)
15.16.020: PERMITS:
No alterations or additions shall be made in existing wiring, nor shall any
wirings or any apparatus which generates, transmits, transforms, or utilizes
any electricity be installed without first obtaining a permit therefor except
minor repair work such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses,
changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints, and repairing drop
cords. Applications for such permit describing such work shall be made in
writing and shall conform as far as practicable to the requirement set forth in
section 15.04.020 of this title. (Ord. 2022-24: Prior code § 9-542)
15.16.030: PERMIT FEES:
The applicable electrical permit fees in this city shall be included as part of
a building permit which is required prior to initiating any work. The fee
amount shall be determined and established by resolution by the city council.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2001-07 § 1: prior code § 9-543)
CHAPTER 15.18
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
SECTION:
15.18.010: Adoption
15.18.010: ADOPTION:
   A.   The edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as
currently adopted by the State of Utah, regulating the design, safety,
construction, quality of swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, aquatic facilities,
and related equipment is hereby referred to and adopted as the Swimming Pool
and Spa Code for Santa Clara City.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Santa Clara City.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2014-05)
CHAPTER 15.20
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
15.20.010: Adoption
15.20.020: Establishment And Duties Of Bureau Of Fire Prevention
15.20.030: Definitions
15.20.040: Amendments Made In The International Fire Code
15.20.050: Appeals
15.20.060: Fire Prevention Processes Requiring Permit Fee(s)
15.20.070: Violation; Penalty
15.20.010: ADOPTION:
The Fire Chief or designee responsible for fire code enforcement, shall use the
current edition of the International Fire Code (IFC) as adopted by the State of
Utah Legislature. This includes appendices A-N as recommended by the Western
Fire Chiefs Association and the International Code Council, and printed as a
code in book form, copies of which have been and are now filed in the office of
the city recorder for the use and examination by the public. Such edition of
the fire code shall be and is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city of
Santa Clara, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and protecting property from fire or explosion; and as
adopted and amended by the state of Utah, together with amendments thereto in
the future made by the state as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsequent
sections of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-03: Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2014-05)
15.20.020: ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
   A.   The fire code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the
fire department of the city, which is established, and which shall be operated
under the supervision of the chief of the fire department.
   B.   The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire
department as inspector as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of
the fire department shall recommend to the mayor the employment of technical
inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an
examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall
be open to members and nonmembers of the fire department, and appointments made
after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause.
(Ord. 2022-24: Prior code § 10-152)
15.20.030: DEFINITIONS:
 
CORPORATION COUNSEL: As used in the international fire code, means the attorney
                     for this city.
JURISDICTION:        As used in the international fire code, means the
                     boundaries of this city. (Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2008-15 § 1)
 
15.20.040: AMENDMENTS MADE IN THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
Any amendments to the international fire code shall be set forth in the
appropriate appendix to this code. (Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2008-15 § 1)
15.20.050: APPEALS:
Whenever the chief shall disapprove an application, refuse to grant a permit
for which application has been received, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the fire code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of
the fire code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may
appeal the decision of the chief to the city council within thirty (30) days
from the date of such decision. (Ord. 2022-24: Prior code § 10-158)
15.20.060: FIRE PREVENTION PROCESSES REQUIRING PERMIT FEE(S):
The building inspector and the Fire Marshal shall act as a committee to
determine and specify any new materials, processes, or occupancies, which shall
require permit fees in addition to those now enumerated in the fire code. The
Santa Clara-Ivins Fire Rescue Prevention Fees Schedule, as adopted by
resolution of the City Council from time to time, will be available upon
request. (Ord. 2024-03: Ord. 2022-24: Prior code § 10-159)
15.20.070: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the international
fire code for failure to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent
jurisdiction within the time fixed herein shall, severally for each and every
such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment of not more
than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of
one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit such to
continue. All persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten
(10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense.
   B.   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of the prohibited condition. (Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2008-15 § 1:
Ord. 2006-04 § 1: prior code § 10-160)
CHAPTER 15.22
FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
15.22.010: Adoption
15.22.010: ADOPTION:
   A.   The edition of the International Fuel Gas Code, as currently adopted by
the State of Utah regulating installation of gas piping from the point of
delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and
operation of gas appliances installed in residential and commercial
applications is hereby referred to and adopted as Fuel Gas Code for Santa Clara
City.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Santa Clara City.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2014-05)
CHAPTER 15.24
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
15.24.010: Adoption
15.24.020: Permit Fees
15.24.010: ADOPTION:
   A.   The edition of the International Mechanical Code, as currently adopted
by the State of Utah, regulating the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to use or maintenance of mechanical systems is hereby
referred to and adopted as the Mechanical Code by Santa Clara City.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Santa Clara City.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2014-05)
15.24.020: PERMIT FEES:
The applicable mechanical permit fees in this city shall be included as part of
the building permit which is required prior to initiating any work. The fee
amount shall be determined and established by resolution by the city council.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2001-12 § 1)
CHAPTER 15.28
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
15.28.010: Adoption
15.28.020: Permit Fees
15.28.010: ADOPTION:
   A.   The edition of the International Plumbing Code, as currently adopted by
the State of Utah, regulating installation, alteration, and replacement of
plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and
accessories connected to water and sewer systems, is hereby referred to and
adopted as the Plumbing Code for Santa Clara City.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1: Insert: Santa Clara City.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2014-05)
15.28.020: PERMIT FEES:
The applicable plumbing permit fees in this city shall be included as part of
the building permit which is required prior to initiating any work. The fee
amount shall be determined and established by resolution by the city council.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2001-08 § 1: prior code § 9-562)
CHAPTER 15.30
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
15.30.010: Adoption
15.30.020: Permit Fee Schedule
15.30.010: ADOPTION:
   A.   The current edition of the International Residential Code, as adopted
by the State of Utah, regulating and governing the construction, alteration,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and
demolition of detached one and two (2) family dwellings and multiple single
family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in height with
separate means of egress; providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Residential Code, is hereby referred to and
adopted as the Residential Code for Santa Clara City, together with the
additions, insertions, and changes specifically set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Revisions: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section R101.1: Insert: Santa Clara City.
Table R.301.2(1): Insert: Ground Snow Load 21 lbs. Roof Snow Load - 15 lbs.
Wind Speed (mph) - 115. Seismic Design Category D - soils/engineering.
Weathering - moderate/severe. Frost Line Depth - 12 inches. Termite - moderate
to heavy. Decay - none/slight. Design Temperatures - winter dry bulb 2.5% 102°,
summer wet bulb 2.5% 70°.
Section P2603.5.1: Insert: 12 inches; 12 inches.
(Ord. 2022-24: Ord. 2014-05)
15.30.020: PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE:
The building permit fee schedule for Santa Clara City shall be assessed by
applying the current building valuation data published by International Code
Council as it relates to area, classification, and occupancy. (Ord. 2022-24)
CHAPTER 15.32
PROPERTY NUMBERING
SECTION:
15.32.010: Display Of Property Numbering Required
15.32.010: DISPLAY OF PROPERTY NUMBERING REQUIRED:
Owners of all residential and commercial properties within the city shall
identify the street address of each such property by attaching thereto and
maintaining the numbers representing such street address. Numbering shall be
not less than three inches (3") high and two inches (2") wide and shall be
placed in an unobstructed location on the primary structure on the property,
clearly visible from the street. The numbering required by this section shall
be in place not later than the following times:
   A.   Completed and occupied structures: Sixty (60) days after the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this section;
   B.   New structures: At or prior to occupancy. (Ord. 96-98 § 1: prior code §
9-658)
CHAPTER 15.36
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
Article I. Statutory Authorization, Findings
Of Fact, Purpose And Methods
15.36.010: Statutory Authorization
15.36.020: Findings Of Fact
15.36.030: Statement Of Purpose
15.36.040: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
Article II. Definitions
15.36.050: Definitions Of Words And Phrases
Article III. General Provisions
15.36.060: Lands To Which This Chapter Applies
15.36.070: Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard
15.36.080: Compliance
15.36.090: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
15.36.100: Interpretation
15.36.110: Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability
Article IV. Administration
15.36.120: Establishment Of Development Permit
15.36.125: Variance Procedures
15.36.130: Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator
15.36.140: Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator
Article V. Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
15.36.150: General Standards
15.36.160: Specific Standards
15.36.170: Standards For Subdivision Proposals
15.36.180: Standards For Areas Of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
15.36.190: Floodways
15.36.200: Establishment Of Erosion Hazard Zones
15.36.210: Penalties For Noncompliance
ARTICLE I. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS
OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS
15.36.010: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of Utah has in section 10-8-84 delegated the
responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses and promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.020: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The flood hazard areas of Santa Clara City are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.030: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area; and
   H.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.040: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or which result in damaging increases in erosion
hazard, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
15.36.050: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application:
   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan
or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
   APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30,
VE or V.
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building: a) built, in the case of a
building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of
the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zone V1-30, VE, or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers),
or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and b) adequately anchored so
as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up
to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by
means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zone V1-30,
VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building", even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of section
60.3(e)(5) of the national flood insurance program regulations.
   EROSION HAZARD ZONE: Land adjoining a body of water or adjacent to or
partially or wholly within a delineated area of special flood hazard which due
to soil instability, is likely to suffer flood related erosion damage. The area
may be designated on the erosion hazard zone maps.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Means, for the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which
the federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary and floodway maps.
   FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the department of the interior) or preliminarily
determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of the interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior; or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
   INFRASTRUCTURE: Roads, bridges, pipelines, cabling, power lines, utility or
any other public or private constructed improvement.
   LEVEE: A manmade structure; usually an earthen embankment designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL: Means, for purposes of the national flood insurance program,
the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which
base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: Means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which
the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction"
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of
construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
   VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter
when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this chapter. (For full requirements, see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.)
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
ARTICLE III. GENERAL PROVISIONS
15.36.060: LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES:
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city of Santa Clara. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.070: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
The areas of special flood hazard are identified by the federal emergency
management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "Flood
Insurance Study For Washington County, Utah And Incorporated Areas", dated
April 2, 2009. Copies are available for review at the office of the city
floodplain administrator. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.080: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.090: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2009-04
§ 1)
15.36.100: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.110: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2009-04 §
1)
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION
15.36.120: ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter. Application for a development permit shall be
presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing
and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
   A.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
   B.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
   C.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that
the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria
of subsection
15.36.160B of this chapter;
   D.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
   E.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection
15.36.140A of this chapter;
   F.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the Santa Clara City
general plan designated use for that area. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.125: VARIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   The appeal board as established by the community shall hear and render
judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   C.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may
appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
   E.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
   F.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section
15.36.120 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
   G.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter (see section
15.36.030 of this chapter).
   H.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   I.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   J.   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      1.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard to afford
relief.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      3.   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   K.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
      1.   The criteria outlined in subsections A through I of this section are
met, and
      2.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.130: DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The building official is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate
sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance program regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.140: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
   A.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site,
including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
   C.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
   D.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
   E.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
   F.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state of
Utah, department of natural resources, division of water rights, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the federal emergency management agency.
   G.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained.
   H.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
section
15.36.070 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of article V of this chapter.
   I.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
   J.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12 of the national
flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided
that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision). (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
ARTICLE V. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
15.36.150: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required for
all new construction and substantial improvements:
   A.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   B.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   C.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   D.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   E.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
   F.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.160: SPECIFIC STANDARDS:
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in section
15.36.070 of this chapter, the following provisions are required:
   A.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement),
elevated a minimum of two feet (2') above the base flood elevation. A
registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this
subsection, as proposed in subsection
15.36.120C of this chapter, is satisfied.
   B.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements for any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of
one foot (1') above the base flood elevation or together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural
design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the
floodplain administrator.
   C.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
      1.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   D.   Manufactured Homes:
      1.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a
community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      2.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: a)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated two feet (2') above the base flood elevation and
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      3.   Require that manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on
sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30,
AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
this subsection D be elevated so that either:
         a.   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is two feet (2') above
the base flood elevation, or
         b.   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
   E.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
      1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days,
      2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
      3.   Meet the permit requirements of section
15.36.120 of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection D of this section. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.170: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS:
   A.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections
15.36.020,
15.36.030 and
15.36.040 of this chapter.
   B.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development
permit requirements of sections
15.36.080 and
15.36.120 of this chapter and this article.
   C.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which are greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5)
acres, whichever is less, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
15.36.070 or article IV of this chapter.
   D.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   E.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.180: STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES):
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section
 15.36.070 of this chapter, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These
areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to
three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
   A.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
   B.   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
      1.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified), or
      2.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads or effects of buoyancy.
   C.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in subsection 15.36.120C of this chapter, are satisfied.
   D.   Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. (Ord.
2009-04 § 1)
15.36.190: FLOODWAYS:
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section
15.36.070 of this chapter, are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters
which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
   A.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   B.   If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this article.
   C.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12 of the national
flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the
adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood
elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM
and floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.200: ESTABLISHMENT OF EROSION HAZARD ZONES:
   A.   Delineation: Erosion hazard zones (EHZ) are delineated on the Santa
Clara City erosion hazard boundary maps on file at the city office.
   B.   Revision Of Erosion Hazard Zones:   EHZ cannot be revised unless a
study, sealed by a registered engineer with experience in river mechanics,
sediment transport, riverine erosion, hydraulics, and hydrology, is performed
that includes the tasks outlined in the "Santa Clara City Construction Design
Standards", section 3.4.9.
   C.   Regulations For Development Within Erosion Hazard Zones: Development
within the adopted EHZ may occur only if protected by adequately designed
erosion protection. Engineering analyses required to support engineering design
of erosion protection are outlined in the Santa Clara construction design
standards, section 3.4.9.
      1.   All new development proposals, including subdivisions, located
within an erosion hazard area shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage. Proposals within these areas shall comply with the following
requirements:
         a.   Meet all applicable provisions of this chapter;
         b.   Meet all applicable provisions of the international building code
with regard to wall and footing setbacks for slopes, grading, drainage and
compaction of fills;
         c.   Provide an engineering study, prepared by a professional civil
engineer licensed to practice in the state, which includes a hydraulic
analysis, a historical and geological evaluation of potential erosion hazards,
and an analysis of long term channel degradation, movement and bank erosion.
The study shall also include recommendations for erosion protection measures,
if any. The study shall include the engineer's professional opinion that when
the erosion protection measures, if any, are implemented, the proposed
development will not be adversely affected by erosion and that the erosion
protection measures, if any, will not adversely affect reaches or development
upstream, downstream, and across river over a one hundred (100) year planning
period;
         d.   Provide for the perpetual maintenance of the erosion protection,
if any, at no cost to the city or other public agency;
         e.   Provide a maintenance and access easement to any erosion
protection. Access to erosion protection, if any, shall be located and
constructed so as to minimize flood damage;
         f.   Obtain necessary section (404) permit from the United States army
corps of engineers, and stream alteration permits from the office of the Utah
state engineer prior to any construction activity at no cost to the city;
         g.   Hold the city harmless from all claims resulting from erosion or
any other flood related damage to development within an erosion hazard zone by
executing a "flood and erosion hazard disclaimer of liability and agreement"
and by placing a "notice of hazard" on the final plat if applicable.
      2.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed so as
to minimize flood damage;
      3.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
      4.   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for each lot or building
pad for all subdivision proposals and other development.
   D.   Development In Areas Without NRCS Or City Erosion Protection
Improvements: A minimum river corridor width of four hundred feet (400') as
defined in the river master plan is established within which no residential
structures may be constructed.
      1.   Allowable Uses:
         a.   Agriculture: Grading/revegetation to conform with template cross
section adopted in the river master plan.
         b.   Recreation areas (parks, golf courses, etc.): Grading/
revegetation to conform with template cross section adopted in the river master
plan.
         c.   Open space.
      2.   Fences: Fences should be designed to break away during flood events
and to not divert flow from its ordinary course, by obstructing floodwater or
by catching debris.
   E.   Development Within NRCS Or City Erosion Protection Improvements: No
habitable structures may be constructed between the erosion protection and the
river.
      1.   Allowable uses:
         a.   Agriculture: Grading/revegetation to conform with template cross
section adopted in the river master plan.
         b.   Recreation/pedestrian areas: Grading/revegetation to conform to
template cross section adopted in the river master plan.
         c.   Open space.
   F.   Development In Areas Protected By NRCS Or City Erosion Protection
Improvements:
      1.   Allowable uses:
         a.   Agriculture: Grading/revegetation to conform with template cross
section adopted in the river master plan.
         b.   Recreation areas: Grading/revegetation to conform with template
cross section adopted in the river master plan.
         c.   Structures: Any development behind the NRCS or city erosion
protection improvements will be at flood and/or erosion risk from large flow
events and should be appropriately sited and protected.
            (1)   A minimum fifty foot (50') horizontal setback from the levee
top is required for all structures. Grading and revegetation to conform to
template cross section adopted in the river master plan.
            (2)   A minimum setback necessary to achieve a three to one (3:1)
slope between the top of the levee and structure grade is required. Adequately
engineered protection from erosion must be approved prior to construction. All
areas to be revegetated to conform with the river master plan.
   G.   Permit Required: Any development including grading to conform to the
river master plan within the EHZ requires a development permit approved by the
floodplain administrator. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
15.36.210: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a class B misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than the maximum allowed by statute for a class B misdemeanor or
imprisoned for not more than the maximum allowed by statute for such an
offense, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
of Santa Clara from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation. (Ord. 2009-04 § 1)
CHAPTER 15.40
INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISPOSAL CODE
SECTION:
15.40.010: Adopted
15.40.010: ADOPTED:
The "Regulations For Individual Wastewater Disposal Systems", adopted February
5, 1984, revised May 21, 1984, and published by the Utah department of health,
three (3) copies of which have been filed with the recorder for use and
examination by the public, is adopted. (Prior code § 9-610)
CHAPTER 15.44
SMALL UNDERGROUND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM CODE
SECTION:
15.44.010: Adopted
15.44.010: ADOPTED:
Part V, "Small Underground Wastewater Disposal Systems", of the code of waste
disposal regulations, adopted by the Utah division of health and Utah state
committee on water pollution in May, 1965, as revised by action of the board
June 2, 1967 and June 21, 1967, and issued and published as a code in book
form, three (3) copies of which have been filed for use and examination by the
public in the office of the recorder, is adopted by the city as the small
underground wastewater disposal systems code within the city, except as it may
be altered or modified by the provision of this or the preceding chapter.
Occupancies in existing building may be continued as provided in section 104(g)
of the uniform building code, except as to those structures which are found to
be substandard as defined in the housing code. (Prior code § 9-620)
TITLE 16
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 16.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
16.04.010: Purpose
16.04.020: Scope Of Title
16.04.030: Effect On Previous Ordinance
16.04.040: Exceptions To This Title
16.04.050: Exemptions
16.04.060: Fees
16.04.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the residents of the city of Santa Clara, Utah, by:
   A.   Promoting the efficient and orderly development of land located within
the city;
   B.   Establishing policies, procedures, requirements, and standards for
subdivision development;
   C.   Preserving and protecting the environmental quality and aesthetic
character of hillside areas, other topographic features, and vegetative cover,
and reducing the hazards to life and property from fire, flood, erosion,
sedimentation, and soil slippage;
   D.   Providing lots of sufficient size and appropriate design for the
purpose for which they are to be used;
   E.   Providing subdivision improvements of adequate capacity and design for
traffic that will utilize them, and to ensure pedestrian and vehicle user
safety.
(Ord. 2023-21:Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.04.020: SCOPE OF TITLE:
This title shall apply to all subdivisions located wholly or in part within the
city. To further define the scope of this title, but not in derogation of its
purpose or scope, no person shall:
   A.   Subdivide a parcel of land except in compliance with this title;
   B.   Sell, exchange, offer to sell, or offer to exchange any land which is
part of a subdivision or a tract of land, offer for recording in the office of
the Washington County recorder any deed conveying a parcel of land, or any
interest in it, unless that parcel of land is part of a subdivision created
pursuant to this title;
   C.   Offer to sell or lease, to contract to sell or lease, or to sell or
lease a subdivision in whole or part until a final plat, in full compliance
with this title, has been recorded in the office of the county recorder;
   D.   Further divide, rearrange, or reduce the area of a lot within a
subdivision without first obtaining the approval of the planning commission and
the city council as provided in this title (a person may combine lots within a
subdivision to create larger lots upon planning commission approval, and may
vacate side and rear lot easements by action of the city council);
   E.   Receive a building permit on a lot within a subdivision until all
subdivision improvements, including roads, pavements, and utilities are
installed, unless waived by the planning commission;
   F.   Occupy a building or structure within a subdivision until the city
accepts the subdivision improvements, any buildings and all lots fully
complying with the city's subdivision and zoning ordinances;
   G.   Sell any portion of an approved subdivision until the prospective buyer
or builder is advised that occupancy permits will not be issued until all
subdivision improvements are completed.
(Ord. 2023-21 :Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.04.030: EFFECT ON PREVIOUS ORDINANCE:
The ordinance codified in this title shall amend and supersede the city's
existing subdivision ordinance. It is not a new enactment but a continuation of
the previous ordinance, whether in the same or in different language. The new
ordinance shall read in its entirety as set out in this title.
(Ord. 2023-21:Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.04.040: EXCEPTIONS TO THIS TITLE:
When the planning commission finds that unusual topographic or other conditions
exist on a parcel of land subject to this title, the planning commission may
allow for an exception to this title be granted. Upon recommendation by the the
TRC, the Planning Commission may change or except the lands from all or a part
of the requirements of this title. However, the exception or changes authorized
by the Planning Commission shall not substantially frustrate the intent of this
title.
(Ord. 2023-21:Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.04.050: EXEMPTIONS:
Those uses of land specifically exempted from subdivision by the Utah state
code shall be exempt from the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 2023-21:Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.04.060: FEES:
The city council shall from time to time establish and reestablish subdivision
filing fees.
(Ord. 2023-21:Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
CHAPTER 16.08
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
16.08.010: Definitions Of Terms
16.08.010: DEFINITIONS OF TERMS:
As used in this title:
               The person or persons designated by the city to receive information from an owner
ADMINISTRATIVE or owner's agent; send copies of plats, plans, maps, and other material, to city
OFFICER:       departments; prepare planning commission agendas; collect fees; and perform other
               work necessary to the planning commission.
               The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, and gardening;
AGRICULTURE:   breeding, grazing, and keeping or raising of domestic animals and fowl, except
               household pets, and not including any agricultural industry or business, such as
               fruit packing plants, fur farms, animal hospitals, or similar uses.
BEGINNING OF   Grading, excavation, or removal of vegetation or earth from a site for construction
CONSTRUCTION:  of access routes or preparation of building pads or footings.
CITY:          The city of Santa Clara, Utah, and including any of its assigned staff.
CITY BUILDING  The city's building official.
OFFICIAL:
CITY COUNCIL:  The city council of the city of Santa Clara, Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: The city's engineer or the authorized representative if an engineer is under
               contract to do work for the city.
CITY PLANNER:  The city's Planning Manager or the authorized representative if a planner is under
               contract to do work for the city.
CITY SURVEYOR: The city's surveyor or the authorized representative if a surveyor is under
               contract to do work for the city.
EASEMENT:      The right of the public, some part of the public, or an individual in the land of
               another person for the purpose of exercising a liberty, privilege, or advantage.
ELECTRONIC     A computer generated copy of the plat information otherwise submitted to the city
COPY:          in hard copy. In the case of a final plat, containing all the information required
               for a final plat.
               A final plat prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title to be
FINAL PLAT:    recorded in the office of the Washington County recorder following planning
               commission and city council approval.
FINAL PLAT     The reproducible copy of a final plat meeting all the requirements of this title
MYLAR:         and properly prepared to record in the office of the Washington County recorder.
LAND USE       The Planning Commission of the city of Santa Clara, Utah is the land use authority
AUTHORITY:     for subdivisions of property.
LOT WIDTH:     The width of a lot measured along the minimum setback line.
OFFICIAL MAP:  Any map adopted by the city council under the provisions of the Utah Code
               Annotated, 1953, as amended.
               A natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or any combination
OWNER:         that owns a parcel of land or any person designated by the owner in writing as the
               authorized person to represent the owner.
PARCEL OF      A contiguous quantity of land, in the possession of, or owned by, or recorded as
LAND:          the property of the same owner.
PLANNING       The planning commission of the city of Santa Clara, Utah.
COMMISSION:
PRELIMINARY    A map or plan of a proposed subdivision complying with the requirements of this
PLAT:          title.
               The division, re-subdivision, or proposal to divide a parcel of land into two (2)
               or more lots, parcels, or other units for the immediate or future sale, lease,
               division, development, or other disposition. Subdivision includes:
SUBDIVISION:      A.   The division or development of land whether by deed, metes and bounds
               description, devise and testacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded document; and
                  B.   Divisions of land for all residential and nonresidential uses, including
               land used or to be used for commercial, agricultural, and industrial purposes.
SUBDIVISION    Includes all applications for vacating, altering or amending a recorded subdivision
PLAT           plat.
AMENDMENT:
THROUGH LOT:   A lot having frontage on two (2) dedicated streets and having the right of access
               to both of said streets, not including corner lots.
TECHNICAL      The Technical Review Committee of the city of Santa Clara, Utah which includes
REVIEW         representatives from all reviewing city departments, private utilities, and
COMMITTEE,     relevant contract professionals.
TRC:
               A map or drawing showing the physical relationship of the proposed development to
VICINITY MAP:  the existing or proposed streets, buildings, and utilities; other relevant
               information such as special terrain, or surface drainage; and existing zoning
               classification of land in the vicinity of the property proposed for development.
 
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
CHAPTER 16.12
APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS
SECTION:
16.12.010: Procedure For Obtaining Approval Of Subdivision Plats
16.12.020: Step One, Basic Data And Information
16.12.030: Step Two, Concept Plan
16.12.040: Step Three, Preliminary Plat
16.12.050: Step Four, Final Plat
16.12.060: Construction Of Improvements
16.12.010: PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS:
Development of any subdivision shall comply with the following procedures.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.12.020: STEP ONE, BASIC DATA AND INFORMATION:
   A.   Before initiating the process for subdivision plat consideration, the
owner, which may be the owner, or an agent designated by the owner and
authorized to act for the owner, shall obtain and review the following:
      1.   The city's subdivision ordinance.
      2.   The city's general plan, land use ordinance, construction standards,
and other applicable information.
      3.   Plat maps and record of survey maps of existing subdivisions and
parcels of land adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
      4.   A copy of the city's hillside protection overlay, HP zone where
applicable.
   B.   The owner shall visit with the city technical review committee (TRC) to
discuss the proposed subdivision, gain a general understanding of the
subdivision procedure, and to discuss any other information relative to the
specific area being considered for development.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.12.030: STEP TWO, CONCEPT PLAN:
   A.   The owner initiates the subdivision plat consideration process by
submitting a concept plan to the technical review committee (TRC).
   B.   The concept plan need not be prepared by a design professional.
However, detailed, and accurate information incorporated into the concept plan
will enable the TRC to make more meaningful comments to the development process
at an early stage of development.
   C.   If a zone change is required before the approval of a preliminary plat,
the requirements for a zone change found in title 17,
chapter 17.18  of this code shall be followed.
   D.   A preliminary plat shall not be submitted to the planning commission
for consideration until after the zone change shall have been favorably acted
upon by the city council. (Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.12.040: STEP THREE, PRELIMINARY PLAN:
The preliminary plat step is the point at which the owner and city staff work
closely together to resolve issues relative to the subdivision, and to
determine its feasibility. All information required by this title as well as
additional requirements of the hillside protection overlay, HP zone, floodplain
ordinance, planned development zoning requirements, and any other information
deemed to be appropriate to the proposed development, will all be reviewed at
the preliminary plat phase. Reports from the hillside review board shall be
required by the TRC, where applicable, prior to submitting the plat to the
planning commission.
   A.   Preparation: The owner will prepare a preliminary plat and vicinity
map. The preliminary plat shall contain all required information listed in this
title, as applicable, and the vicinity map will show the relationship of the
proposed subdivision to adjacent subdivisions and to the city in general.
   B.   Submission: The preliminary plat should be submitted promptly after
concept plan review. If city ordinances or regulations change between concept
plan review, and before preliminary plat submission, the owner must comply with
the new ordinances and regulations. A minimum of four (4) scale drawings shall
be submitted along with twelve (12) reduced eleven inch by seventeen inch (11"
x 17") drawings, and one copy in electronic format.
   C.   Review By City Departments: The administrative officer shall deliver
copies of the preliminary plat and vicinity plan to city departments affected
by the proposed subdivision. City departments shall review the preliminary plat
for compliance with city ordinances, policies, and regulations. Copies of their
comments and suggestions will be reviewed with the owner as often as necessary
at TRC meetings to resolve as many concerns as possible.
   D.   Completion: Upon completion of TRC and applicant review meetings, the
owner shall submit the same number of copies of the completed preliminary
subdivision plat with supporting documentation, pay the subdivision filing fee,
and zone change application fee, as may be applicable, as found in the
development fee schedule established by resolution of the city council from
time to time. The preliminary plat shall be considered at the next available
planning commission meeting. The administrative officer shall send all
necessary notices, agendas, and other materials to members of the planning
commission.
   E.   Planning Commission Review:
      1.    A preliminary plat application must be reviewed by the Planning
Commission within fifteen (15) business days from the date of receiving a
complete application. In considering the preliminary plat, the planning
commission shall approve only those preliminary plats that it finds to be in
accordance with the standards and criteria set forth in this title, and all
other city ordinances and policies including, but not limited to, the general
plan, the standard specifications for design and construction, the land use
ordinance, the historic preservation ordinance, the building codes, and the
city's land use, street, utility and drainage master plans, the hillside
protection overlay zone, and soils and floodplain ordinances. The planning
commission may approve the plat fully or conditionally, may impose conditions
or revisions that they feel may be necessary to bring the subdivision into full
compliance with city requirements, it may table the plat for further
information or study, or it may reject the plat. If rejected, the planning
commission shall indicate reasons for the rejection. The owner may redesign the
plat using recommendations from the planning commission and reprocess it
beginning with step three. If plat revisions are required, the owner shall
complete the revisions, and the administrative officer shall resubmit the
preliminary plat to the city staff for review, comment, and compliance with
city ordinances. The officer will then place the plat on the next available
planning commission agenda for further consideration.
      2.   The planning commission may set special meetings to visit the site
prior to considering the preliminary plat for approval. All special meetings
shall be advertised in the same manner as regular planning commission meetings.
The planning commission may also schedule work meetings to consider aspects of
the proposed development under the same advertising conditions as indicated for
special meetings. The planning commission, during their review, may require
further information to be submitted in addition to information already provided
to the TRC.
   G.   Additional Studies: In carrying out its responsibilities pursuant to
this section, the TRC, or planning commission may require the applicant to
submit such additional information, data, studies, plans, analyses, or maps as
may be necessary to make the factual determinations set forth herein. Any of
the above groups may also request a third-party review at any time of the
information submitted. If further study or information is required, the owner
shall bear the full cost of meeting this requirement. In situations with severe
limitations, actual construction drawings, as required in step four below, may
be required for proper preliminary plan review and approval.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2015-19: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.12.050: STEP FOUR, FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Following Planning Commission approval of the preliminary plat, the
owner shall meet with the technical review committee (TRC) for detailed project
design information. The owner's engineer shall prepare complete construction
drawings for street profiles, utility construction, drainage, soils reports,
flood studies, and any other drawings or plans required by this title, or the
hillside protection overlay zone. The owner shall submit four (4) sets of scale
drawings, along with twelve (12) reduced scale sets of the drawings, and one
copy in an electronic format to the administrative officer for distribution to
required departments.
   B.   The city departments shall review the final plat and construction
drawings. Staff will submit comments to the administrative officer. Based upon
review and comments, the city shall advise the owner of any required
engineering drawing revisions. The owner shall revise the drawings to comply
with the required revisions and submit four (4) sets of final scale drawings
along with twelve (12) reduced size drawings, and one copy in electronic
format, to the city. A review must be completed within 20 business days from
the date of receiving a complete application. The City may perform up to four
reviews on a given application. A review cycle is not considered complete until
the applicant has adequately addressed all redlines identified by the City. The
City may only add new redlines after the first review cycle in response to
changes made or if a correction is necessary to protect the public health or
safety, or to enforce state or federal law.
   C.   In considering the final plat for approval, the TRC shall approve only
those final plats that it finds to be in accordance with the requirements of
preliminary and final plat approval, the standards and criteria set forth in
this title, and all other city ordinances and policies.
   D.   After TRC review and approval, the city shall review the final plat and
construction drawings, along with an estimate from the applicant's engineer of
estimated construction costs for the project.
   E.   The administrative officer will verify, using the subdivision ordinance
check sheet, that all final plat requirements are submitted and reviewed before
placing the final plat on the next regularly scheduled TRC meeting agenda. The
TRC , after review, may approve, conditionally approve, request further changes
or corrections, or deny the final plat. If changes are requested, it may be
brought back to another TRC meeting for review. The TRC will approve the final
plat, and the construction drawings, which may then be stamped as "approved".
If a final plat is denied by the TRC , the applicant may make changes and
submit a revised final subdivision plat for consideration.
   F.   Following TRC approval, the applicant shall post with the city, the
required guarantees, inspection fees, impact fees, recording fees, approval
from the city attorney that the title report is approved, and from the county
treasurer that all taxes, fees, or other financial requirements have been paid
in full.
   G.   Following completion of all steps listed above, the administrative
officer shall obtain all required signatures on the plat and transmit the final
signed plat to the county recorder. The recording fee shall be paid by the
owner.
   H.   No development work of any type shall commence until TRC approval of
the final plat and the construction drawings.
   I.   All final plats and construction drawings shall be prepared and
approved within one year of Planning Commission approval of the preliminary
plat. Any final plat not submitted and approved within one year of preliminary
plat approval is void. If the owner, or any subsequent owner, later desires to
submit this same or modified plat for approval, submittal shall begin with step
three of this chapter.
   J.   A final plat must be recorded within eighteen (18) months of Planning
Commission approval. Extensions may be granted by the Planning Commission for
periods not to exceed eighteen (18) month intervals. Any plat, with or without
posted guarantees, not recorded, nor extended, becomes void eighteen (18)
months following Planning Commission approval. If the owner, or any subsequent
owner later desires to develop the subdivision, the process shall start with
step three of this chapter. Construction of any plat extended by the Planning
Commission shall meet all requirements of the subdivision ordinance that may
have been amended between the final approval and the actual construction of the
subdivision.
   K.   Appeal Process: The following appeal processes may be applied for after
the four review cycles have been exhausted and 20 business days have passed:
      1.   For disputes relating to public improvements or engineering
standards, the City shall assemble a three-person panel of experts to include:
         a.   One licensed engineer designated by the City.
         b.   One licensed engineer designated by the applicant.
         c.   One licensed engineer, agreed upon, and designated by the two
designated engineers.
      Members appointed to the panel may not have an interest in the
application in question. The applicant must pay 50% of the total cost of the
panel and the City's published appeal fee. The remaining 50% must be paid by
the City. The panel's decision is final, unless the City or applicant petition
for district court review within 30-days after a written decision is issued.
      2.   For all other disputes, the City shall refer the question(s) to the
designated appeal authority at the applicant's request. The applicant must pay
the required appeal fee.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.12.060: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The following chapters
16.16 through
16.32 of this title identify specific design and construction standards,
guarantees, studies, reports, and other information by which the subdivision
will be processed, reviewed, approved, and constructed. The owner is encouraged
to study these chapters as well as the previous chapters very carefully when
preparing to submit a subdivision plat to the city of Santa Clara.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
CHAPTER 16.16
PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
16.16.010: Preliminary Plats
16.16.020: Title Block
16.16.030: General Requirements
16.16.040: Existing Conditions
16.16.050: Proposed Plan
16.16.060: Special Conditions
16.16.070: Approval Procedure
16.16.010: PRELIMINARY PLATS:
   A.   Preparation of Preliminary Plat. It is anticipated that if the
Preliminary Plat complies with all requirements under this title, upon final
approval of the Preliminary Plat, the Preliminary Plat shall be the basis for
the Construction Drawings and Final Plat. Prior to preparing the Preliminary
Plat, the applicant shall meet with the Technical Review Committee, TRC to
discuss the subdivision proposal and review the Preliminary Plat and the
requirements for the required plans, Construction Drawings, studies, and
reports. The general requirements as to the layout of streets, street
improvements, traffic impact studies, drainage, sewerage, fire protection,
availability of existing services, and similar matters will be discussed.
   B.   Preliminary Plat. The Preliminary Plat shall be a clear and legible
graphic representation of the subdivision, existing conditions, and proposed
improvements. It shall be labeled and dimensioned and be of a suitable scale to
graphically represent the proposed subdivision, existing and proposed
improvements required by this title. The preliminary plat will comply with the
following requirements and show the following information.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.16.020: TITLE BLOCK:
   A.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
   B.   The location of the subdivision, including the address, quarter
section, township, and range.
   C.   The owner's name and address.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.16.030: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   North arrow and scale: One-inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') is
preferred. One-inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200') is acceptable for
larger subdivisions. A minimum of four (4) scale drawings shall be submitted.
At least twelve (12) other copies shall be submitted. These additional copies
may be in a reduced form on eleven by seventeen-inch (11 x 17") sheets along
with an electronic copy.
   B.   The boundary line of the subdivision along with any proposed phasing
plan.
   C.   All property under control of the owner showing phases being developed
and an overall street system. The street system shall conform to the existing
street master plan, and to local streets already approved adjacent to the
proposed subdivision.
   D.   Existing and proposed contour lines at vertical intervals of not
greater than two feet (2') unless otherwise approved by the city. Contours
shall extend in all directions for a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond
the boundaries of the subdivision.
   E.   Any other information that the applicant or the city feels would be
useful for proper identification and orientation of the proposed subdivision.
   F.   At the time of filing an application, the applicant shall schedule an
appointment with the city. The city shall review the application for
completeness and shall require that the applicant and owner (if different)
provide an acknowledgment that they are responsible for obtaining a culinary
water "Will-Serve" letter, or the equivalent from the Washington County Water
Conservancy District, WCWCD. This requirement is in Chapter 17.04, General
Provisions. The city may request that the applicant also present additional
information to assist in determining the adequacy, quality, and characteristics
of the subdivision proposal.
   G.   Once the application has been considered and determined to be complete,
the application shall be reviewed according to the procedures set forth by this
chapter. If the city finds that the application is incomplete, the application
shall be rejected, returned to the applicant, and the applicant shall submit a
complete application.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.16.040: EXISTING CONDITIONS:
   A.   Streets: Location, width, and names of all streets within two hundred
feet (200') of the subdivision.
   B.   Adjacent Tracts: Boundaries of adjacent tracts of subdivided and
unsubdivided land, showing ownership where possible.
   C.   Zones: Identification of the zone or zones in which the property is
located.
   D.   Public Objects: All public streets, utility rights of way, easements,
parks, and other public open space within or adjacent to the proposed
subdivision; all section and city boundary lines within and adjacent to the
proposed subdivision.
   E.   Utilities: Sewer mains, sewer manholes, water mains, fire hydrants,
power lines, power poles, culverts, or other facilities within one hundred feet
(100') of the proposed subdivision.
   F.   Ditches And Drains: Ditches, drainage channels, waterways, storm
drains, and major washes.
   G.   Floodplains: The location of the floodplain, floodway, and elevations
designated by FEMA. No subdivision in the city shall be permitted in a
floodplain.
   H.   Slopes: Any subdivision with hillside slopes must conform to the
requirements of the hillside protection overlay zone as part of the preliminary
plat approval.
   I.   Soils: A soils report is required on all lots in the city and on all
lots in any subdivision. In addition, preliminary plat approval will require
compliance with the requirements of the hillside protection overlay zone, as
may be applicable.
   J.   Erosion Hazard Zones: The preliminary plat shall identify all potential
erosion hazard zones, or lands that may be affected by the sensitive land's
ordinance to the best knowledge of the applicant.
   K.   Historic Preservation: Information may be required by the historic
preservation ordinance if the proposed subdivision falls within the historic
preservation overlay zone.
   L.   Vicinity Map: A vicinity map shall be submitted to orient staff and the
planning commission as to the specific location of the subdivision.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.16.050: PROPOSED PLAN:
   A.   Streets And Utility Easements: The layout of streets and utility
easements showing identification and dimensions. The proposed subdivision plat
shall show how it will be served by existing or proposed streets, and a traffic
impact study may be required to determine what impact the subdivision may have
on other existing development.
   B.   Lots: The layout, number, and dimensions of lots.
   C.   Setback Lines: Building setback lines must be shown for all lots.
   D.   Parcels Set Aside: Parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public
use or set aside for use of property owners in the subdivision as common or
limited common areas.
   E.   Stormwater Drainage: A proposed plan to dispose of stormwater drainage
for the subdivision including proposed realignment or regrading of existing
drainageways upstream, within, and downstream of the subdivision. (Note that a
stream alteration permit from the state of Utah may be required prior to the
alteration of any stream or drainage channel.)
   F.   Wastewater Collection: Determine how the proposed subdivision can be
served by the existing wastewater collection system without the off-site
extension of any trunk or outfall line.
   G.   Wastewater Treatment: Determine how wastewater estimated to be
generated by the proposed subdivision can be accommodated and treated in
accordance with city standards and without any treatment plan expansion.
   H.   Water Supply and Storage: Determine how both the culinary and secondary
irrigation water needs of the proposed subdivision can be accommodated in
accordance with legally authorized and physically available water rights, and
the capacity, storage, design, and construction requirements of the city
without additional supply, or storage improvements. Developer may also be
required to transfer to the city such water rights and/or water shares to the
city, or pay a special assessment in lieu of such transfer, as may be
established by ordinance.
   I.   Fire Flow: Show how the proposed development will be served by a
central water system with appropriately located fire hydrants and adequate
flows to meet insurance requirements (a minimum of 1,000 gallons per minute for
a period of two (2) hours without additional capital improvements).
   J.   Fire Response Time: Determine if the proposed subdivision is within two
(2) miles of a five (5) minute response time of an existing fire station.
   K.   Solid Waste: Determine that the proposed subdivision be served by the
existing solid waste collection and disposal system.
   L.   Electrical Supply: Determine whether the electrical needs of the
subdivision can be accommodated by the city power department, and under what
conditions.
   M.   Parks: Determine that the proposed development is within one mile of a
city park, or recreational facility, and within one-half (1/2) mile of a
community or neighborhood park, all of which meet city acreage and facility
standards, and can accommodate the population projected to be generated by the
proposed subdivision development.
   N.   Phasing Plan: A phasing plan for the subdivision if phases are
proposed.
   O.   Agreements With Outside Agencies: Where public services are proposed by
agencies outside those operated by the city, the owner shall provide signed
agreements with those agencies approving proposed plans and agreeing to install
their systems in accordance therewith.
   P.   Other Items and Additional Studies: Other items that may be required by
the planning commission, and which may be site specific for a subdivision and
not to subdivisions in general. In carrying out its responsibilities pursuant
to this section, the TRC, or planning commission, may require the applicant to
submit such additional information, data, studies, plans, analyses, or maps, as
may be necessary to make the factual determinations set forth herein. If so
required, the owner shall bear the full cost of meeting this requirement. In
situations with severe limitations, actual construction drawings, as required
for final plat submission, may be required at the preliminary plat level.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2019-10 § 2: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.16.060: SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
The zoning laws of the city of Santa Clara shall confer no vested right to
develop under the terms of the zone in which any proposed development is
located if the development, due to access and/or other on-site development
conditions which cannot, in the judgment of the city, be developed safely under
reasonably anticipated conditions. Safety shall include safety to the users,
their invites, safety to the residents of Santa Clara City, and to the public,
and safety of the structural integrity of the improvements.
If the proposed subdivision presents a development condition that the city
planning commission or the city council (hereinafter referred to as the "city")
deems to be unsafe, the city shall require, prior to preliminary plat approval
or building permit issuance (as the case may be), such engineering studies as
may be reasonably required to render the site safe for the long-term viability
and safety of the proposed building site. Included in the consideration of
unsafe conditions shall be sites which have any, or a combination, of the
following conditions:
   A.   Unsafe or steep access.
   B.   Steep slopes.
   C.   Underground water/damage issues.
   D.   Flooding issues (sites in 100-year floodplain, or subject to flood
erosion that may extend beyond the 100-year floodplain).
   E.   Washes.
   F.   Adverse soils conditions.
   G.   Adverse rock or soils formations.
   H.   Slide hazards.
   I.   Liquefaction/earthquake hazard.
   J.   Such other hazards as may be considered unsafe by the city.
If an unsafe condition is found, then the city shall specify such studies as
may be necessary to determine if safe mitigation is reasonably certain to allow
the development to proceed. The city shall then consider the reports of the
owner's experts/engineers, and the reports of any special consultants that the
city may hire at the expense of the owner. The city shall also consider the
effects of the development on adjacent properties where the site presents
evidence of risk outside of the proposed development. The city may also conduct
on site reviews of the possible unsafe condition. If, after review of these
reports and the evidence presented, the city determines that the site may not
be developed safely, then the project shall be denied to preserve the health,
safety, and welfare of city residents. The city shall determine if a portion of
the site can be developed, which ruling shall be given to the owner, and the
owner shall be given the opportunity to submit an amended plan which can be
developed safely. If an adverse ruling is given, the city shall issue written
findings of the reasons why the site is not considered safe.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.16.070: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   City planning staff will transmit the Preliminary Plat, and Preliminary
Plat review application, along with all accompanying plans, reports, and
studies to appropriate city officials and other official agencies or bodies as
deemed necessary or as required by law, to allow such persons to review the
application.
   B.   After the Preliminary Plat review application is found to meet the
requirements of this title, and all comments have been received from those to
whom a request to review was made, the planning manager or designee shall cause
the Preliminary Plat to be placed on the next available planning commission
agenda, and shall notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the
meeting at which the application shall be reviewed.
   C.   The planning commission is the city land use authority for subdivision
plats. The Planning Commission may grant approval of a Preliminary Plat which
it finds to be in accordance with the standards and criteria set forth by the
city in this title and all other ordinance, plans, and policies of the city.
The planning commission may also conditionally approve a Preliminary Plat,
imposing such conditions as it may require bringing the Preliminary Plat into
compliance with the requirements of the city's ordinances, plans, and policies.
   D.   After reviewing the Preliminary Plat, the planning commission will make
a determination that the Preliminary Plat be approved, conditionally approved,
or disapproved.
   E.   Upon approval of the Preliminary Plat, and approval of the Construction
Drawings, a permit may be issued which allows the applicant to begin
construction at their own risk, of the infrastructure improvements required for
the subdivision prior to the Final Plat approval. Issuance of a permit to
construct infrastructure prior to Final Plat approval does not constitute a
vesting of development rights.
   F.   If the final subdivision plat, or phase thereof, is not approved by the
city within one (1) year after Planning Commission approval of the Preliminary
Plat, all approvals shall be deemed expired and void. If eligible, the
applicant may submit for approval a new Preliminary Plat in accordance with
this section, if it is determined by the planning manager or designee that
substantial progress toward completion of the final subdivision plat has been
done, and the Final Plat cannot be submitted due to reasons beyond the control
of the applicant, the item shall be placed on the next available Planning
Commission agenda for consideration of a reasonable extension of time to
complete the final plat, but no longer than one (1) year. A second extension
not to exceed one (1) additional year may be granted in extraordinary
circumstances demonstrated by the applicant.
   G.   No extension will be granted to any applicant unless the applicant
first submits documentation evidencing that WCWCD has consented to the
extension of applicants "Will-Serve" letter consistent with the extension
sought from the city.
   H.   Approval of the Preliminary Plat does not constitute full approval of
the development nor vest any development rights as additional requirements may
be imposed that are a result of more detailed and thorough review of all plans,
specifications, reports, and investigations.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1)
CHAPTER 16.20
FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
16.20.010: Final Plat
16.20.020: Description And Delineation
16.20.030: Standard Forms
16.20.040: Additional Information Submitted With Final Plat
16.20.050: Conformance To Applicable Rules And Regulations
16.20.060: Other Restrictions
16.20.070: Approval Procedure
16.20.010: FINAL PLAT:
The final plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor on a standard
twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch (24" x 36") mylar sheet drawn with
waterproof black ink. The plat shall contain all information required as set
forth below. The final plat will also include an electronic copy.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.20.020: DESCRIPTION AND DELINEATION:
   A.   Name: The name of the subdivision approved by the planning commission.
   B.   Lots: An identification system shall be shown for all lots, blocks, and
names of streets. Lot lines shall show dimensions in feet and hundredths. Lot
sizes shall be shown to one square foot accuracy. Other easements shall be of
sufficient width and location necessary to provide the proper function and
maintenance of utility and drainage facilities as determined by the public
works director and shall be shown on the final plat.
   C.   Easements; Street Names: Easements shall be a minimum of ten feet (10')
wide along all front property lines unless otherwise required by the city. In
multi-family or PD projects, the city may require easements in common areas.
All street names shall be approved by the city to avoid duplication of names
within the city limits. As a courtesy, and as required by the Utah code 54-3-27
(5), a copy of all final plats shall be provided to any utility company
providing service to the subdivision in addition to city owned utilities
already approved herein. This could include natural gas, cable television,
telephone, high speed internet, or other providers of public services. Evidence
shall be provided to the city from the utility companies that this requirement
has been complied with.
   D.   Traverse Of Perimeter: A traverse of the perimeter of the subdivision.
   E.   Monumentation And Survey Control:
      1.   All United States, state, county, city, or other official monuments
shall be identified on the plat. The location of these monuments shall be
accurately tied to the subdivision by true bearing and distance. All existing
monuments shall show the agency setting the monument and the date set, if
known, and the type of monument (i.e., brass cap, rebar, and cap, etc.).
      2.   Street monuments shall be installed by the owner in accordance with
the requirements of the city with locations indicated on the plat within thirty
(30) days after street paving.
   F.   Public Objects: The dedication to the public of all streets, easements,
or other areas reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon.
Any area to be reserved by deed or covenant for common use of all property
owners shall be indicated on the plat.
   G.   North Arrow and Scale: North arrow, scale, point of beginning, legal
description, and basis of bearing shall be shown not only in narrative but also
on the drawing. Surveys shall coincide with other surveys of record in the
area. The basis of bearing shall be the one most predominantly of record in the
area and shall be identified on the plat as well as in the survey narrative.
   H.   Boundary Closures: Subdivision boundary closures shall be 0.01 or less
on exterior boundaries and 0.02 on interior lots.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2013-09: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.20.030: STANDARD FORMS:
The final plat shall require:
   A.   A registered professional land surveyor's signed stamp and certificate
of survey.
   B.   All street centerline data and street widths shall be shown with ties
to property lines, lot corners, etc. All radii, internal angles, points and
curvatures, tangents, bearings, and the length of all arcs.
   C.   A notary public's acknowledgment of all signatures on the plat.
   D.   A notarized consent of all lienholders, unless a separate notarized
consent to plat is provided for any lien holder, in a form acceptable to the
city.
   E.   The final plat (mylar) shall be signed by the Planning Commission Chair
or Vice-Chair.
   F.   The final plat (mylar) shall be signed by the city engineer and the
city surveyor.
   G.   The final plat (mylar) shall be signed by the city attorney, after
having reviewed a title report prepared or updated by a title company and dated
within the past ninety (90) days. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to
obtain releases or consents to plat from the holders of all liens or
encumbrances which would otherwise prevent the subdivision of the property and
the sale of good and marketable title to third party buyers of property in the
subdivision.
   H.   The final plat (mylar) shall be signed by the mayor.
   I.   A one and one-half by five-inch (1½ x 5") space in the lower right-hand
corner of the plat for use by the county recorder.
   J.   The final plat shall include the following notes:
      1.   A note stating: "This property is subject to the findings, summary
and conclusions of a Geotechnical Investigation Report prepared by
                Dated                  .
"A copy of said report has been placed within the Geotechnical Report File of
the city and is available for inspection. The report may be inspected, or
copies obtained, by contacting the City of Santa Clara, P.O. Box 2601 Santa
Clara Drive, Santa Clara, Utah 84765. Purchasers should review this report and
contact the city for additional updated information regarding the report. All
purchasers of lots in this subdivision are strongly encouraged to obtain their
own Geotechnical Investigation Report and to follow its recommendations."
   2.   A note indemnifying the City for soil or other sensitive conditions on
the site.
   3.   If lot setbacks are not otherwise depicted on the plat, a note stating
any front, side, and rear yard setbacks applicable to lots on the plat.
   4.   A note stating that notwithstanding the posting of any performance
security, no building permit will be issued until all utilities are completed
in the subdivision.
   5.   A note stating that all street landscaping must confirm to the City's
landscaping ordinances and construction standards.
   6.   Any other notes or statements required by the Planning Commission as a
condition of final plat approval.
   K.   The county treasurer's certificate of approval indicating at the time
of signing that the property taxes, special assessments, and fees due and owing
have been paid in full.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2015-12: Ord. 2012-07: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.20.040: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION SUBMITTED WITH FINAL PLAT:
   A.   An engineer's itemized estimate of the cost of all required
improvements to be developed in the subdivision, which shall be subject to
approval by the city engineer.
   B.   Final utility plans for culinary water, secondary irrigation water,
sewer, power, and natural gas, if proposed, with approval from each utility
department indicating that utility and easement plans have been reviewed and
approved by them, and that services are available to each lot in the
subdivision. This requirement may be met by receiving approval for these
construction drawings during the preliminary plat approval phase of development
1 .
   C.   A final drainage plan, if not previously approved at the preliminary
stage, indicating the following:
      1.   Complete drainage systems for the entire subdivision shall be
designed by a professional engineer, licensed in the state of Utah, and
qualified to perform such work. All existing drainage features which are to be
incorporated into the design shall be so identified. If the final plat is to be
presented in phases, general drainage plans for the entire area shall be
presented with the first phase. Appropriate development plans shall be prepared
for each subsequent phase and shall be submitted.
      2.   The drainage plan shall be designed to consider the drainage basin
as a whole and shall accommodate not only runoff from the subdivision area but
also where applicable, the system shall be designed to accommodate the runoff
from those areas adjacent to and upstream from the subdivision itself, as well
as its effects on lands that are downstream.
   D.   Final plans and profiles for all streets to be constructed in the
subdivision indicating that the plans have been reviewed and approved by the
city engineer.
   E.   All plans and information required by the hillside protection overlay
zone, or the FEMA flood maps have been complied with. Where such plans are not
required, that a soils report, covering each lot in the subdivision has been
submitted and approved by the city engineer.
   F.   For any subdivision in a PD Zone a fully executed original copy of any
Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions anticipated to be recorded with the
plat shall be submitted to the city for verification. The original will be
returned to the applicant for recording when the final plat is released.
   G.   Any other information reasonably required by City staff to assist in
determining whether the requirements of this Chapter have been met with respect
to the final plat for which approval is sought.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2019-10 § 3: Ord. 2012-07: Ord. 2009-02 §
1)
 
Notes
1    UCA §§ 10-9a-603(4)(c)(i), 10-9a-603(4)(c)(ii).
16.20.050: CONFORMANCE TO APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall
comply with all applicable laws, plans, and regulations including, but not
limited to:
   A.   The city general plan, land use ordinance, zoning map, and all other
applicable city ordinances.
   B.   The official city general plan, including general plans for streets,
parks, drainage, trails, and utility systems.
   C.   Requirements of any departments of the state of Utah, as applicable.
   D.   The standards, regulations and policies adopted by the city including
all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of the city who may be
authorized to adopt the same.
   E.   A copy of any development agreement that may have been agreed upon
between the city and the owner of the project.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.20.060: OTHER RESTRICTIONS:
If the applicant places restrictions on any of the land contained in the
subdivision greater than those required by the land use ordinance, these
covenants, conditions, and restrictions may be required to be indicated on the
subdivision plat, or the planning commission may require that restrictive
covenants be recorded with the county recorder in a form approved by the city
attorney. Conditions, covenants, and restrictions shall be required in the case
of a planned unit development in the planned development zone where common
areas are proposed.
   A.   The city will not accept property as a bond to guarantee installation
of improvements in a subdivision. An acceptable agreement may include a cash
amount posted with the city, an escrow agreement with a local financial
institution, a letter of credit from such an institution, or a corporate surety
bond.
   B.   The city shall not create a special improvement district for the
purpose of installing improvements in a subdivision proposed by an owner. If an
improvement district is proposed by the city and, if the district proposed
contains property owned by more than one property owner not involved with the
development and said owners cannot agree on a method of financing the required
improvements, then, and only then, shall the city consider the possible
creation of a special improvement district.
   C.   Special improvement districts are not intended for the improvement of a
subdivision owned by one person or a group of persons acting jointly together
to create a subdivision development.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.20.070: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   After the Preliminary Plat has been approved by the Planning
Commission, and all conditions are complied with, a final subdivision plat
shall be prepared and submitted to the planning department.
   B.   The Final Plat shall be reviewed by the Technical Review Committee, TRC
prior to submittal of a final mylar copy.
   C.   All applications to subdivide real property shall comply with the
requirements of Utah Code Title 10, Chapter 9a, of the Utah Land Use and
Development Management Act, as amended.
   D.   A Final Plat must be recorded with the office of the County Recorder
within one (1) year of the date of city approval. This includes a final plat
which is a phase of the project (this entitles the preliminary plat). A Final
Plat which has not been recorded withing one year, shall be deemed void and all
land use approvals associated with the Final Plat shall be considered void ab
initio. Prior to expiration, an applicant may request a one-time six-month
extension of approval to the planning department. The item shall be placed on
the next available Planning Commission agenda for consideration.
   E.   Following approval by the TRC, the mylar copy of the final plat will be
held for review by city staff and not released for recording until all the
requirements of this Chapter have been met, including but not limited to the
posting of adequate performance security, payment of all city fees, and all
required signatures being obtained on the mylar copy.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1)
CHAPTER 16.22
SUBDIVISION PLAT AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
16.22.010:   Vacating, Altering Or Amending A Subdivision Plat
16.22.020:   Lot Adjustments And/Or Mergers
16.22.030:   Vacating A Street, Right-of-Way, Or Easement
16.22.010:   VACATING, ALTERING OR AMENDING A SUBDIVISION PLAT:
All applications for vacating, altering or amending a subdivision plat shall
comply with the requirements of Utah Code Title 10, Chapter 9A, as amended.
(Ord. 2023-21)
16.22.020:   LOT ADJUSTMENTS AND/OR MERGERS:
All applications seeking to adjust and/or merge lots, parcels, units, or other
divisions of land shall comply with the requirements for the adjustment of lot
lines as set forth in Utah Code Title 10, Chapter 9A, as amended.
(Ord. 2023-21)
16.22.030:   VACATING A STREET, RIGHT-OF-WAY, OR EASEMENT:
All applications for vacating a street, right-of-way, or easements shall comply
with the requirements of Utah Code Title 10, Chapter 9A, as amended.
(Ord. 2023-21)
CHAPTER 16.24
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
16.24.010: Compliance With Design Standards
16.24.020: Approved Engineering Drawings
16.24.030: Inspections
16.24.040: Utility Improvements
16.24.050: Storm Drainage And Nuisance Water Control
16.24.060: Street Improvements
16.24.070: Layout Of Lots
16.24.080: Lot Arrangement
16.24.010: COMPLIANCE WITH DESIGN STANDARDS:
All subdivisions shall comply with the following design standards.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.24.020: APPROVED ENGINEERING DRAWINGS:
Prior to commencement of construction, engineering drawings prepared and
stamped by the owner's engineer for improvements shall be approved by all
required departments. These plans shall comply with the requirements as set
forth in official city standards and specifications. No residential building
permits shall be issued prior to approval of engineering drawings and
completion and acceptance of all development improvements.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.24.030: INSPECTIONS:
Appropriate agencies and departments of the city shall inspect or cause to be
inspected all buildings, street improvements, fire hydrants, water supply,
electrical systems, and sewage disposal systems, etc., during construction,
installation, or repair. Excavations for fire hydrants and water and sewer
mains and laterals, shall not be covered or backfilled until such installation
shall have been approved and inspected by the city. If any installation is
covered before being inspected and papproved, it shall be uncovered after
notice to uncover has been issued to the responsible person by the inspector.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.24.040: UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   All subdivision lots shall be served by the city's culinary water,
secondary irrigation water, sewer, and electrical systems unless otherwise
approved by the city council. Provisions shall also be made for the
installation of natural gas, telephone, cable television, and fiber optic as a
part of the subdivision development. For any of the above services not provided
by the city, the owner shall submit will serve letters from each utility
providing service as a condition of approval of the utility systems. No
building permits shall be issued until full completion and approval of all
required public improvements of the project.
   B.   All utility improvements shall comply with city construction standards
and will be completed to the boundaries of the subdivision.
   C.   All electrical, telephone, television cable, and fiber optic shall be
installed underground except as otherwise directed by the city council. All
electrical systems shall conform to underground specifications and city
construction standards.
   D.   All sewer, electrical, culinary water and secondary irrigation water
plans and specifications shall be approved by the city before commencing public
improvements.
   E.   The owner shall provide streetlights in conformance with city
standards.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2019-10 § 4: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.24.050: STORM DRAINAGE AND NUISANCE WATER CONTROL:
   A.   A storm or nuisance water drainage system shall be provided and shall
be separate and independent from the sanitary sewer system.
   B.   No ditch or canal shall be approved as suitable for the use of storm
drainage without the written permission of the appropriate ditch or canal
company or of the water users for such use, and the approval of the city. No
ditch or canal shall be used for stormwater unless adequately improved to
handle such water as might be reasonably expected to flow from canal and ditch
water, subdivision runoff water, and other water expected to reach the
subdivision, canal, or ditch. Where subdivision improvements affect existing
canals or ditches, specific modifications shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the irrigation company and the city. In situations where the
city already has a drainage plan or system in place, the owner shall be
expected to participate in the expansion, extension, or enlargement of such
system to accommodate water from the subdivision. Retention basins developed as
a part of the subdivision may also be required.
   C.   Drainage and flood control shall be designed in conformance with the
Washington County Flood Control Authority Storm Drainage Systems Design and
Management Manual and the city Storm Water Master Plan. Public drainage
easements or dedications with a minimum width of fifteen feet (15') shall be
provided along all drainageways as determined by the city.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.24.060: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this Section 16.24.060, each reference to
a "subdivision" herein shall mean and refer to either (1) a "subdivision," as
defined in Santa Clara City Code §
16.08.010 ; or (2) a "streets project area," as may be defined by the city
council from time to time, on recommendation of the technical review committee
(TRC) and planning commission.
   B.   Streets Project Areas: The purpose of defining a "streets project area"
is so that existing parcels not requiring further subdivision before
development may still have the benefit of complete and well-maintained street
improvements. A streets project area shall be created when at least eighty
percent (80%) of the owners on the public street in the proposed streets
project area, as measured by linear foot of frontage, have signed a document
notifying the city of their agreement with the conditions of such designation.
Such designation shall signify the intent of the signing owners to bear a share
of costs to improve the public street to applicable city standards, as set
forth in this section. The following areas of the city shall, for purposes of
this section, each be considered a potential streets project area:
      1.   Vernon Street, North of Santa Clara Drive
      2.   Vernon Street, South of Santa Clara Drive
      3.   Victors Street, North of Santa Clara Drive
      4.   Victors Street, South of Santa Clara Drive
      5.   Quail Street, North of Santa Clara Drive
      6.   Quail Street, South of Santa Clara Drive
      7.   Hamblin Drive and Gates Lane, North of Santa Clara Drive
      8.   West Vineyard Drive, from Old Farm Road to Heights Drive
      9.   West Arrowhead Trail, from Arrowhead Circle to Santa Clara Parkway
      10.   South Arrowhead Trail, from Pearl Rose Drive to Concord Drive
   Any other combination of adjacent parcels, having direct access from the
same public street, may also seek recognition as a "streets project area" by
obtaining a recommendation from the technical review committee and planning
commission and approval from the city council.
   C.   When multiple streets project areas are designated or eligible by
designation, the city council shall have the right to determine the relative
priority of the projects for application of available city resources. The city
council will consider the following information when determining priority
between any two (2) streets project areas:
      1.   Citizen input;
      2.   Whether the proposed streets project area will help to mitigate the
anticipated impacts of growth or development;
      3.   Availability of utility services;
      4.   Relative size of streets project areas;
      5.   Availability and cost of contractor services;
      6.   Any other reasonable consideration related to the health, safety,
and welfare of city residents and visitors.
   D.   The City Council shall ultimately have the right to make a final
determination as to the feasibility and timing of any proposed streets project,
and in doing so may consider the availability of funds or financing, the
feasibility of constructing required improvements and the interfacing of new
improvements with existing improvements, the feasibility of necessary land
acquisition, or any other reasonable consideration.
   E.   All streets shall be designed in accordance with the city design
standards, AASHTO, or other approved standards. All streets within the city
shall be improved with streetlights and pavements bounded by integral concrete
curbs, gutters, and sidewalks. All street improvements will be completed to the
boundaries of the subdivision.
   F.   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions and in designated
streets project areas shall provide for the continuation of principal streets
between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient
movement of traffic, effective fire protection, for efficient provision of
utilities, and where such continuation is in accordance with the general plan.
   G.   The owner(s) of the subdivision shall be responsible to bear all costs
of required improvements as set forth in this chapter, shall provide a bond or
other security to warranty the improvements for not less than one (1) year from
the date of completion, and shall provide traffic control and street name signs
conforming to the city's design specifications and approved by the city.
   H.   The owner(s) of parcels comprising a designated streets project area
shall also be responsible to bear certain costs of required improvements;
however, the city agrees to bear a portion of material and improvement costs,
as set forth in the following table:
 
Owner(s) pay for:                        City pays for:
Sidewalk                                 Asphalt and base
Right of way and public utility easement Storm Drain System including curb &
dedication as needed                     gutter
Bond or other security for 1-year
warranty, covering Owner(s)' pro rata    Civil engineering costs, including
portion of project costs (if required by required surveys
City)
New lateral connections to service       Utility replacement and upsizing
individual properties (if required or    (excluding new lateral connections to
desired)                                 service individual properties)
Own legal and professional fees          Streetlights
                                        Own legal and professional fees
 
   Where a corner lot is part of the streets project area, the owner(s) in the
streets project area shall only be responsible for the above costs in relation
to improvements along the side of the corner lot having the longest public
street frontage; the city will pay all costs of improvements along the side
having the shorter frontage. Owner(s) may negotiate among themselves to modify
their respective obligations, provided that any such agreement shall not be
enforceable against the city. The city shall have no obligation to proceed with
improvements to a designated streets project area until having received from
   the owner(s) thereof one hundred percent (100%) of the funds anticipated to
be required to complete the planned improvements. Impact fees designated for
road improvements, or any funds or other security previously deposited with the
city by owner(s) in lieu of impact fees, may be applied by the city to any
designated streets project area in the city, regardless of location.
   I.   All subdivision lots shall have frontage on a dedicated public street
improved to city standards unless the lot is approved as a flag lot under the
city's flag lot ordinance or is approved by the city council on some other
basis. Streets project areas are assumed by definition to have such frontage.
Private streets, alleys, or ways shall not be approved except as may be
approved as a part of a planned development project under the city planned
development ordinance or when, because of hazardous slopes, soils, floodplains,
or other conditions, the city council determines that approval is not in the
best interest of the city.
   J.   The technical review committee (TRC) or the planning commission may
recommend to the city council that an exception for private roadways, utility
improvements, or other improvements be approved for a specific subdivision or
streets project area. In any event, private streets and utility construction
will conform to the construction standards required for dedicated streets and
utilities regarding quality of construction, whether dedicated or not.
   K.   All off-site access roads providing the subdivision or streets project
area with access to the nearest public street shall be improved as required by
this section. Wherever feasible, local streets shall be laid out to provide
connectivity to adjoining residential areas. If the adjacent property is
undeveloped and the street must be a temporary dead-end street, the right of
way shall be extended to the property line and a temporary turnaround shall be
provided. All permanently dead-end streets shall end in an approved cul-de-sac
or other improved turnaround, including appropriate signage, unless otherwise
approved by the city council.
   L.   Intersections shall be designed in conformance with AASHTO standards to
provide adequate sight distance and other performance and safety needs as
approved by the city.
   M.   No subdivision shall be approved which does not have access to an
improved and dedicated city street. Where a subdivision or existing streets
project area obtains access from a street which does not meet minimum city
standards, the access road shall be improved to a minimum width of twenty-five
feet (25'). Additionally, all utilities will be brought up to current city
construction standards.
   N.   Where a subdivision or designated streets project area abuts a master
planned road, utility, or drainage system, the owner(s) shall complete their
portion of such improvements the full length of their project in conformance
with the official city master plan unless otherwise approved by the city
council. Any owner(s) of parcels which are part of a larger designated streets
project area shall have the same obligation with respect to their own
respective parcels.
   O.   Streets shall have the following minimum right of way widths:
      1.   Arterial Street: Eighty-foot (80') minimum.
      2.   Collector Street: Sixty-six feet (66').
      3.   Local Street: Forty-seven (47').
      4.   In planned development areas, subdivisions, and designated streets
project areas, the minimum street width is forty-five (45') feet as per City
Construction Standards.
   P.   Streets shall have the following paved roadway width (lip of curb to
lip of curb):
      1.   Arterial Street: Fifty-five feet (55').
      2.   Collector Street: Forty-nine feet (49').
      3.   Local Street: Thirty-two feet (32') of paved roadway is the minimum
required; however, a developer may build a wider paved roadway width if
approved by the city.
      4.   Modified Local Street: Thirty feet (30') of paved roadway is the
minimum required for a planned development area, infill subdivision, or
designated streets project area.
   Q.   Cul-de-sacs shall be no longer than eight hundred feet (800') in length
without a request for an exception from the applicant and approval by the
planning commission upon recommendation from the TRC.
   R.   The radius of the turnaround in a cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of
fifty feet (50').
   S.   Streets should intersect as nearly as possible to ninety-degree (90°)
angles and shall not be offset less than two hundred fifty feet (250') from the
centerline of the nearest intersecting street.
   T.   Streets shall have the names or numbering system of all streets in
city-approved sequence. Permanent street name or number signs shall be
installed by the owner at their expense according to city requirements and
standards at the time of development of the subdivision and shall be provided
for along with other elements of the subdivisions for which a guarantee is
posted.
   U.   Traffic control signs required by the city shall also be installed to
ensure a smooth flow of traffic through the subdivision.
   V.   Streetlights, of a type approved by the Power Department, shall be
installed in every subdivision. Spacing of streetlights shall be within two
hundred fifty feet (250'), except as approved by the Power Department, and
shall be installed at all intersections, or in other locations as determined by
the city.
   W.   Curb, gutter, and sidewalk are required in all subdivisions and
designated streets project areas, in accordance with the city's design and
construction standards. Additionally, all existing utilities in these areas
will be brought up to current city construction standards.
   X.   The minimum centerline radii for local streets shall be one hundred
fifty feet (150'). For collector streets the minimum shall be three hundred
feet (300'). For arterial streets the minimum shall be five hundred feet
(500'), unless otherwise approved by the city council upon recommendation of
the city engineer.
   Y.   The grade of streets shall not exceed eight percent (8%) for arterial
or collector streets and fifteen percent (15%) for local streets.
   Z.   Blocks shall not be longer than one thousand feet (1,000') and shall be
at least two (2) building lots in depth, unless otherwise approved by the
planning commission upon recommendation from the TRC.
   AA.   All arterial streets are classified as limited access streets, and no
individual lot shall front on an arterial street.
   BB.   All street widths shall conform to the width requirements unless
otherwise recommended by the TRCfor approval by the planning commission. Such
recommendation and approval shall normally apply only to developments in the
planned development zone.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2019-07 § 3: Ord. 2016-12: Ord. 2013-09:
Ord. 2012-13: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.24.070: LAYOUT OF LOTS:
   A.   The design and development of the subdivision shall preserve, insofar
as possible, the natural terrain, drainage, existing topsoil, and vegetation.
   B.   In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines, or
radial curving street lines, unless a variation from this rule will give a
better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to
allow erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setbacks unless
other provisions are approved by the planning commission upon recommendation
from the TRC.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.24.080: LOT ARRANGEMENT:
   A.   Lot Arrangement Considerations: The lot arrangement shall be such that
there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other
conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in the
subdivision in compliance with the zoning ordinance and in providing driveway
access to buildings on all lots from an approved street unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Commission for reasons listed elsewhere in this title.
   B.   Lot Dimensions: Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards
of the zoning ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required
area for the zoning district, the planning commission may require that the lots
be arranged to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets
where they would be necessary to serve potential lots, all in compliance with
the zoning ordinance and these regulations.
   C.   Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots are lots which have the rear
property line adjacent to a public street. Double frontage lots shall not be
permitted except where necessary to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation. All double frontage lots must be approved by the
Planning Commission. A solid block or masonry wall shall be provided on all
double frontage lots as a part of the required development of improvements,
unless waived or modified by the Planning Commission. Where a privacy wall is
constructed, there shall be a landscape strip provided between the sidewalk and
privacy wall with a minimum average width of ten feet (10'). The wall may be of
serpentine design so that the distance between the wall and sidewalk varies,
but the wall shall not be closer to the sidewalk at any point than four feet
(4'). The minimum ten foot (10') wide planter strip may include landscape area
on both sides of the sidewalk where the sidewalk is separated from the curb by
a landscape area.
   Where the privacy wall on the adjoining property has a curvilinear or
serpentine design, the Planning Commission may require the continuation of such
wall design to provide for a uniform appearance along the public street.
   Where the city determines that a turning lane is needed at an intersection,
the Planning Commission may reduce the landscape strip to accommodate the
turning lane. There shall be a minimum separation of one foot (1') between the
sidewalk and privacy wall. The subdivision developer shall make provisions for
the long-term maintenance of the planter strip either through a homeowners
association (HOA), or other approved maintenance plan, or where the City agrees
to provide long term maintenance for the planter area, in which case the
developer shall on the final subdivision plat grant to the City a landscape
maintenance easement upon all private property which may be on the street side
of the privacy wall.
   D.   Access From Major Arterials and Collector Streets: Residential lots
shall not derive access from major arterial streets, and access shall be
limited on collector streets, except where approved by the City. In cases where
driveway access from such streets may be necessary for several adjoining lots,
the Planning Commission may require that such lots be served by a combined
access drive to limit possible traffic hazards on these streets. In these
cases, driveways shall be designed and arranged to avoid requiring vehicles to
back into traffic.
   E.   Flag Lots: After determination by the Planning Commission that standard
lots are not feasible, the Planning Commission, may, to encourage more
efficient use of the land, allow flag lots to be developed subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   The property cannot be subdivided with public street and standard
sized lots, either at the present time or in the foreseeable future.
      2.   The staff portion of the lot shall front on a dedicated public
street. The minimum width of the staff portion of the lot shall be twenty-five
feet (25') and the maximum length shall be two hundred feet (200').
      3.   No building or construction, except driveways, shall be allowed on
the staff portion of the lot.
      4.   The front side of the flag lot shall be deemed to be the side
nearest the dedicated public street upon which the staff portion fronts.
      5.   All lot size and setback requirements shall be the same as required
by the zone in which the lot is located. The staff portion of the lot shall not
be included in these calculations.
      6.   No more than two (2) flag lots or four (4) dwelling units may be
served by one staff portion of the lots.
      7.   Each flag lot shall be specifically approved by the Planning
Commission.
      8.   The staff portion of the lot shall be owned by the owner of the flag
lot, or jointly in the case of two (2) lots served by one staff portion.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2020-14 § 1: Ord. 2018-05: Ord. 2009-02 §
1)
CHAPTER 16.28
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
SECTION:
16.28.010: Performance Guarantee Required
16.28.020: Guarantee Form
16.28.030: Guarantee Amount
16.28.040: Release Of Guarantee/Posting Of Maintenance Warranty
16.28.010: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE REQUIRED:
The owner shall guarantee the installation and construction of the required
subdivision improvements free from defective material or workmanship and in
compliance with all city standards. Even though the owner provides a guarantee
for the completion of the improvements, building permits will not be issued
until all off-site improvements are completed. The improvements shall have been
installed and completed within one year of final Planning Commission approval
unless extended for cause by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.28.020: GUARANTEE FORM:
The guarantee shall be in the form of an improvement agreement approved by the
city council from time to time, plus, an escrow bond, letter of credit, or cash
guarantee for the amount required by this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.28.030: GUARANTEE AMOUNT:
The guarantee amount shall be one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of
improvements as set forth in the project engineers estimate. That the estimate
shall be required to include:
   A.   Ten percent (10%) administrative costs;
   B.   Ten percent (10%) contingency; and
   C.   Engineering and quality assurance testing costs.
If the city council authorizes an extension of time beyond one year to complete
the improvements, the extended guarantee shall be equal to one hundred percent
(100%) of the cost of the remaining improvements.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.28.040: RELEASE OF GUARANTEE/POSTING OF MAINTENANCE WARRANTY:
   A.   After completion of all subdivision improvements the owner shall make a
written request to the city for a final inspection. Upon receipt of the
inspection reports from affected departments the city shall notify the owner in
writing specifying the acceptability of all subdivision improvements and
itemizing those improvements not acceptable along with the actions necessary to
render those improvements acceptable.
   B.   After acceptance of all improvements by the city, the city may release
up to ninety percent (90%) of the guarantee amount. The city shall continue to
hold the security covering the remaining ten percent (10%) guarantee to ensure
that all improvements shall be free from defective material and workmanship and
in compliance with all city standards for a period of one (1) or two (2) years
as may be determined by the city engineer or public works director. This period
is marked from the date of final approval of all improvements until the
performance guarantee is replaced by a maintenance guarantee in the same ten
percent (10%) amount. At the end of the performance period, the city shall
perform a second inspection of all improvements. The city shall notify the
owner in writing of any corrective measures that are required. If the defects
are identified as a part of the inspection, the owner shall have the option of
correcting the defects to the satisfaction of the city or shall forfeit the
maintenance guarantee to the city as damages for the defective work.
   C.   The improvement guarantee may be released in part as progress payment
for improvements, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The owner shall submit to the city a request for payment against the
guarantee showing to whom and for what amount the release is requested. The
request shall include an updated engineers estimate for completion of the
remaining improvements. Upon inspection by the city, and approval of the
requested amount, the city will authorize the holder of the guarantee amount to
disperse the approved payments, less any amount required to secure completion
of remaining improvements. Payments may be made upon completion of the various
phases of development as follows:
         a.   The complete water system including mains, outfall lines, valves,
hydrants, or any other part of the required water system.
         b.   The complete road construction, including all survey monuments,
traffic control and street name signs. Road construction shall also include
storm drainage systems.
         c.   The complete waste disposal system.
         d.   The staking of lot corners and any other required survey field
work.
         e.   The completion of each required utility system, including power,
telephone, natural gas, cable TV, internet connections, or any other utility
service that may have been bonded for by the owner. Each required utility may
be released independent of other utility installation.
      2.   Requests shall not be submitted more frequently than monthly. A
minimum of twenty percent (20%) of each element shall be retained as required
for the guarantee required in subsection B of this section. A guarantee of the
same type used to guarantee installation of all improvements shall be posted
prior to final release of the improvement guarantee amount. The city reserves
the right to require updated engineers estimates of the remaining improvements,
and additional security if required, every six (6) months in the event that no
partial releases are requested.
      3.   For an owner who proposes to install all improvements prior to final
recording of a final plat, a cost estimate of improvements shall be submitted
to the city and approved by the city engineer or public works director prior to
the start of construction, as the basis for determining the amount of the ten
percent (10%) guarantee that shall be posted upon final approval of the
improvements by the city, and prior to the recording of the final plat.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
CHAPTER 16.32
FEES, ENFORCEMENT, PERMITS, AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
16.32.010: Fees
16.32.015: Subdivision Water Modeling Fee
16.32.016: Subdivision Water Model Approval Procedure
16.32.020: Enforcement
16.32.030: Permits
16.32.040: Violation
16.32.050: Penalty
16.32.060: Building On Unsubdivided Parcel
16.32.010: FEES:
All persons filing subdivision plats with the city shall pay fees as adopted
through resolution by the city council.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.32.015: SUBDIVISION WATER MODELING FEE:
There is hereby established a subdivision water modeling fee applicable to all
subdivisions for which application is made after the effective date hereof that
add at least five (5) equivalent residential units ("ERUs") to the water
system, and/or involving adding five hundred feet (500') or more of main water
line. This fee shall be deemed a part of the subdivision application fee. The
fee shall be as set forth at exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified
herein, which fee may be changed by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2012-20)
16.32.016: SUBDIVISION WATER MODEL APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
Upon payment of the fee, the city staff shall cause the engineer currently in
charge of the city water model, to determine whether that subdivision's water
requirements will be reasonably met after proper installation. If the engineer
opines that the city's water system will not accommodate the proposed
subdivision under Utah administrative code ("UAC") rule R-309-510 regarding
minimum requirements, available water rights, and storage and source capacity
to serve said subdivision, the subdivision approval shall be suspended pending
a determination of necessary upgrades done and/or water rights required at the
subdivision developer's expense, that will allow the subdivision to be serviced
by the city water system. Any of such upgrades shall be completed and/or bonded
as a condition of filing the final plat of said subdivision.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2012-20)
16.32.020: ENFORCEMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to contract to sell or lease, or to sell or lease
any subdivision, or any part thereof, which is in the city until a final plat
thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this title, has been duly
recorded or filed in the office of the county recorder. The Santa Clara City
administrator shall be charged with the enforcement powers of this title.
Failure of city departments or individuals to pursue appropriate legal remedies
shall not legalize any violation of this title.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.32.030: PERMITS:
From the time of the effective date hereof, the Building Official shall not
grant a permit, nor shall any city officer grant any license or permit for the
use of any land or the construction or alteration of any building or structure
on a lot until a subdivision plat therefor has been recorded. Any license or
permit issued in conflict with such provisions shall be void.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.32.040: VIOLATION:
No person shall subdivide any tract or parcel of land located wholly or in part
in the city except in compliance with the provisions of this title. No person
shall purchase, sell or exchange any parcel of land which is any part of a
subdivision, or a proposed subdivision submitted to the planning commission,
nor offer for recording in the office of the county recorder, any deed
conveying such parcel of land or any fee interest therein, unless such
subdivision has been created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions
of this title. Each day that a violation of the provisions of any chapter of
this title is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
and independent violation.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.32.050: PENALTY:
Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction of such violation, shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or six (6) months in
jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. This penalty may be imposed for
each separate violation found to exist as provided in section
16.32.040 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2009-02 § 1)
16.32.060: BUILDING ON UNSUBDIVIDED PARCEL:
One (1) unit can be built on an unsubdivided parcel prior to subdivision plat
recordation. However, all utilities and improvements must be completed, or
performance guarantee given prior to building permit issuance. If performance
guarantee is given for improvements, then a certificate of occupancy will only
be issued upon completion.
(Ord. 2023-21: Ord. 2023-04 § 1: Ord. 2013-03)
TITLE 17
ZONING
CHAPTER 17.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
17.04.010: Short Title
17.04.020: Purpose
17.04.030: Interpretation
17.04.035: Land Use Decision And Water Acknowledgment Required
17.04.040: Conflict
17.04.050: Effect On Previous Ordinances And Maps
17.04.060: Building Permit Required
17.04.070: Occupancy Permit Required
17.04.080: Site Plan Required
17.04.090: Inspection
17.04.100: Permits To Comply With This Title
17.04.110: Nuisance And Abatement
17.04.120: Enforcement
17.04.125: Notice Of Noncompliance
17.04.130: Responsibility For Violations
17.04.140: Penalties
17.04.150: Changes And Amendments
17.04.160: Conflicting Provisions Repealed
17.04.170: Fees
17.04.180: Licensing
17.04.190: Annexations
17.04.200: Completion Of Improvements
17.04.210: Denied Amendments; Reconsideration
17.04.220: Vesting And Expiration
17.04.010: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF SANTA CLARA, UTAH, and may
be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-1)
17.04.020: PURPOSE:
This title is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the health,
safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and
future inhabitants of the city of Santa Clara, Utah, including, among other
things, the lessening of congestion in the streets and roads, securing safety
from fire and other dangers, providing adequate light and air, classification
of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization, protection
of the tax base, securing economy in governmental expenditures, fostering the
city’s commercial and industrial growth, and protecting both residential and
nonresidential development. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-2)
17.04.030: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, the requirements
contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the purposes
set forth. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-3)
1704.035: LAND USE DECISION AND WATER ACKNOWLEDGMENT REQUIRED:
   A.   Interpretation of Zoning Ordinance. Any use of land that is not plainly
designated as a permitted use or conditional use shall be reviewed and decided
on by the City Council following a recommendation by the planning commission.
   B.   Land Use Decision Required. No development may commence, or land use
changed or expanded, without a final Land Use Decision, which determines that
the development, or the change or expansion, is allowed in the zone and
complies with all Land Use Regulations.
   C.   Water Acknowledgment Required. All new Land Use Applications must
submit with the application, an acknowledgment signed by both the applicant/
developer and the owner(s) of all real property which are part of the
application that:
      1.   The applicant is responsible for ensuring that the Project or
application has sufficient culinary water service, and;
      2.   Approval of any development application by the city does not
guarantee that sufficient water will be available to serve the zone, project,
or permit for which the application is submitted. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1)
17.04.040: CONFLICT:
This title shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants,
agreements, or other ordinances of laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding such
provisions which are less restrictive. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 2004-19 § 1:
Ord. 97-06 § 1-4)
17.04.050: EFFECT ON PREVIOUS ORDINANCES AND MAPS:
The existing ordinances covering zoning, in their entirety, and including the
maps heretofore adopted and made a part of said ordinance are hereby superseded
and amended to read as set forth herein. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-5)
17.04.060: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
The construction, alteration, repair, removal or moving of any building or
structure or any part thereof, as provided or as restricted in this title shall
not be commenced or proceeded with, except after the issuance of a written
permit for the same by the city. In addition to buildings or structures, other
improvements on any lot such as fences, pools, tennis courts, etc., shall be
constructed only after receiving a written permit from the city.
All building permits shall be issued in accordance with the general plan of the
city of Santa Clara, the road master plan, the standards, and regulations
approved by the city, and all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of
the city, and all other applicable ordinances of the city of Santa Clara.
Every permit issued under the provisions of this code shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such
permits is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of
such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended
or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one
hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit
shall first be obtained to do so, and the fee thereafter shall be one-half (½)
the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have
been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such
work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded
one year. To renew action on a permit one year after original application, the
permittee shall pay a new full permit fee. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 2004-19 § 1:
Ord. 97-06 § 1-6)
17.04.070: OCCUPANCY PERMIT REQUIRED:
No land shall be used or occupied, and no building hereinafter structurally
altered or erected shall be changed in use, until a final inspection shall have
been completed, and a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
city, stating that the building or the proposed use thereof, or the use of the
land, complies with the provisions of this title for the renewing, changing, or
extending of a nonconforming use.
Such a permit shall also be issued whenever the character or use of any
building or land is proposed to be changed from one use to another use. (Ord.
2023-05 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-7)
17.04.080: SITE PLAN REQUIRED:
A detailed site plan, drawn to scale, shall be filed as a part of any
application prior to consideration for any building permit. The site plan shall
show, where pertinent:
   A.   Scale used and direction or north point;
   B.   Lot lines, adjacent streets, or right of way, and easements;
   C.   Location of all existing structures on the property, including driveway
entrances, utility poles, etc.;
   D.   Location of the proposed construction and improvements, including
setbacks, location, dimensions of signs, garbage receptacles in commercial
areas, etc.;
   E.   Motor vehicle access, including individual parking stalls, circulation
patterns, curb and gutter and sidewalk locations, etc.;
   F.   Any necessary explanatory notes;
   G.   Name, address, and telephone number of building contractor, and owner;
   H.   All other information that may be determined by the city.
   I.   A plot plan to include the floor elevation(s) of the building in
relation to the elevation of the sidewalk and/or curb in front of the proposed
building. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 2004-19 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-8)
17.04.090: INSPECTION:
The city is authorized to inspect or to cause to be inspected all buildings and
structures during construction, modification, moving, or repair, and to inspect
land uses to determine compliance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance,
the international building code, and the subdivision ordinance. The city,
including any authorized employee of the city, shall have the right to enter
any building premises for the purpose of determining the use thereof, or to
enter the premises for the purpose of determining compliance with the
provisions of this title; provided that such right of entry shall be exercised
only at reasonable hours and that in no case shall entry be made to any
occupied building in the absence of the owner or tenant thereof, without
written permission of the owner, or the written order of a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 2004-19 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-9)
17.04.100: PERMITS TO COMPLY WITH THIS TITLE:
From the time of the effective date hereof, the city shall not grant a permit
for the construction or alteration of any building or structure, on any lot, or
the moving of or structure onto a lot, if such building or structure would be
in violation of any of the provisions of this title nor shall the city grant a
permit or license for the use of any building or land if such use would be in
violation of this title. Any permit so issued shall be null and void.
The city shall certify that all building permits conform to the zoning
ordinance, subdivision ordinance or other city ordinances. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1:
Ord. 97-06 § 1-10)
17.04.110: NUISANCE AND ABATEMENT:
Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted,
moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, and any use of
land, building premises established, conducted, or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this title, shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful
and a public nuisance. The city attorney shall, upon request of the city
council, immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and
removal and enjoinment thereof in the matter provided by law and shall take
other steps and relief as well as abate and remove such building or structure
or use of property contrary to the provisions of this title. The remedies
provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord.
97-06 § 1-11)
17.04.120: ENFORCEMENT:
The city, including any authorized officer of the city, is designated, and
authorized with the enforcement of this title. The city council may entrust
such administration, in whole or in part, to any officer of the city without
amendment to this title. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-12)
17.04.125: NOTICE OF NONCOMPLIANCE:
   A.   Purpose: To enforce compliance with the international building code,
the zoning and subdivision ordinances, and all other ordinances dealing with
building and land use in the city of Santa Clara. The building official, or
other city representative, may issue a “stop work order” and may record, or
cause to be recorded, a notice of noncompliance to be filed with the county
recorder’s office against the property where the violation has been committed.
   B.   Permanent File: Prior to notice and processing of the certificate of
noncompliance with the county, a permanent file will be developed which will
include:
      1.   A statement of the failure to comply with the building regulations.
      2.   Attempts to obtain compliance.
      3.   A corrections list to bring the construction into compliance.
      4.   Copies of all attempts to contact the permit holder/owner.
      5.   A review of the file to determine the proper course of action.
   C.   First Notice: The builder/owner shall be notified in writing of the
failure to comply with the building regulations. The owner/builder will be
given ten (10) to thirty (30) days to comply, depending upon the circumstances.
If the matter is one of public safety immediate compliance will be required.
   D.   Second Notice: If the owner/builder fails to comply with the first
notice, the building official will prepare a second notice. The second notice
shall be mailed by certified mail to the owner who will be given ten (10) days
to comply. The second notice will contain a copy of the certificate of
noncompliance that will be recorded against the property at the county
recorder’s office if the owner/builder fails to comply with the building
violations.
      1.   If the owner fails to comply with the second notice within the
required period, or if the notice is returned as being undeliverable at the
owner/builder’s last known address, the certificate of noncompliance will be
recorded. Any returned mail will be kept in the file as evidence of an attempt
to serve notice at the last known address.
      2.   No work may be done on the property until the noncompliance notice
has been released and a new building permit has been issued.
      3.   To release the certificate, a new building permit shall be obtained,
and the plans will be reviewed according to the building regulations currently
in place. If issued within one year, the permit fee shall be one-half (½) of a
regular permit. If more than one year has expired, the permit fee will be the
complete amount of a new building permit.
      4.   After the construction work shall have been completed and approved,
the city will record a notice to remove the certificate of noncompliance with
the county recorder, and a copy of the release notice will be mailed to the
owner/builder.
      5.   If all other efforts to correct the violation fail, the city may
commence steps to have the building removed as a public nuisance. (Ord. 2023-05
§ 1: Ord. 2013-05)
17.04.130: RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS:
It shall be the duty of all contractors, subcontractors, builders, and other
persons having to do with the establishment of any use of land, or the
erection, altering, changing, or remodeling of any building or structure to see
that a proper permit has been granted before such work is begun. Any such
person doing or performing any such work without a permit having been issued
conflicts with the requirements of this title and shall be deemed to be guilty
of a violation of this title in the same manner and to the same extent that the
owner of the premises or the persons for whom the use is established, and shall
be subject to the penalties, prescribed for violation in this chapter. (Ord.
2023-05 § 1: Ord. 2004-19 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-13)
17.04.140: PENALTIES:
Any firm, corporation, person or persons, or any action on behalf of such
person, persons, firms, or corporations, violating any of the provisions of
this title shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor, or lesser offense at the
discretion of the city.
Each person, persons, firm, or corporation found guilty of violation shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during which any violation of
any provision of this title is committed, continued, or permitted by such
person, persons, firm, or corporation and shall be punishable as provided in
this title. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-14)
17.04.150: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
This title, including the zoning map, may be amended from time to time by the
city council. All proposed amendments shall be recommended by the planning
commission and shall be heard by the planning commission at a public hearing
with an advertised ten (10) day public notice prior to the public hearing. In
addition, the subject property shall be posted with a posting notice that can
be seen by passersby during the advertising period, and property owners owning
property within three hundred feet (300'), as measured by public street, shall
receive a first-class mail notification of the upcoming public hearing with
notice of the date, time, and place of the advertised public hearing mailed at
least five (5) working days prior to the public hearing. The applicant shall
provide the city with first class addressed and stamped envelopes of all such
property owners.
The city council, as an agenda item at a regularly scheduled council meeting
shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission and may either
approve the planning commission recommendation and approve the zone change,
reject the zone change, table the zone change request for further study and
consideration, or send the zone change request back to the planning commission
for further study and recommendation for consideration by the city council at a
later city council meeting. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 2012-19)
17.04.160: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS REPEALED:
Where any ordinance, resolution, or part thereof, is found to conflict with the
provisions of this title, the most restrictive provision shall apply. (Ord.
2023-05 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-16)
17.04.170: FEES:
Fees may be charged to applicants for building, occupancy and conditional use
permits, design review and planned unit development approval, land use
authority hearings, and such other services as are required by this title to be
performed by public representatives or agencies. Such fees shall be established
and amended from time to time by the city council and shall be in amounts
reasonably necessary to defray costs to the public. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord.
2006-02: Ord. 2004-19 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-17)
17.04.180: LICENSING:
All departments, officials, and public employees of the city of Santa Clara who
are vested with authority to issue the permits or licenses provided for herein
shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit or
license for uses, buildings, or purposes where the same would conflict with any
provision of this title. Any permit or license issued that conflicts with any
part of this title, or any other ordinance of the city of Santa Clara, shall be
null and void. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-18)
17.04.190: ANNEXATIONS:
New areas to be annexed to the city shall be classified in the open space (OS)
zone until such classification shall have been changed by an amendment to the
zoning ordinance as provided by law.
Notwithstanding the above requirement, the planning commission shall have
authority to prezone properties lying outside of the city limits to determine,
in advance of the annexation, the zone or zones into which the property should
be zoned upon annexation. Upon the recommendation of the planning commission,
and subject to approval of the city council, such areas may come into the city
in other zoning classifications than outlined in the previous paragraph.
All annexations to the city shall comply with all laws and requirements of the
city and to all laws and requirements of Washington County and the state of
Utah, relative to the annexation of land. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 2010-06: Ord.
2004-19 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-19)
17.04.200: COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Required site improvements such as pavement for parking areas, curb and gutter,
privacy walls, landscaping, storm drainage facilities, utilities, and all other
improvements required under city ordinance, shall be completed prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If such improvements cannot be
completed prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy, due to weather
conditions, or other unusual circumstances, or at the decision of the city, a
guarantee in the form of a cashier’s check, cash bond, letter of credit or
other means acceptable to the city, shall be provided to the city’s guarantee
that such required improvement will be fully completed as required. (Ord. 2023-
05 § 1: Ord. 2004-19 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-20)
17.04.210: DENIED AMENDMENTS; RECONSIDERATION:
In the event that a petition for a zone change or an ordinance amendment is
denied by the city council, or is withdrawn after the planning commission
hearing, the planning commission shall not consider the petition, or any other
petition for the same zone change or amendment of this title as it applies to
the same property described in the original petition, or any part thereof,
within a period of one year from the date of such denial action, unless the
conditions upon which the original denial was based have substantially changed.
For this section, a “substantial change” in a request shall mean a substantial
reduction in density, and/or land area involved, a change in the proposed use,
such as residential rather than commercial, or other factors which, in the
opinion of the planning commission, clearly constitute a significant change in
a zone change request. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 1-22)
17.04.220: VESTING AND EXPIRATION:
   A.   Vesting:
      1.   Process. A completed Land Use Application shall be entitled to
substantive review and process under the Land Use Regulations in effect at the
time the application is complete. A Completed Application requires that all
information necessary for a final decision has been provided to the Land Use
Authority and all fees have been paid.
      2.   Uses and Density. A Land Use Application shall not be considered
formally approved or vested in that approval until the Land Use Authority has
approved the final site plan, final Construction Drawings, or Final Plat
   B.    Expiration: Recognizing that the length of the planning, building, and
engineering review process will vary with the size and complexity of each
proposal, applicants must move their applications either to approval or denial
in a reasonably expeditious manner. The city may formally close applications
which remain inactive for one (1) year or longer due to acts or omissions of
the applicant.
      1.   An application is deemed inactive and subject to closure based on
inactivity if, through the act or omission of the applicant and not the city,
one of the following occurs:
         a.   More than one (1) year has passed since the last substantive
contact between staff and the applicant. Sporadic non-substantive contact shall
not be sufficient to move an application forward or prevent closure.
         b.   More than one (1) year has passed since a request for additional
information was made by staff, which request has:
            (1)   Not been complied with; or
            (2)   Was incomplete or insufficient.
         c.   The applicant is more than thirty (30) days in default of the
payment of any fee assessed or required by ordinance.
         d.   The applicant has informed the city of intent to abandon the
application.
      2.   When the designated planning, building, or engineering staff member
determines an application is inactive, the application file may be closed.
         a.   No application may be closed based on inaction without giving
thirty (30) calendar days’ written notice to the applicant. Written notice may
be delivered in person, by mail or by email. Such notice must state the intent
of the respective department to have the Project closed because of inaction and
what the applicant must submit in a timely manner to maintain an active file.
         b.   Applicants who fail to provide a full and complete response shall
not prevent closure if the requested information or submissions are
insufficient, untimely, or incomplete. (Ord. 2023-05 § 1)
CHAPTER 17.08
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
 17.08.010: Terms Defined
17.08.010: TERMS DEFINED:
For the purpose of this title, certain words and terms are defined as follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the singular
number include the plural, and the plural the singular. Words not included
herein but defined in the building code shall be construed as defined therein.
Some definitions are included for reference purposes and may not be permitted
in any current zone found in the Santa Clara City zoning ordinance.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING: A structure on the same lot with a main structure but
incidental and subordinate to the use thereof. There must first be a "main"
building on the lot before a permit can be issued for any other building to be
"accessory".
   AGRICULTURE: Land devoted to the raising of useful plants and animals with a
reasonable expectation of profit, including forage and sod crops, grain and
feed crops, nut and fruit crops, vegetables, nursery, floral and ornamental
stock, livestock animals including domestic animals, poultry and honeybees.
Agricultural land also includes land devoted to and meeting the requirements
and qualifications for payments or other compensation under a cropland
retirement program with an agency of the state or federal government.
   A.   Does not permit residential dwellings in an agriculture zone.
   B.   Not currently zoned anywhere in Santa Clara City.
   ANIMAL NUMBERS: The number of animals does not include newborn animals under
the age of six (6) months, or those animals that are dependent upon their
mother for sustenance of life, whichever is greater, that were born by animals
kept on the property in compliance with the numbers of animals allowed by this
title.
   ANIMAL SIZE: The categorizing of animals is based upon a classification of
large, medium, or small animals. The determination may be made by size of
animal, irrespective of genetic makeup at the discretion of the planning
commission.
   BARNS, COOPS, STABLES: A building for the keeping of livestock animals, or
fowl, by the occupants of the premises. The above uses are not considered to be
accessory buildings and do not require a prior permit for a primary structure.
They must meet all setback and height requirements of the zone in which they
are located, and any permit requirements of the international building code.
   BASEMENT: A story partly underground. A basement shall be counted as a story
for the purposes of height measurement if its height is one-half (1/2) or more
above grade.
   BOARDING HOUSE: A building with not more than five (5) guestrooms, where,
for compensation, meals are provided for at least five (5) but not more than
fifteen (15) persons.
   BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the
housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
      Building Height:
         A.   The vertical distance measured from the average natural grade of
a building pad or approved finished grade of a building lot (whichever is
applicable), to the highest point of the building or structure, including
architectural features, chimneys, and rooftop mounted equipment.
         Exception: Where there is a difference in finish grade on a lot or
parcel, the building height shall be measured from the "average grade" height
as measured between the "upper grade" and the "lower grade" with the following
restrictions:
            1.   The maximum variation allowed between "upper grade" and "lower
grade" is ten feet (10').
            2.   The highest point on a building or structure, as defined in
the section, shall not exceed the maximum allowed height as measured from the
"average grade."
         B.   In the event a building pad is substantially higher than the
street grade (greater than 3' measured from top back of curb) the approved
building pad elevation shall be established by the natural topography and
approved by the Hillside Review Board prior to building permit issuance. In no
case shall a building pad be artificially elevated to accomplish a favorable
viewshed.
      Main Building: The principal building or one of the principal buildings
upon a lot, or the building of one of the principal uses upon a lot.
      Public Building: A building owned and operated or owned and intended to
be operated by a public agency of the United States of America, of the state of
Utah, or any of its subdivisions.
   CARPORT: A private garage not completely enclosed by walls or doors. For the
purposes of this title, a carport shall be subject to all of the regulations
prescribed for a private garage.
   CHICKEN RUN: A fenced area, typically attached to a chicken coop where
chickens can exercise, forage, and engage in natural behaviors.
   CHILD NURSERY: An establishment for the care and/or instruction, whether or
not for compensation, of six (6) or more children other than members of the
family residing on the premises.
   CONDITIONAL USE: A use of land for which specific conditions or approval are
required by the planning commission, prior to authorizing a permit therefor.
   CONDOMINIUM OR TOWNHOUSE PROJECT: A development where there is ownership of
a single unit in a multiple-family development, together with an undivided
interest in the common area, and facilities, and such project meets all
requirements of the condominium ownership act of the state of Utah and
requirements of the city of Santa Clara.
   COOPS: See definition of Barns, Coops, Stables.
   CORRAL OR PEN: A space fenced and used for the confinement of animals. They
must meet the setback requirements of the zone in which they are located. They
are not considered to be an accessory use (see definition of Barns, Coops,
Stables).
   DAIRY: A commercial establishment for the manufacture and/or processing of
dairy products.
   A.   Not currently zoned anywhere in Santa Clara City.
   DISTRICT: A portion of the city shown on a map attached to the ordinance
codified herein and given a district or zoning name.
   DOMESTIC ANIMALS: Animals historically found on farms in Washington County.
Domestic animals shall not include animals commonly found in zoos and animal
preserves, and which animals are not historically endemic to the Washington
County areas. Exception: Llamas may be considered as domestic animals, subject
to planning commission approval, and limited to the number limitations of the
zone in which they are located.
   DWELLING: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed and used for
residential purposes and complies with the provisions of the international
building code, except for the following: hotels, motels, boarding houses, bed
and breakfast homes, travel trailers, recreation vehicles, or motor homes are
not considered dwellings.
Multiple-Family Dwelling: A dwelling arranged or designed to be occupied by
more than two (2) families.
Single-Family Dwelling: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by one
family, the structure having only one dwelling unit.
Two-Family Dwelling: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by two (2)
families, the structure having two (2) dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling, designed for, or occupied
by, one family for living or sleeping purposes, and having kitchen facilities
for the use of not more than one family.
   EXOTIC ANIMALS: Animals not historically found on farms in the Washington
County area. Exotic animals shall include animals commonly found in zoos and
animal preserves, and which animals are not historically endemic to the
Washington County area. For the purpose of determining the types of animals
that may be allowed to be maintained in the various zones of the city of Santa
Clara, the term "exotic animals" shall not include traditional household pets,
including dogs, small domestic house cats, small caged birds, gerbils, guinea
pigs, and similar traditional household pets, but not including biting or
venomous snakes.
   FAMILY: A. An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit in a
dwelling unit; or
   B.   A group of not more than four (4) persons, who need not be related by
blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in
dwelling unit. Persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption may not have
more than three (3) additional persons living with them as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
   FENCE, SOLID: A fence of a material that is sight obscuring, and made of a
solid material such as wood, vinyl, or masonry, but not including a chainlink
fence with slats inserted into the chainlinks. Any questionable material shall
be reviewed by the planning commission for determination.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: A depository institution such as a bank, brokerage
firm, credit union, mortgage lender, or savings and loan. A Non-Depository
Institution (see definition) is not included.
   GRADE: Compare to sign height or building elevation.
   A.   For buildings adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk
at the center of that wall adjoining the street;
   B.   For buildings adjoining more than one street, the average of the
elevations of the sidewalks at the centers of all walls adjoining the street;
   C.   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of
the ground (finished surface) adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
All walls approximately parallel to and not more than five feet (5') from a
street line are to be considered as adjoining a street.
   HANDICAPPED PERSON: A person who has a severe chronic disability
attributable to a mental or physical impairment or to a combination of mental
and physical impairments, which results in a substantial functional limitation
in three (3) or more of the following areas of major life activity: self-care,
receptive and expressive language, learning, mobility, self-direction, capacity
for independent living, or economic self-sufficiency; and who requires a
combination or sequence of special interdisciplinary or generic care,
treatment, or other services that are individually planned and coordinated to
allow the person to function in, and contribute to, a residential neighborhood.
   HOME OCCUPATION: Any use conducted and carried out by persons residing in
the dwelling unit, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for dwelling purposes. It shall not cause a change in the character of
the dwelling unit. The home occupation shall not change the character of any
accessory buildings and shall not use any yard space outside of the main
dwelling or accessory buildings. A home occupation shall have no outdoor
advertising, except as permitted by this code, and will not generate such
traffic as to become a public nuisance to the neighborhood.
A home occupation may be granted with a conditional use permit from the
planning commission, but may be rescinded for cause if such use becomes a
nuisance to the neighborhood.
   HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house, and kept
for personal use, but not for commercial purposes. Household pets do not
include, "exotic animals", or "domestic animals" as defined herein, unless
specifically approved by the planning commission.
   JUNK: Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber, debris, waste of junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts
thereof, iron, steel, and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
   JUNKYARD: Any place, establishment, or business maintained, used, or
operated for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for the maintenance,
or operation of an automobile graveyard, and the term includes garbage and
sanitary fills.
   KENNEL: Any premises where four (4) or more dogs older than four (4) months
are kept.
   A.   Not currently zoned anywhere in Santa Clara City.
   LIVESTOCK: A. Large animals: May include horses, and cattle, or other
animals judged by the planning commission to be compatible with this category
of animal, but not including pigs, or "exotic animals" as defined in this
section.
   B.   Medium animals: Three (3) medium animals shall equal one large animal,
and shall include goats, sheep or ponies which do not exceed thirty six inches
(36") in height, measured from the withers, or other animals judged by the
planning commission to be compatible with this category of livestock, but not
including exotic animals or pigs.
   C.   Small animals: Include poultry, rabbits, or other small animals judged
by the planning commission to be compatible with this category of animal. Small
animals do not include exotic animals or pigs.
   LIVESTOCK FEED YARD: A commercial operation on a parcel of land where
livestock are kept in corrals, or pens, for extended periods of time, at a
density which permits little movement, and where all feed is provided for the
purpose of fattening or maintaining the condition of the livestock prior to
their shipment to a stockyard for sale, etc.
   A.   Feed yards are not currently zoned anywhere in Santa Clara City.
   LIVESTOCK PASTURE: A fenced land area devoted to the production of a grass
product in which livestock may be kept in a loosely controlled environment as
opposed to being kept in a barn, corral, or stable. No setback is required from
any property line.
   LOT: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building, or
group of buildings (main and accessory), together with such yards, open spaces,
lot width and lot area, as are required by this title, and having frontage upon
a dedicated and improved city street.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot having frontage on two (2) or more improved and dedicated
city streets.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit constructed on
or after June 15, 1976, according to the federal home construction and safety
standards act of 1974 (HUD code), in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width, or forty (40) body
feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is four hundred (400) or more
square feet in size, and which is built upon a permanent foundation when
connected to required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems.
   NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas, varying in width, along streams, creeks,
springs, gullies, or washes, which are natural drainage channels, as determined
by the city, and in which areas no buildings shall be constructed.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure, or a portion
thereof, lawfully existing at the time the ordinance codified herein became
effective, which does not conform to all regulations herein prescribed for the
zone in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the
time the ordinance codified herein became effective, and which does not conform
to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. Also including land
which was used prior to the time the ordinance codified herein became
effective, and which use does not conform with the use regulations of the zone
in which it is now located. Any nonconforming use that is abandoned or not used
for a period exceeding one year may no longer be used or recognized as a
nonconforming use, and must be made to comply with the requirements of the zone
in which such use is, or was located.
   NON-DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION: A financial business, other than a depository
institution, that is registered by the state of Utah pursuant to the Check
Cashing Registration Act, the Title Lending Registration Act, or any successor
statutes. Non-depository institutions include specifically:
      A.   Check cashing business. A person or business that for compensation
engages, in whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants,
drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose.
“Check cashing business” excludes (1) a state or federally charted bank,
savings association, credit union, industrial loan company or other depository
institution, and (2) a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of
selling goods (including consumables) to retail buyers that also cashes checks
for or issues money orders to its customers, provided that such services are
clearly incidental to its main purpose or business and that the fees charged
for such services do not exceed 1% of the amount of the check or money order or
otherwise de minimus.
      B.   Deferred deposit lender. A person or business that conducts
transactions where a customer presents to a check casher a check written on the
customer’s account or provides written or electronic authorization to a check
casher to effect a debit to the customer’s account, whereupon the check casher
(1) advances the customer an amount of money that is equal to the face value of
the check or debit, less any fee or interest charged for the transaction, and
(2) agrees to defer processing the check or debit until a specific future date.
      C.   Payday loan business. An establishment providing short-term loans to
individuals in exchange for personal checks or assignment of wages as
collateral.
      D.   Title loan business. An establishment providing short-term loans to
individuals in exchange for the title of a motor vehicle, mobile home or
motorboat as collateral.
   NURSING HOME: An institution providing residence and care for the aged or
infirm.
   PARKING LOT: A surfaced area other than a street used for the parking of
vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE: The space within a building or parking lot for the parking of
one motorized vehicle.
   PENS: See definition of Corral Or Pen.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development, residential or commercial, in which the
regulations of the zone in which the use is situated are modified to allow
flexibility and initiative in site and building design and location, in
accordance with an approved plan.
   SETBACK: The required portion of a yard over which no portion of a building
or structure shall encroach unless otherwise permitted in this title. Setback
distance shall be measured from the property line of each yard.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS: Established regulations concerning lot areas,
yard setbacks, building height, lot coverage, open green space, and any other
special regulations deemed necessary to accomplish the purpose of this title.
   STABLES: See definition of Barns, Coops, Stables.
   STORY: The space within a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the ceiling of the next floor above.
   STORY, HALF: A story with at least two (2) of its opposite sides situated in
a sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the
floor immediately below it.
   STREET: A public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to
abutting property and is dedicated and improved to city standards.
   STREET, PRIVATE: A right of way, or easement in private ownership, at least
twenty five feet (25') wide, not dedicated or accepted as a public street,
which affords the principal means of access to one or more sites.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in supporting members of a building, such
as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the
ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground.
   USE, ACCESSORY: A subordinate use customarily incidental to and located upon
the same lot occupied by a main use.
   WIDTH OF LOT: The distance between the side lot lines at the distance back
from the front lot line required for the front yard setback.
   YARD, FRONT: A space on the same lot with a building between the front line
of the building and the front lot line, and extending across the full width of
the lot.
   YARD, REAR: A space on the same lot with a building between the rear line of
the building and the rear line of the lot and extending across the full width
of the lot.
   YARD, SIDE: A space on the same lot with a building between the side line of
the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard
line to the rear yard line.
   ZONE: The area or district within which the regulations of this title are
uniform.
(Ord. 2025-09 § 1: Ord. 2025-07: Ord. 2023-17 § 1: Ord. 2009-12 § 1: Ord. 2008-
10 § 1: Ord. 2007-01 § 2: Ord. 2004-20 § 1: Ord. 99-16 § 2: Ord. 97-06 ch. 21)
CHAPTER 17.10
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
17.10.010: Purpose And Intent
17.10.020: Applicability
17.10.030: Enforcing Officer
17.10.040: General Provisions
17.10.050: Disposal Of Violations
17.10.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the enforcement of this title
which shall include penalties for criminal and civil violations. (Ord. 2002-24
§ 2)
17.10.020: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions established herein shall apply to all lands within the civil
jurisdiction of Santa Clara City, Utah. Where there is conflict between the
terms and/or requirements contained in this section and any other section
contained in this chapter, as amended, or any other ordinance, code, regulation
of Santa Clara City, Utah, the more strict shall apply. (Ord. 2002-24 § 2)
17.10.030: ENFORCING OFFICER:
The building official shall have the authority and the duty to ensure that all
buildings and structures and use of all land complies with the provisions of
this title. (Ord. 2002-24 § 2)
17.10.040: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Any building or structure erected contrary to any of the provisions of
this chapter and any use of any building or land which is conducted, operated
or maintained contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter or the
provisions of any approval granted by the city under this chapter shall be a
violation of this chapter and the same declared to be unlawful.
   B.   Any person, whether owner, lessee, principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or permits any
such violation, or fails to comply with any of the requirements hereof, or who
erects any building or structure or uses any building, structure or land in
violation of the provisions of this chapter or provisions of any approval
granted by the city under this chapter shall be subject to the enforcement
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   In addition to the remedies provided in this chapter, the building
official may initiate injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other appropriate
action to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove any unlawful building, structure or
use.
   D.   If the person responsible for the alleged violation denies that a
violation exists, he may appeal the decision of the building official pursuant
to the provisions of chapter 17.16, "Land Use Authority", of this title.
   E.   Whenever a violation occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person
may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the cause and basis
thereof shall be filed with the building official. The building official shall
record such complaint, investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this
chapter. (Ord. 2006-02: Ord. 2002-24 § 2)
17.10.050: DISPOSAL OF VIOLATIONS:
If the building official concludes there exists an objectionable condition in
violation of this title, than he or she shall:
   A.   Ascertain the names of the owners and occupants and descriptions of the
premises where such objects and conditions exist;
   B.   Serve notice in writing upon the owner and occupant of the premises,
either personally or by mailing notice, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner
and occupant at their last known post office addresses as disclosed by the
records of the county assessor or as otherwise ascertained, requiring such
owner or occupant, or both, as the case may be, to eradicate or destroy and
remove the same within such time as the inspector may designate, provided that
any person notified pursuant to this subsection shall be given not more than
thirty (30) days, as determined by the inspector following the date of service
of such notice, to correct the objectionable condition or make an appeal with
the city's land use authority. The notice shall:
      1.   Contain a specific statement of the nature of the violation and
generally describe the premises on which the violation exists.
      2.   Inform the owner, occupant or other person that in the event he or
she disagrees with the determination of the inspector and does not comply with
the provisions of the notice or that he or she objects to the factual or legal
basis for the notice, he or she may appeal the administrative finding to the
land use authority per the requirements found in
chapter 17.16, "Land Use Authority", of this title.
      3.   Inform the person that in the event he or she lulls or neglects to
correct the objectionable condition, the building official will issue a
citation per section
17.04.140 of this title and
chapter 1.16 of this code.
   C.   In the event the owner or occupant makes such request for an appeal or
to the expiration of the time allowed to mitigate the noted infraction on the
notice served, the appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from as noted in section
17.16.040 of this title. (Ord. 2006-02: Ord. 2002-24 § 2)
CHAPTER 17.12
PLANNING COMMISSION 1
SECTION:
17.12.010: Creation Of Planning Commission; Terms; Numbers
17.12.020: Terms Of Office
17.12.030: Removal and Vacancy
17.12.040: Compensation
17.12.050: Officers
17.12.060: Rules And Procedures
17.12.070: Quorum And Vote
17.12.080: Employees; Expenditures
17.12.090: Powers And Duties
17.12.100: Entrance Upon Land
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 17.16 of this title.
17.12.010: CREATION OF PLANNING COMMISSION; TERMS; NUMBERS:
The Santa Clara Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members each to
be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. It
is not the intent of this chapter that all the members come from the same field
of expertise but shall reflect a variety of backgrounds. The members shall
reside in Santa Clara City. (Ord. 2007-16 § 1: Ord. 2004-21 § 1: Ord. 2000-08 §
1: Ord. 99-29 § 1: Ord. 98-26 § 2: Ord. 97-06 § 2-1: Ord. 2022-06)
17.12.020: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The terms of office for the Planning Commission shall be for five (5) years and
members shall not serve more than two (2) consecutive five (5) year terms. The
terms of the members shall be staggered so that no more than two (2) terms
shall expire at the same time. (Ord. 2009-13 § 1: Ord. 2022-06)
17.12.030: REMOVAL AND VACANCY:
Any member of the Planning Commission may be removed from office by the Mayor
for any reason with the advice and consent of City Council. The City Council
shall also have the right to remove any member of the Planning Commission for a
failure to attend at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the Planning
Commission’s scheduled meetings during any twelve (12) month period. Vacancies
of appointed members for purposes other than the expiration of a regular term
shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by appointment of the
mayor with the consent of the City Council. (Ord. 2007-16 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 2-
3: Ord. 2022-06)
17.12.040: COMPENSATION:
The members of the Planning Commission shall serve with compensation in an
amount set by the City Council for meetings attended. Additionally, the City
Council will allow for reimbursement of the members for actual expenses
incurred, upon presentation of proper receipts and vouchers. (Ord. 2007-16 § 1:
Ord. 97-06 § 2-4: Ord. 2022-06)
17.12.050: OFFICERS:
The Planning Commission shall elect a chair and vice-chair from among its
members yearly. The election of the chair and vice-chair will occur during the
first regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting each year. (Ord. 2007-16
§ 1: Ord. 2004-21 § 1: Ord. 2000-08 § 1: Ord. 99-29 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 2-5: Ord.
2022-06)
17.12.060: RULES AND PROCEDURES:
The Planning Commission may adopt such rules and procedures as it may deem
necessary for the proper conduct of its business. A record shall be kept of its
proceedings, such record shall be open to inspection by the public during
regular office hours. (Ord. 2007-16 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 2-6: Ord. 2022-06)
17.12.070: QUORUM AND VOTE:
A quorum shall consist of four (4) members of the Planning Commission,
including the chair or vice-chair. If the chair or vice-chair is not present, a
temporary chair shall serve. No evidence shall be presented unless a quorum is
present. The concurring vote of a majority of those present shall be required
to carry and pass any motion. All members of the Planning Commission shall vote
on all matters before the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2007-16 § 1: Ord. 2004-21
§ 1: Ord. 2000-08 § 1: Ord. 99-29 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 2-7: Ord. 2022-06)
17.12.080: EMPLOYEES; EXPENDITURES:
The Planning Commission may, upon approval of the City Council, employ staff,
including consultants, and a secretary, and shall pay such expenses, as may be
reasonable and necessary for the carrying out the duties defined in this title,
that such expenditures may not exceed the amount appropriated for the operation
of the Commission by the City Council. (Ord. 2007-16 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 2-8:
Ord. 2022-06)
17.12.090: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The Planning Commission shall act as the land use authority on the
following land use applications and issues, except where an approval of the
Santa Clara City Council is required by ordinance or state law:
      1.   Conditional Use Permits and such conditions as may be imposed on
their approval under applicable law, except those specifically delegated to
planning staff for approval.
      2.   Variances of any kind, except those specifically delegated to
planning staff approval.
      3.   Interpretation of zoning maps and consideration of disputed
questions of lot lines, district boundary lines, and similar questions as they
arise in the administration of the land use ordinances, unless the same
requires an action that requires final approval of the City Council.
      4.   Issues or applications otherwise delegated to the planning staff,
when the planning staff determines that a public hearing should be held to
ensure that citizens can comment on the application.
      5.   Issues delegated to the Planning Commission by the City Council
which do not otherwise require final approval of the City Council.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall act as a reviewing and recommending body
to the Santa Clara City Council on the following land use applications and
issues:
      1.   General Plan adoption or General Plan Amendments.
      2.   Adoption of land use regulations or amendments thereto (except for
temporary land use regulations).
      3.   Zoning Map Amendments, i.e., amending the zoning designation of a
parcel or parcels under applicable land use regulations, including adopting a
project plan for a parcel or parcels previously designated for planned
development.
      4.   Subdivision Ordinance Amendments.
      5.   Subdivision reviews for new subdivisions, phases of subdivisions,
preliminary and final plat approval, and amendments to existing subdivisions.
      6.   Determination regarding the existence, expansion, or modification of
nonconforming uses.
      7.   Any other land use applications or issues which the Santa Clara City
Council delegates to the Planning Commission for review, preparation,
recommendation, or to receive public input at a public hearing, before a final
decision is made by the City Council.
   C.   The Planning Commission is further empowered to hold all public
hearings which may be required for any land use application under applicable
local or state law, where such hearing is not required to be held by the City
Council.
   D.   Except with respect to the land use applications and issues listed in
subsection A of this section, the Planning Commission is a recommending body to
the City Council. Final approval of all land use applications and issues except
as listed in subsection A or otherwise delegated by ordinance to the planning
staff is a City Council responsibility, and City Council approval is required
before any such action becomes of record. (Ord. 2007-16 § 1: Ord. 2004-21 § 1:
Ord. 97-06 § 2-9: Ord. 2022-06)
17.12.100: ENTRANCE UPON LAND:
The Planning Commission or its authorized agents may enter upon any land at
reasonable times to make examinations and surveys which are reasonably required
to fulfil its duties hereunder. (Ord. 2007-16 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 2-10: Ord.
2022-06)
CHAPTER 17.16
LAND USE AUTHORITY 1
SECTION:
17.16.010: Purpose
17.16.020: Land Use Authority; Delegation of Duties
17.16.030: Public Hearings
17.16.040: Variances
17.16.050: Appealing A Land Use Authority’‘s Decision
17.16.060: Appeals From Land Use Decisions
17.16.070: Administrative Hearing Officer
17.16.080: Unauthorized Communications Prohibited With Appeal Authority
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 17.12 of this title.
17.16.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish by ordinance the Land Use Authority
for decisions applying the land use ordinances, establish the Appeal Authority
to hear and decide requests for variances from the terms of the land use
ordinance, and to establish the Appeal Authority to hear and decide appeals
from the decisions applying the land use ordinance. (Ord. 2006-02)
17.16.020: LAND USE AUTHORITY; DELEGATION OF DUTIES:
   A.   The planning staff shall be the Land Use Authority to hear and act on
the following land use applications:
      1.   Conditional use permits for simple home occupations, and accessory
dwelling units in the RA, R-1-10 and R-1-10/RA Zones.
      2.   Fences meeting all requirements of the land use ordinance.
      3.   Signs meeting all requirements of the land use ordinance.
      4.   Child nurseries with six (6) or less children.
      5.   Review and approval of minor variances:
         a.   Building setbacks and distances from lot lines or other buildings
of one (1) foot or less.
         b.   Building heights.
         c.   Fence adjustments.
         d.   Other similar requests.
      6.   Lot line adjustments between two (2) property owners or one owner on
two (2) lots where no hearings are required.
      7.   Those uses specifically delegated to the planning staff by the City
Council.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall be the Land Use Authority to hear and act
on the land use applications set forth in section 17.12.090 and as delegated to
the Planning Commission by the City Council. (Ord. 2022-09: Ord. 2018-04: Ord.
2006-02)
17.16.030: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
   A.   Planning Staff: The planning staff shall make its decisions at regular
staff meetings. No public hearing or public meeting will be held outside of
regular staff meetings.
   B.   Planning Commission: All public hearings related to land use decisions
shall be held by the Planning Commission. Notice for the public hearing must
meet the requirements of Utah Code Annotated, 10-9a-205. Additional public
meetings may be held as necessary to properly review and make decisions
regarding a land use application or decisions. (Ord. 2022-09: Ord. 2006-02)
17.16.040: VARIANCES:
Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the requirements of
the land use ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that he owns, leases,
or in which he holds some other beneficial interest may apply to the planning
staff or the Planning Commission, as designated in section
17.16.020 of this chapter, for a variance from the terms of the ordinance. The
designated Land Use Authority may grant a variance if the requirements of Utah
Code Annotated 10-9a-702 have been met. (Ord. 2022-09: Ord. 2006-02)
17.16.050: APPEALING A LAND USE AUTHORITY'S DECISION:
Any person adversely affected by the Land Use Authority’‘s decision in
administering or interpreting a land use ordinance may appeal that decision.
The appropriate appeal authority, according to the type of appeal, is set forth
in this chapter and delineates this authority between legislative and
administrative proceedings.
   A.   Legislative Appeal Authority: Appeals from land use decisions that are
identified as legislative matters and subject to legislative proceedings are
defined herein and shall only be appealed to the District Court pursuant to
Utah Code section 10-9a-801. The following types of applications are
legislative matters, subject to legislative proceedings:
      1.   General Plan amendment applications;
      2.   A land use ordinance amendment application, including zoning
ordinances and subdivision ordinances amendment applications;
      3.   Zoning map amendment applications (rezones), including site-specific
rezones;
      4.   An official map amendment application;
      5.   Temporary land use regulations;
      6.   Combined land use map and zoning map amendments; and
      7.   All other land use decisions or adoptions of or amendments to the
land use ordinances by the City Council which are legislative in nature.
   B.   Administrative Appeal Authority: Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-701, the City has appointed an Administrative Hearing Officer as
the City’‘s Appeal Authority to hear appeals from decisions of the Land Use
Authority on the following matters, which are recognized as being
administrative in nature:
      1.   Variances from any land use decision or regulation;
      2.   Conditional Use Permits;
      3.   Building permits or applications;
      4.   Determinations regarding nonconforming uses and noncomplying
structures;
      5.   Determinations of violations of the storm water ordinances and any
civil fines or costs imposed;
      6.   Fees charged in accordance with Utah Code section 10-9a-510;
      7.   Decisions on all other applications for any necessary approval,
permit, or license required by the provisions of this title and any other land
use ordinances, not identified to be a legislative proceeding, as identified by
this chapter; and,
      8.   Decisions on any other land use issues which are specifically
delegated to another land use authority by the City Council. (Ord. 2022-09)
17.16.060: APPEALS FROM ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE DECISIONS:
An administrative land use decision identified in section
17.16.050 B. may be appealed only in accordance with this section 17.16.060.
Anyone appealing any such decision shall be deemed not to have exhausted his or
her administrative appeals until the decision has been appealed and reviewed
pursuant to this section.
   A.   Procedure, Time Limit: A notice of appeal of a request for variance or
other land use decision must be commenced within ten (10) calendar days of the
adverse order, requirement, decision or determination by filing a written
notice of appeal with the Santa Clara Planning Manager at the Santa Clara City
Building Department Office. If the tenth day falls on a weekend or holiday, it
will be accepted on the next business day. The notice must indicate the
decision appealed from, the grounds upon which the appeal is based, and
identify the parties making the appeal. Any notice of appeal must include a
list containing the names and addresses of adjoining property owners. Adjoining
property owners include all owners of property within a five-hundred-foot
(500') radius of the property affected by the appeal or request for variance as
shown on the tax rolls of Washington County. The Santa Clara Planning Manager
shall notify the appropriate Appeal Authority of the notice of appeal within
seven (7) working days.
   B.   Fee: The filing of an appeal shall be accompanied by a fee established
by the City Council, which amount shall be used to defray the cost of
administering the appeal, including, but not limited to, costs of mailing and
publishing notice.
   C.   Hearing To Be Scheduled; Notice: When a notice of appeal is filed, the
Appeal Authority of the adverse order, requirement, decision or determination
shall schedule a meeting for a hearing within fifteen (15) working days, unless
such time is extended for good cause or stipulation of the parties. Notice of
the time, place, and subject matter of the meeting shall be given to the person
making the appeal, the Land Use Authority or official who issued the adverse
order, requirement, decision or determination, and all parties in interest,
including adjoining property owners within a five-hundred-foot (500') radius of
the property affected by the request for variance or appeal. The Appeal
Authority may require such written briefs or memorandum of the parties, as the
Appeal Authority deems advisable. At the hearing, the appellant shall appear in
person or by agent or attorney.
   D.   Stay Of Proceedings: The filing of a notice of appeal stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the City
official, from whom the appeal is taken, after receiving notice of appeal,
certifies in writing with specificity to the Appeal Authority the reasons why a
stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, the Appeal
Authority may lift the stay, upon notice to the parties, with the opportunity
to respond.
   E.   Burden Of Proof: At all times, the appellant has the burden of proving
that the Land Use Authority's decision was in error.
   F.   Standard Of Review: The Appeal Authority shall review the matter de
novo, without deference to the land use authority's determination of factual
matters. The Appeal Authority shall determine the correctness of a decision of
the Land Use Authority in its interpretation and application of a land use
ordinance. Only those decisions in which a Land Use Authority has applied a
land use ordinance to a particular application, person, or parcel may be
appealed to the Appeal Authority.
   G.   Final Decision: The Appeal Authority will issue a decision in writing
within fifteen (15) working days of the hearing, which constitutes a final
decision under Utah Code Annotated 10-9a-801(1) and a final action under Utah
Code Annotated subsection 10-9a-801(4).
   H.   Judicial Review Of Appeal Authority's Decision: No land use decision
may be appealed directly to the district court. Before petitioning for district
court review, a person must exhaust all remedies by appealing to the Appeal
Authority in accordance with this section and receive a final decision issued
by the appeal authority. The City, the applicant, and any person adversely
affected by a final decision of the Appeal Authority may petition the District
Court for review of the decision as permitted by law. Such a petition is barred
unless filed within thirty (30) days after the Appeal Authority's decision is
final.
   I.   Action Of Variance Withdrawal, No Refund: Unless otherwise specified by
the Appeal Authority, any order or decision of the Appeal Authority authorizing
a variance shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit
within one year from the date of the decision. Any applicant may voluntarily
withdraw the appeal or variance request at any time prior to a decision of the
Appeal Authority. No person shall be entitled to a refund of costs for any
reason whatsoever. (Ord. 2022-09)
17.16.070: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER:
   A.    Appointment: The appeal of an administrative decision shall be
conducted by an Administrative Hearing Officer, who must be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The administrative
hearing officer shall be an independent contractor. The Administrative Hearing
Officer will be selected without respect to political affiliation, race, age,
gender, or religion. The city may appoint multiple Administrative Hearing
Officer's as needed.
   B.   Qualifications: The Administrative Hearing Officer must be a current or
former professional in law, land use, or public administration and shall have
the knowledge, training, and experience necessary to conduct administrative
hearings regarding variances and appeals, as determined by the Mayor and City
Council. The Administrative Hearing Officer cannot be a member of the City
Council, a member of the Planning Commission, City staff, or any other elected
or appointed City official.
   C.   Conflict of Interest: An administrative hearing officer must not
participate in any appeal where the administrative hearing officer has a
conflict of interest.
   D.   Compensation: The Administrative Hearing Officer is an appointed
official. Terms for compensation and reimbursement will be set by written
contract with the Administrative Hearing Officer. To be valid, the written
contract required by this section must be approved and adopted by the City
Council. (Ord. 2022-09)
17.16.080: UNAUTHORIZED COMMUNICATIONS PROHIBITED WITH APPEAL AUTHORITY:
It is a class C misdemeanor for any individual, including the party bringing an
appeal or requesting a variance, to discuss substantive matters pertaining to a
pending appeal or variance with the Administrative Hearing Officer in an effort
to influence his or her decision on the matter, other than as part of an appeal
hearing that is set for the purpose of considering the appeal or variance. It
is also a class C misdemeanor for the Administrative Hearing Officer to discuss
with an appellant or any other individual any substantive matters pertaining to
a pending appeal or variance, other than as part of an appeal hearing that is
set for the purpose of considering the appeal or variance. It is not a
violation of this section to speak with the Appeal Authority about general or
procedural matters not related to the substance of the appeal, which include
but are not limited to the date, time, or place of the hearing. (Ord. 2022-09)
CHAPTER 17.18
AMENDMENTS TO LAND USE ORDINANCE AND ZONING MAP
SECTION:
17.18.010: Purpose And Intent
17.18.020: Applicability
17.18.030: Initiation Of Amendment
17.18.040: Application Submittal Requirements
17.18.050: Review Of Application
17.18.060: Amendment To Application
17.18.070: Withdrawal Of Application
17.18.080: Public Notice And Public Hearings
17.18.090: Standards Of Review By Land Use Authority And City Council
17.18.100: General Plan Amendments
17.18.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide clear and consistent procedures and
requirements for amendments to the land use ordinance and the zoning map. (Ord.
2007-18 § 1; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 6-21-2023)
17.18.020: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter apply to all amendments to the land use
ordinance and zoning map of the city of Santa Clara, Utah, subsequent to the
date of adoption hereof. (Ord. 2007-18 § 1; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 6-21-2023)
17.18.030: INITIATION OF AMENDMENT:
Either a zoning map or text amendment may be proposed by motion of the city
council or land use authority. In the case of a zoning map amendment an
application may be filed by a person who owns or has a legal interest in
property or is a duly authorized agent of the owner. In all events, the
application must exhibit the consent of those with a legal ownership interest
in the property under consideration. In the case of a land use ordinance
amendment, a landowner may file a petition for a motion of the city council to
amend the ordinance text to be acted upon by the city council. The council
shall either adopt such motion, initiating the text amendment requested, or
deny such petition, in which event the request shall not proceed to a hearing
before the land use authority. (Ord. 2007-18 § 1; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 6-21-2023)
17.18.040: APPLICATION SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
Applications for amendments to the land use ordinance or zoning map must
provide the following information:
   A.   Ordinance Amendments:
      1.   Amendments to the land use ordinance must provide a completed
application for an ordinance amendment. The application requests that the
application be able to satisfactorily answer the following questions:
         a.   How has/have the current land use ordinance section(s) that is/
are the subject of this application become outdated or no longer in the best
interest of Santa Clara City?
         b.   How does the proposed land use ordinance change better serve
Santa Clara City in promoting and protecting the health, safety, morals,
convenience, order, prosperity, or general welfare of the city and its
citizens?
         c.   How does the proposed ordinance change fit with the goals,
objectives, and policies of Santa Clara City's general plan?
      2.   In addition, the following information must be provided along with
the completed application:
         a.   Letter Of Intent: A letter of intent giving the details of the
proposed ordinance change which should include, at a minimum, the following
information:
            (1)   The purpose of the proposed ordinance change.
            (2)   How the ordinance change may affect other ordinance sections.
         b.   Impact Of Land Use Ordinance Change Description: A narrative
explaining the benefit to the city anticipated from the ordinance change,
including expected impact on public services, as well as the amount of city
land that is expected to be affected by the proposed change.
         c.   Filing Fee: Filing fee as established by city resolution.
         d.   Signature: The application must be signed by the applicant and
duly notarized. It shall be submitted in accordance with a schedule as provided
in the application packet.
   B.   Map Amendments:
      1.   Amendments to the zoning map must include a completed application to
amend the zoning map, as adopted and amended from time to time by the city
council. The application must be completed and accompanied by the required
items.
      2.   The application must also include the additional requirements
required by the designations of commercial, planned development districts, and
the historic district/mixed use zone.
      3.   Adherence to the application submittal deadlines as established by
resolution of the city council and found on the application to amend the zoning
map.
      4.   Filing fee payable to Santa Clara City according to the fee schedule
established by the city council.
      5.   The application must be signed by the applicant(s) and/or property
owners and duly notarized.
(Ord. 2007-18 § 1; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 6-21-2023)
17.18.050: REVIEW OF APPLICATION:
An application for a zoning map amendment, containing information specified in
section
17.18.060 of this chapter shall be filed and reviewed pursuant to the
following:
   A.   Preapplication Conference: Prior to filing an application, the
applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator, or designee, and discuss
his/her intentions regarding a given application and asking questions regarding
the procedure or substantive requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Review Of Application Completeness: No application shall be accepted
and reviewed unless determined by the zoning administrator, or designee, to be
complete. A complete application is one which meets such minimum submission
requirements as established by resolution of the city council.
   C.   Acceptance Of Application: The zoning administrator shall either accept
the application if it is complete, or forward to the applicant a notice of the
incompleteness specifying those areas of additional information necessary for
review.
   D.   Application Processing: Upon acceptance of the application, it shall be
reviewed by the land use authority staff, and then comments provided to the
applicant prior to consideration by the land use authority. The zoning
administrator shall schedule a public hearing before the land use authority as
outlined in section
17.18.080 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-18 § 1; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 6-21-2023)
17.18.060: AMENDMENT TO APPLICATION:
An application may be amended by the submittal of additional information or
proposed changes, provided however, that no amendments shall be made to the
application after the land use authority has formulated its recommendation. If
the additional information or the proposed changes to the application are
submitted to conform with recommendations made by the city staff, then it shall
not be deemed an amendment and the application shall continue its original
timeline. However, if the additional information or proposed changes to the
application are submitted at the applicant's discretion, then the zoning
administrator shall review the information and render a finding as to whether
the amendment requires the readvertising of the public notice, or additional
review time by the city staff. If the zoning administrator determines
readvertising or additional review time is needed the application shall be
delayed until the next regularly scheduled land use authority meeting, and the
applicant shall pay an additional zone change application fee.
(Ord. 2007-18 § 1; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 6-21-2023)
17.18.070: WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATION:
An application may be withdrawn upon written request by the applicant at any
time. If an application is withdrawn after staff review, the application fee
shall not be refunded.
(Ord. 2007-18 § 1; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 6-21-2023)
17.18.080: PUBLIC NOTICE AND PUBLIC HEARINGS:
Public notice and hearings shall be conducted for all zoning decisions as
defined in Utah Code Annotated, title 10, chapter 9A, known as the municipal
land use, development, and management act (LUDMA).
   A.   Third Party Notice for Zoning Map Amendments: A third party notice in
the form of a public notice on the property with a sign of sufficient size,
durability, print quality, and location that is reasonably calculated to give
notice to passersby will be required for zoning map amendments (rezonings). The
sign will be placed by the city at least ten (10) days prior to the required
public hearing.
   B.   Public Hearings: At the public hearing, the land use authority will
hear comments from the staff, the applicant, and any citizen wishing to speak
regarding the change.
      Following the close of the public hearing, the land use authority may
take action on the request by doing any of the following:
      1.   Recommend approval of the zone change request to the city council.
      2.   Recommend denial of the zone change request to the city council.
      3.   Table the request for further information, scheduling a field trip,
or some other valid reason.
   C.   City Council Action: Following the land use authority action, the
request will be forwarded to the city council for their legislative action. The
city council may act upon the request, deny the request, or table the request
for further information, or send the request back to the land use authority for
further study or action.
   D.   Approval: Once approved by the city council, the zoning map will be
amended to reflect the zone change.
   E.   Denial: If a zone change request is denied by the city council, it may
not be reconsidered for a period of one year unless there is a significant
change, as determined by the zoning administrator, to the prior request making
it, in effect, a new application. A new filing fee must also be paid.
(Ord. 2013-01: Ord. 2007-18 § 1; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 6-21-2023)
17.18.090: STANDARDS OF REVIEW BY LAND USE AUTHORITY AND CITY COUNCIL:
In consideration of any land use ordinance or zoning map amendment, the land
use authority shall consider the following matters and the city council shall
give reasonable consideration to the following matters:
   A.   Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of
adjacent and nearby property.
   B.   Will the proposed use adversely affect the existing use or suitability
of adjacent or nearby property.
   C.   Are there substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be
used as currently zoned.
   D.   Will the proposed use cause an excessive or burdensome use of public
facilities or services, including, but not limited to, streets, schools, water
or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection.
   E.   Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the
general plan.
   F.   Will the use be consistent with the purpose and intent of the proposed
zoning district
   G.   Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not
anticipated by the general plan.
   H.   Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the
promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the
right to the unrestricted use of property.
(Ord. 2007-18 § 1; amd. Ord. 2023-13, 6-21-2023)
17.18.100: GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS:
The General Plan may be amended from time to time by the City Council. General
Plan Amendments will be considered on a quarterly basis by the city.
   A.   All proposed amendments shall be submitted first to the Planning
Commission for consideration at a public hearing. The City Council shall
consider the recommendation at a public meeting, and make a final determination
to adopt, modify, or deny the proposed amendment.
   B.   For a General Plan Amendment which includes a Rezoning of property and
a required Project Plan to a Planned Development, PD Zone, the General Plan
Amendment may include a condition that the Rezoning Application on which the
General Plan Amendment is based must be approved within a one (1) year
timeline, or the property reverts to the General Plan prior to approval of the
Amendment.
(Ord. 2023-13, 6-21-2023)
CHAPTER 17.20
SUPPLEMENTARY AND QUALIFYING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
17.20.010: Effect Of Chapter
17.20.020: Lots Of Record In Separate Ownership
17.20.030: Separately Owned Lots; Reduced Yards
17.20.040: Lot Standards
17.20.050: Every Dwelling To Be On A Lot; Exceptions
17.20.060: Yard Space For One Building Only
17.20.070: Sale Or Lease Of Required Space
17.20.080: Sale Of Lots Below Minimum Space Requirements
17.20.090: Yards To Be Unobstructed; Exceptions
17.20.100: Planned Developments
17.20.110: Double Frontage Lots
17.20.120: Area Of Accessory Buildings
17.20.130: Exceptions To Height Limitations
17.20.140: Minimum Height Of Main Dwelling
17.20.150: Accessory Buildings, Construction And Maximum Height
17.20.160: Utility Requirements
17.20.170: Streets, Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks And Storm Drainage
17.20.180: Dumping Or Disposal
17.20.190: Moving Of Dwellings
17.20.200: Public Right Of Way
17.20.210: Timesharing (Rep. by Ord. 2004-39 § 1)
17.20.220: Exception To Lot Standards
17.20.230: Residential Facilities For Persons With A Disability
17.20.240: Residential Facilities For The Elderly
17.20.250: Limitations On Establishment
17.20.260: Short Term Residential Properties
17.20.270: Garage Setbacks
17.20.280: Non-Depository Institutions
17.20.010: EFFECT OF CHAPTER:
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or supplement, as
the case may be, the zone regulations appearing elsewhere in this title. (Ord.
97-06 § 4-1)
17.20.020: LOTS OF RECORD IN SEPARATE OWNERSHIP:
Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter, a conditional use permit may
be issued by the city to allow for residential construction on a lot of less
than the frontage, or area required by the zone in which it is located, subject
to meeting the following conditions:
   A.   The lot or parcel shall have been identified on the records of the
Washington County recorder as being a separate lot or parcel having its own
legal description, tax number, and deed as of January 1, 1988, as shown on the
records in the Santa Clara City office.
   B.   A plot plan shall be submitted to the planning commission showing how
the home is proposed to be placed on the property and showing that it meets the
following requirements:
      1.   All front, side and rear setbacks required for the zone in which the
property is located;
      2.   That the size of the home meets the square footage requirement
(1,250 square feet) as required by this title.
   C.   A conditional use permit shall first be approved by the planning
commission.
   D.   A request for a conditional use permit shall be filed in the manner
required by chapter 17.40 of this title. All conditions of this chapter, as
applicable, shall be met. (Ord. 97-06 § 4-2)
17.20.030: SEPARATELY OWNED LOTS; REDUCED YARDS:
On any lot under separate ownership from adjacent lots as identified in
subsection
17.20.020A of this chapter, and such lot having a smaller width than required
for the zone in which it is located, the width of each of the side yards for a
dwelling may be reduced to a width which is not less than the same percentage
of the width of the lot as the required side yard would be of the required lot
width, provided that on interior lots in no case shall be less than five feet
(5'), and for corner lots, the side yard on the street side shall be in no case
less than fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 97-06 § 4-3)
17.20.040: LOT STANDARDS:
Except as provided above, every lot, existing or intended to be created, shall
have such area, width and depth as is required by this title for the district
in which such lot is located and shall have its required frontage upon a
dedicated or publicly approved street unless a private street or right of way
has been approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 97-06 § 4-4)
17.20.050: EVERY DWELLING TO BE ON A LOT; EXCEPTIONS:
Every dwelling structure shall be located and maintained on a separate lot
having no less than the minimum area, width, depth, and frontage required by
this title for the district in which the dwelling structure is located unless
otherwise recommended by the planning commission, and approved by the city
council. Group dwellings, cluster dwellings, condominiums, and townhouses, or
other multistructure dwelling complexes under single ownership and management,
which are permitted by this title may occupy one lot for each such
multistructured complex. (Ord. 97-06 § 4-5)
17.20.060: YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY:
No required yard or other open space around an existing building or which is
hereinafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this title, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space
for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an
adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon
a building is to be erected or established. (Ord. 97-06 § 4-6)
17.20.070: SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE:
No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking, or other
requirements of this title for lot or building, may be sold or leased away from
such lot or building. (Ord. 97-06 § 4-7)
17.20.080: SALE OF LOTS BELOW MINIMUM SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area requirements
for the district in which it is located may be cut off from a larger parcel of
land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of building or development.
(Ord. 97-06 § 4-8)
17.20.090: YARDS TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Porticoes extending from the dwelling over the main doorway and over a
circular drive-through driveway, may be allowed to project to within fifteen
feet (15') of the front or street side property line. Porticoes shall remain
fully open on three (3) sides and not more than thirty feet (30') in width.
   B.   Awnings attached to and extending from the front of the dwelling may be
allowed to project to within fifteen feet (15') of the front property line,
subject to compliance with all of the following conditions:
      1.   The awning shall remain fully open on three (3) sides.
      2.   The materials and appearance of the awning are compatible with the
dwelling in color and design, in the opinion of the community development
director. (Ord. 2016-17)
17.20.100: PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS:
In planned developments a patio cover may be projected into the rear setback
area subject to the following conditions:
   A.   The patio cover shall not be enclosed on any side except the side
attached to the dwelling.
   B.   No more than one-third (1/3) of the rear yard area shall be covered.
   C.   No cover shall be closer than three feet (3') to the property line. In
common areas having limited common areas, the property line shall be considered
to be the area assigned to the specific use of an individual property owner,
and the outer limits of the area shall be considered to be lot lines of the
property for the purposes of this section.
   D.   Building permits are required for the installation of a permitted
cover.
   E.   Covers may be constructed of noncombustible materials only. (Ord. 2004-
23 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 4-10)
17.20.110: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS:
Double frontage lots are lots which have the rear property line adjacent to a
public street. Such lots shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   A six foot (6') masonry wall shall be constructed along all rear lot
lines unless otherwise approved by the planning commission. Accessory buildings
no higher than fifteen feet (15') in height may be ten feet (10') from the rear
property line, and storage sheds no higher than six feet (6') in height may be
placed adjacent to the wall.
   B.   Where a six foot (6') masonry wall is not required along the rear
property line, the minimum rear setback for all structures shall be twenty five
feet (25') from the rear property line. (Ord. 2004-23 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 4-11)
17.20.120: AREA OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
No accessory building nor group of accessory buildings in any residential
district shall cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area. No
building permit is required for accessory buildings of less than ten by twelve
feet (10 x 12') in size as per the international building code provided that
such building will have no plumbing or electrical elements. (Ord. 2004-23 § 1:
Ord. 97-06 § 4-12)
17.20.130: EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
Subject to approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission,
stairways, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate, and
towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, wireless or television masts, theater
lofts, or similar structures, may be erected above the height limit, but shall
not be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space. (Ord. 97-06
§ 4-13)
17.20.140: MINIMUM HEIGHT OF MAIN DWELLING:
No dwelling shall be erected to a height of less than one story above grade.
(Ord. 97-06 § 4-14)
17.20.150: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, CONSTRUCTION AND MAXIMUM HEIGHT:
Accessory buildings shall not be constructed upon a lot until a building permit
has been issued for the principal building. No building which is accessory to a
dwelling shall be erected to a height greater than one story, or twenty feet
(20'). (Ord. 97-06 § 4-15)
17.20.160: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
In all areas of the city, connection shall be made to public water, electrical,
and sewer facilities wherever available. All utilities shall be located
underground unless specifically approved otherwise by the city. All
construction shall comply with city and state building codes and standards.
(Ord. 97-06 § 4-16)
17.20.170: STREETS, CURBS, GUTTERS, SIDEWALKS AND STORM DRAINAGE:
   A.   The installation of streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and storm
drainage of a type approved by the city may be required on any existing street
where such improvements are not already in existence or where such improvements
are damaged or broken or are substantially substandard.
   B.   Installation may be required as a condition of obtaining a building
permit for a new residential or other structure wherein a new upsized water
and/or sewer and/or electrical service is required or when an existing
structure's square footage is increased, and shall be completed as a part of
the building contract prior to occupancy. All undedicated rights of way for
required streets shall be dedicated as well, for any building permit.
   C.   The city, upon examination, may determine that it is not in the best
interest of the city to install full improvements at the time of land
development. In this event, the applicant shall be required, as a condition to
receiving a building permit, to sign an improvement agreement, which shall be
an agreement to post a cash bond for the estimated costs of the improvements,
plus a factor of twenty five percent (25%). The funds shall be used to complete
the improvements in the overall area when the city determines that it is
prepared to complete the required improvements.
   D.   The exactment for city streets shall be one-half (1/2) of the
engineer's estimated cost of a standard city street for the full frontage that
the property has on the street, including frontage for corner lots.
   E.   The cost of curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be for the engineer's
estimated cost for the side of the street that fronts on the lot, including
frontage for corner lots.
   F.   The cost of the storm sewer shall be the engineer's estimate of a
standard street's storm sewer cost, also determined by front footage of the
storm sewer system that is planned to be placed on the property, according to
the city's storm sewer master plan. If there is no storm drain in the street
where building is to occur (according to the storm sewer master plan), then no
fee shall be exacted.
   G.   The improvement agreement shall be recorded against the property and
shall constitute a covenant to run with the land. A sample of the improvement
and cash bond agreement is attached to the ordinance codified herein, and is
hereby incorporated by reference herein. The cash bond deposit shall be put at
interest by the city to assist in defraying the cost of inflation. The amount
of cash bond to be deposited shall be computed by the city engineer based on
the engineer's estimate of the cost of installation under the standards stated
above. Each applicant shall pay an engineer's review fee in connection with
applying for the building permit, as the city council may establish by
resolution, to cover the cost of the engineer's review.
   H.   Upon actual building of the improvements involved, the cash bond,
including interest earned thereon, shall be applied to the cost, including the
city's reasonably allocated engineering, legal and administrative costs. (Ord.
2007-19 § 1: Ord. 2004-08: Ord. 97-06 § 4-17)
17.20.180: DUMPING OR DISPOSAL:
The use of land for dumping or disposal of scrap materials, garbage, rubbish,
or other refuse, or for ashes, or other industrial wastes, shall be prohibited
in every district of this title.
No yard or other open space surrounding an existing building shall be used for
the storage of junk, debris, abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles, or other
unsightly material, judged by the city to create a public nuisance. (Ord. 97-06
§ 4-18)
17.20.190: MOVING OF DWELLINGS:
Except for new construction, any dwelling proposed to be moved onto any parcel
of land in the city of Santa Clara shall meet the following requirements:
   A.   All dwellings moved onto any lot must first obtain a conditional use
permit as required by chapter 17.40 of this title.
   B.   Any dwelling proposed to be moved onto a site shall be less than ten
(10) years of age at the time of moving unless otherwise approved by the
planning commission and the city council.
   C.   Any dwelling proposed to be moved onto a site shall first be inspected
by the building inspector to determine that it is in compliance with the
current edition of the applicable building code, or that it is capable of being
brought into compliance with said code. Inspection shall be made prior to
planning commission review and a report of findings shall be submitted to the
planning commission along with the application for a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 97-06 § 4-19)
17.20.200: PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
Development of any kind on or within a public right of way shall not be done
without having received a permit from the city office, which approval may
require planning commission and/or city council approval. (Ord. 97-06 § 4-20)
17.20.210: TIMESHARING:
(Rep. by Ord. 2004-39 § 1)
17.20.220: EXCEPTION TO LOT STANDARDS:
Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter, the planning commission may
consider the approval of flag lots to be developed either as a part of, or
separate from a platted subdivision, subject to the following conditions:
   A.   In the opinion of the planning commission, the property cannot be
subdivided with public streets and standard shaped lots, either at the present
or in the foreseeable future.
   B.   The staff portion of the proposed lot(s) shall front on a dedicated and
improved public street.
   C.   No building or construction, except for driveways, shall be allowed on
the staff portion of the lot(s).
   D.   The front of the flag lot(s) shall be deemed to be the side nearest the
dedicated public street upon which the staff portion fronts.
   E.   All lot size and setback requirements shall be the same as for the zone
in which the lot is located. The staff portion of the lot(s) shall not be
counted in calculating the size of the lot(s).
   F.   No more than two (2) flag lots may be served by any one staff portion
of said lots.
   G.   The staff portion of the lot(s) shall be owned by the owner(s) of the
flag lot(s). If two (2) lots are served, the staff portion shall be owned
jointly by the owners of both lots that are being served.
   H.   No structure on the adjacent lots located in front of the flag lot(s)
shall be closer to the staff portion of the flag lot(s) than eight feet (8'). A
required twelve foot (12') side yard setback may be reduced to eight feet (8').
   I.   A solid fence or wall of six feet (6') in height may be required by the
planning commission, between the flag lot and the rear property line of the lot
in front of the flag lot.
   J.   The owner(s) of any lot(s) located in front of a proposed flag lot(s)
shall be notified by the city of the date and time at which the flag lot
request shall be considered by the planning commission.
   K.   Each flag lot shall be specifically approved by the planning
commission.
   L.   If the flag lot roadways are not looped, then the provided dead end
access roadway shall meet the requirements specified in subsection M of this
section.
   M.   Approved turnarounds for dead end flag lot streets. (Ord. 2007-29 § 1:
Ord. 2004-23 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 4-22)
17.20.230: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY:
The city building department shall grant a permit for the establishment of a
residential facility for persons with a disability in any zone in which single-
family dwellings are permitted if the applicant certifies that they meet the
following requirements under subsections A through C of this section. The
building department shall certify that the applicant meets the requirement in
subsections D through F of this section.
   A.   The residence conforms to all applicable standards and requirements of
the Utah state department of human services, and if applicable, the Utah state
department of health.
   B.   No individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the
health or safety of other individuals, or whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others, will be a resident.
   C.   If the residence is a substance abuse facility located within five
hundred feet (500') of a school, the residence provides the following in
accordance with rules established by the department of human services:
      1.   Twenty four (24) hour supervision of residents; and
      2.   Other twenty four (24) hour security measures.
   D.   The residence conforms to all state and local building, safety, health,
and zoning requirements applicable to similar structures, including the number
of unrelated persons allowed in a dwelling in the zone where the residence is
located.
   E.   The residence is of a size, scale, and design such that it is in
harmony with other residential uses in the vicinity.
   F.   The residence may not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of
any other residential facility for persons with a disability, or from a
residential facility for elderly persons.
   G.   Staff will bring to the city council any requests for reasonable
accommodations who shall give such consideration to requests under the
standards of applicable state and federal law.
   H.   The right to continue the use under the building permit as a
residential facility for persons with a disability shall be contingent upon
maintaining the standards and requirements of this section.
   I.   In order to obtain a building permit the building department must
certify the plans and specifications which shall include a rendering of the
building with landscape that is compatible with the architectural style of the
neighborhood.
   J.   Parking requirements are detailed in section
17.32.040 of this title.
   K.   The decision to approve a residential facility for the disabled must be
based on legitimate land use criteria. (Ord. 2004-23 § 1)
17.20.240: RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR THE ELDERLY:
Subject to granting of a conditional use permit a residential facility for
elderly persons without structural or landscaping alterations that would change
the structure's residential character, and subject to the requirements of this
chapter, the location of residential facilities for elderly persons may be
approved in areas zoned to permit single-family dwellings. (Ord. 2004-23 § 1)
17.20.250: LIMITATIONS ON ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   No person who is being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse may be
placed in a residential facility for elderly persons.
   B.   Placement in a residential facility for elderly persons shall be on a
strictly voluntary basis and may not be a part of, or in lieu of, confinement,
rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional facility.
   C.   No residential facility for elderly persons may be located within one
thousand feet (1,000') of another such facility, or from a residential facility
for the handicapped.
   D.   The use granted and permitted in this chapter terminates if the
structure is devoted to a use other than as a residential facility for elderly
persons, or if the structure fails to comply with applicable health, safety,
and building codes.
   E.   The decision to approve a residential facility for the elderly must be
based on legitimate land use criteria and may not be based on the age of the
facility's residents.
   F.   The requirements of this section that a residential facility for
elderly persons obtain a conditional use permit or other permit do not apply if
the facility meets the requirements of this chapter relative to the definition
of a "family".
   G.   In order to obtain a building permit the building department must
certify the plans and specifications which shall include a rendering of the
building with landscape that is compatible with the architectural style of the
neighborhood.
   H.   Parking requirements are detailed in section
17.32.040 of this title. (Ord. 2004-23 § 1)
17.20.260: SHORT TERM RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this chapter,
   SELF-CONTAINED: A project where no public streets provide access to
individual units that are no part of the project.
   SHORT TERM RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Property which is used by any person or
entity for hostel, hotel, inn, lodging, motel, resort, or other transient
lodging uses where the term of occupancy, possession, or tenancy of the
property by the person is for twenty nine (29) consecutive calendar days or
less, for direct or indirect remuneration. For this section, "remuneration"
means compensation, money, rent, or other consideration including free gratis,
given for occupancy, possession or use of real property.
   B.   Requirement: Short term residential properties are prohibited in all
zones within the city of Santa Clara except where allowed by conditional use
permit in the planned development residential district or historic district/
mixed use zone. (Refer to each district or zone for specific conditions for
use.) (Ord. 2015-03: Ord. 2013-16)
17.20.270: GARAGE SETBACKS:
Where a sidewalk and a driveway are located in the same setback of a dwelling,
the garage setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back edge
of the sidewalk to the garage. Where no sidewalk is located in the setback, or
where a side entry garage has a minimum twenty foot (20') long driveway from
the back edge of the sidewalk, the garage setback shall be the same as required
for the dwelling unit. (Ord. 2017-07)
17.20.280: NON-DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS:
Non-Depository institutions are allowed as a permitted use within the
Commercial, C Zone or the Planned Development Commercial, PDC Zone, subject to
the following restrictions:
   A.   A non-depository institution shall not be located within one mile of
any other non-depository institution within the City’s geographical boundaries.
The distance shall be measured from the exterior walls of the building in which
the non-depository institution is located or proposed to be located and shall
be measured as a straight- and direct-line distance from said point.
   B.   In addition to the geographical restriction under subsection 17.20.280
(A) above, the total number of non-depository institutions located within the
City’s geographical boundaries shall not exceed one non-depository institution
per seven thousand five hundred (7,500) residents of the City. A portion or
fraction resulting from such calculation that does not equal a whole number
shall not increase, through “rounding” or otherwise, the total number of non-
depository institutions possible. For example, if the City’s population was
14,999, then a maximum of one non-depository institution would be possible in
the City, and a second non-depository institution would not be possible until
the City’s population was 15,000 or more. For purposes of such calculation, the
City’s population shall be determined by the numbers provided by the United
States Census Bureau’s most recent annual estimate.
   C.   All non-depository institutions are subject to applicable architectural
design, aesthetic and other regulations of all applicable zones, and other
requirements of City code. Additionally, all non-depository institutions are
subject to the following supplemental regulations:
      1.   The color of the building housing the non-depository institution
shall be restricted to earth tones or shall match the design theme of the
development of which it is apart.
      2.   At least 25% of the first-floor façade that faces a public street,
or sidewalk shall be windows or doors of clear or lightly tinted glass to allow
views into and out of the building at eye level.
      3.   The use of bars, chains or similar security devices that are visible
from a public street or sidewalk shall be prohibited.
      4.   The use of neon lighting or signage shall be prohibited on the
building exterior.
      5.   All signage associated with any non-depository institution shall
conform to the requirements of
Chapter 17.44 of city code. (Ord. 2025-09 § 1)
CHAPTER 22
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
SECTION:
17.22.010: Definitions
17.22.020: Internal Accessory Dwelling Units
17.22.030: Accessory Dwelling Units
17.22.010: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
following meanings:
 
ACCESSORY A separate dwelling unit located on a residentially zoned property, that
DWELLING  is clearly incidental and accessory to the primary dwelling on the
UNIT      property. In addition to the standards described in this section, ADUs
(ADU):    must meet the standards described in section 10-9a-530 of the Utah Code.
INTERNAL  A separate dwelling unit located entirely within the footprint of an
ACCESSORY owner-occupied single-family detached dwelling on residentially zoned
DWELLING  property, that is clearly incidental and accessory to the primary
UNIT      dwelling on the property. In addition to the standards described in this
(IADU):   section, IADUs must meet the standards described in section 10-9a-530 of
          the Utah Code.
PRIMARY   A single-family detached dwelling that is occupied as the primary
DWELLING: residence of the owner of record. (Ord. 2022-04 § 1: Ord. 2021-14 § 1)
 
17.22.020: INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   Allowed Zones: An IADU is a permitted use in all residential zones,
subject to the standards set forth in this section.
   B.   Standards: All IADUs must conform to the following standards:
      1.   The IADU must contain complete cooking and bathroom facilities that
are separate from the facilities located in the primary dwelling.
         a.   The cooking facility in the IADU must contain:
            (1)   A sink and water faucet,
            (2)   Capacity for food refrigeration, and
            (3)   A permanent, built-in stove top, range, or other similar
device for cooking food.
         b.   The bathroom facility in the IADU must contain:
            (1)   A sink and water faucet,
            (2)   A toilet, and
            (3)   A shower or bathtub.
      2.   The owner of the property must occupy the primary dwelling on the
property.
      3.   One off-street parking space must be provided for the IADU, in
addition to parking required for the primary dwelling on the property.
      4.   IADUs must meet all applicable Health, Fire and Building Codes.
      5.   The lot where the IADU is located must maintain the single-family
appearance and character of the neighborhood. IADUs should be compatible in
design and appearance with the primary dwelling on the property and shall not
be located in detached structures connected by a breezeway.
      6.   Only one IADU per property is permitted.
      7.   The lot where the IADU is located must be at least six thousand
(6,000) square feet in size. However, a single-family detached dwelling in a
Planned Development Residential (PDR) Zone with a lot size of less than six
thousand (6,000) square feet may be allowed if all other requirements of this
section are met.
      8.   The total number of residents that reside in an IADU may not exceed
the number allowed for a single-family dwelling.
      9.   If a garage or carport is converted to an IADU, the property owner
must replace any parking spaces contained in the garage or carport which are
required by code with an equal number of off-street parking spaces elsewhere on
the property in a manner that complies with all land use standards.
      10.   An IADU shall not be permitted within a mobile home.
      11.   A property owner may not install power or culinary water utility
meters that serve only the IADU. The IADU must be served by the same power and
culinary water utility meters as the primary dwelling on the property.
      12.   No IADU may be located in a primary dwelling served by a failing
septic tank.
      13.   The owner shall provide a separate address marking for emergency
services and mailing services.
   C.   Rental Period: The IADU must be rented for periods of thirty (30)
consecutive days or more.
   D.   Permit Required: Prior to renting or offering to rent an IADU, a
property owner must obtain an Internal accessory dwelling unit permit from the
city.
      1.   The IADU permit application is reviewed by city staff.
      2.   The IADU must be inspected by the city prior to issuance of any
permit and may be inspected by the city up to one (1) time per calendar year.
In the event that the IADU requires improvements be made in order to meet
required standards, the property owner shall be required to obtain a building
permit.
      3.   City staff shall issue the IADU permit, only after finding all of
the standards in this section and all other applicable land use standards have
been met and may revoke the IADU permit if an inspection finds that the IADU no
longer meets applicable standards, after ninety (90) days written notice to the
property owner and an opportunity to cure any deficiencies.
      4.   The city shall record a notice of the permit with the Washington
County Recorder, as detailed in Utah Code Section 10-9a-530(6).
   E.   Business License: Renting of any IADU requires a business license. The
business license must be maintained and renewed annually if the unit is rented.
   F.   In addition to other remedies available to the city, the city may hold
a lien against a property that contains an internal IADU if the property owner
violates any standards for operation of an internal IADU. The amount, notice,
and procedure for the lien shall be in accordance with state law. (Ord. 2021-
14, 10-27-2021)
17.22.030: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
   A.   One Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) may be permitted as a conditional use
in a single-family residential zone subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Before an ADU occupancy permit is issued, the applicant must:
         a.   Submit a site plan, drawn to scale, that shows property lines and
dimensions, the location of existing buildings and building entrances, proposed
buildings or additions, distances from buildings or additions to property
lines, the location of parking stalls and utility meters.
         b.   Include detailed floor plans drawn to scale with labels on rooms
indicating uses or proposed uses.
         c.   Pay the required application fee as determined by resolution of
the City Council.
         d.   Obtain a building permit following approval of the ADU and
subject to all the requirements listed herein.
         e.   An ADU is allowed over an attached garage or a detached garage,
provided that the existing parking underneath the created additional living
unit remains parking and is not converted to a living space.
         f.   An ADU may be in a front, side, or rear yard if it meets all
primary dwelling setback requirements.
         g.   An ADU may not exceed twenty feet (20') in height unless it is
attached to the primary structure.
         h.   An ADU is allowed up to one thousand (1,000) square feet, or
thirty percent (30%) of the footprint of the primary dwelling, excluding the
garage, whichever is greater.
         i.   One additional off-street parking space must be provided for an
ADU.
         j.   The primary dwelling and the ADU must be served by the same
electric meter, water meter, and sewer connection. Additional impact fees, as
established by the city may be assessed for the second dwelling unit.
         k.   The primary dwelling and the ADU must have the same address,
except for a letter (A) designation, as may be approved by the city, to provide
differentiation between the main dwelling and the ADU for mail or emergency
response purposes.
         l.    The ADU may not be constructed until after the building permit
is issued for the primary dwelling, and no certificate of occupancy may be
issued for an ADU until after the certificate of occupancy is issued for the
primary dwelling.
      2.   The property owner must occupy either the primary dwelling or the
ADU.
      3.   The total number of residents that reside in an ADU may not exceed
the number allowed for a single-family dwelling.
      4.   The lot where the ADU is located must maintain the single-family
appearance and character of the neighborhood.
      5.   Only one (1) ADU or IADU per property is permitted.
      6.   Rental Period: The ADU must be rented for periods of thirty (30)
consecutive days or more.
      7.   The City will record a notice of the permit with the Washington
County recorder, as detailed in Utah Code Section 10-9a-530(6).
      8.   Business License: Renting of any ADU requires a business license.
The business license must be maintained and renewed annually if the unit is
rented. (Ord. 2022-04 § 1)
CHAPTER 17.24
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
SECTION:
17.24.010: Maintenance Permitted
17.24.020: Repairs And Alterations
17.24.030: Additions, Enlargements And Moving
17.24.040: Alteration Where Parking Is Insufficient
17.24.050: Restoration Of Damaged Buildings
17.24.060: One Year Vacancy
17.24.070: Occupation Within One Year
17.24.080: Change Of Use
17.24.090: Nonconforming Use Of Land
17.24.100: Temporary Buildings And Uses
17.24.110: Continuation Of Use
17.24.010: MAINTENANCE PERMITTED:
A nonconforming building or structure may be maintained provided such use is
not enlarged nor modified. (Ord. 97-06 § 5-1)
17.24.020: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
Repairs or structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming building or to
a building housing a nonconforming use, subject to all conditions contained in
this chapter, or other applicable chapters of this title. (Ord. 97-06 § 5-2)
17.24.030: ADDITIONS, ENLARGEMENTS AND MOVING:
A building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use and a building or
structure nonconforming as to height, area, yard, or zoning regulations shall
not be added to, remodeled, or enlarged in any manner, or moved to another
location on the lot, where such change would also be nonconforming, unless
first receiving a recommendation from the planning commission, and approval
from the city council. In approving such use, it must be determined that the
proposed change does not impose an unreasonable burden upon the lands located
in the vicinity of the nonconforming use or structure.
A building or structure may be added to or enlarged if such addition or
enlargement is being done for the purpose of causing such building or structure
to become conforming with all regulations of the zone in which it is located.
Said improvements may be done after having obtained a proper building permit.
(Ord. 97-06 § 5-3)
17.24.040: ALTERATION WHERE PARKING IS INSUFFICIENT:
A building or structure lacking sufficient automobile parking area or space in
connection therewith, as required by this title, may be altered or enlarged,
provided that additional parking space is supplied to meet the requirements of
this title for such alteration or enlargement. (Ord. 97-06 § 5-4)
17.24.050: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED BUILDINGS:
A nonconforming building or structure, or a building or structure occupied by a
nonconforming use which is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, wind,
earthquake, or other calamity, or act of God, or by the public enemy, may be
restored and the occupancy or use existing at the time of damage or destruction
may be continued or resumed, provided that such restoration is started within a
period of one year after the occurrence or damage or destruction, and is
diligently prosecuted to completion. (Ord. 97-06 § 5-5)
17.24.060: ONE YEAR VACANCY:
A building or structure, or portion thereof occupied by a nonconforming use,
which is, or which hereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied by a
nonconforming use for a continuous period of one year, shall not thereafter be
occupied except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district
in which it is located. (Ord. 97-06 § 5-6)
17.24.070: OCCUPATION WITHIN ONE YEAR:
A vacant building or structure may be occupied by a use for which it was
designed or intended if so occupied within a period of one year after the use
became nonconforming. (Ord. 97-06 § 5-7)
17.24.080: CHANGE OF USE:
The nonconforming use of a building or structure may not be changed except to a
conforming use, except as may be approved in section
17.24.030 of this chapter, but where such change is made, the use shall not
thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. (Ord. 2004-24 § 1: Ord. 97-
06 § 5-8)
17.24.090: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND:
The nonconforming use of land may be continued, provided the nonconforming use
of land shall not in any way be expanded or extended either on the same, or
adjoining property, and provided that if such nonconforming use of land, or any
portion thereof, is abandoned or changed for a period of one year, or more, any
future use of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
title. (Ord. 2004-24 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 5-9)
17.24.100: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS AND USES:
   A building nonconforming as to type or location may be approved by the
planning commission for use as a temporary residence, sales office, or
commercial or industrial building, during the construction of permanent
facilities. Such temporary approval shall not be made for a period exceeding
one (1) year. Extensions may be granted for cause, by the planning commission
for additional six (6)-month periods, up to a maximum of twelve (12) months, or
two (2) such extensions. If the temporary use approval expires without
permanent facilities being complete, the applicant must go to City Council for
consideration of an extension for a maximum period of one (1) year. The
applicant must provide a schedule for project completion for City Council
review and consideration. Temporary buildings shall be connected to all public
utilities and shall meet all setback requirements unless otherwise approved by
the planning commission.
(Ord. 2025-17: Ord. 2004-24 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 5-10)
17.24.110: CONTINUATION OF USE:
   The occupancy of a building or structure by a nonconforming use, existing at
the time the ordinance codified in this title became effective, may be
continued. (Ord. 97-06 § 5-11)
CHAPTER 17.28
WALLS, FENCES AND HEDGES
SECTION:
17.28.010: Setback Area Defined
17.28.020: Permit Required
17.28.030: General Standards
17.28.040: Interior Lot Requirements
17.28.050: Corner Lot Requirements
17.28.060: Retaining Walls; Difference In Grade
17.28.070: Vacant Lots
17.28.080: Fences On the Public Right Of Way
17.28.090: Fences On Controlled Access Streets
17.28.100: Fences For Recreation Use
17.28.110: Fences Required In Certain Areas
17.28.120: Nonconforming Fences
17.28.130: Courtyard Walls Or Fences
17.28.140: Utility Meters
17.28.150: Wall And Fence Material
17.28.160: Fences Not Otherwise Identified
17.28.170: Barbed Wire
17.28.010: SETBACK AREA DEFINED:
The term "front setback area" for the purpose of this title shall refer to the
setback area (as required by this title) along any street frontage. (Ord. 2022-
02 § 1)
17.28.020: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   A building permit and engineered design is required for the
construction of a fence, wall, or retaining wall when one (1) of the following
conditions exists:
      1.   The fence system exceeds seven feet (7') in height.
      2.   A retaining wall that exceeds a height of four feet (4') as measured
from the bottom of footing to the top of wall.
      3.   The retaining wall is less than four feet (4') in height supporting
a surcharge.
      4.   Any fence that is reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission,
prior to the beginning of construction.
   B.   Each wall and fence system installed requires a review by the building
official or designee to ensure the proposed installation is consistent with
this code prior to construction. (Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.030: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   The finished grade may not be bermed for the purpose of increasing the
fence height.
   B.   No fence or obstruction to view shall be placed within a triangle area
formed by a driveway line, the front yard property line, and a line connecting
them at points twelve feet (12') along the driveway line and twelve feet (12')
along the front property line.
   C.   When installed on a shared property line, a fence, wall, or retaining
wall located on an interior property line separating two (2) residential lots
with differing elevations, the maximum height of the fence, wall, or retaining
wall shall not exceed six feet (6') above grade on either side unless:
      1.   The property owners adjoining the fence, wall, or retaining wall
agree in writing to a greater height; and
      2.   A retaining wall is placed against the cut area to retain the
natural grade, in which case the fence, wall, and retaining wall combined shall
not exceed nine feet (9') in height when measured from the lower lot side.
   D.   A fence or wall system constructed solely on a residential lot
(including footing) may be constructed to a maximum height of nine feet (9').
(Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.040: INTERIOR LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   On all interior lot lines, a fence, not to exceed six feet (6') in
height, may be erected along all side and rear property lines as per the
following requirements:
      1.   To a point measured fifteen feet (15') from the front property line
if the property line is from back of sidewalk.
      2.   To a point measured twenty-five feet (25') from the front property
line if the property line is from back of curb.
   B.   In any front setback area along interior front and side property lines,
no fence, wall, or retaining wall shall exceed three feet (3') in height
unless: a non-sight obstructing fence system that is at least fifty percent
(50%) open is installed at which, a four foot (4') high fence may be erected
one foot (1') behind the property line. (Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.050: CORNER LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   On all corner lots, a fence not to exceed six feet (6') in height may
be erected along the rear and interior side lot lines. A solid fence or wall
shall not be erected in the front yard or street side yard setback area to a
height in excess of three feet (3'), except as provided for in subsection C
below, and as approved by the building official or designee. Where the fence or
wall is located within five feet (5') of the sidewalk, the fence height shall
be measured from sidewalk grade. Where the fence or wall is more than five feet
(5') from the sidewalk, the height shall be measured from the adjacent grade on
the street side.
   B.   In all zones requiring a front yard setback, no obstruction to view in
excess of two feet (2') in height shall be placed on any corner within a
triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them
at points thirty feet (30') from the intersection of the property lines
allowing for site visibility.
   C.   Fences or walls erected within the side yard setback that fronts on a
public street may have a height up to six feet (6') provided the following
conditions are met:
      1.   Solid fences or walls up to six feet (6') in height shall maintain a
minimum five-foot (5') setback from the property line.
      2.   Non-sight obstructing fences that are at least fifty percent (50%)
open shall be allowed to a height of six feet (6') and may be erected one foot
(1') behind the property line. (Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.060: RETAINING WALLS; DIFFERENCE IN GRADE:
When a difference in grade exists between adjoining properties, a retaining
wall may be constructed, subject to the requirements set forth in this section.
A rock wall whose height does not exceed four (4) vertical feet and whose angle
of repose does not exceed a ratio of one to one (1:1) is not a retaining wall
for the purpose of this section.
   A.   The height of the retaining wall shall not exceed six feet (6'). If the
retaining wall exceeds four feet (4') in height, the wall shall be engineered
and approved pursuant to the International Residential Code (IRC) standards.
   B.   Retaining wall systems over six feet (6') in height shall be terraced
to form benches or landings which can be landscaped. Terraced walls shall be
offset at a one to one (1:1) ratio.
   C.   Retaining walls shall be moisture proofed on the retaining side of the
wall below grade.
   D.   Walls installed during the project development process will be required
to comply with the Santa Clara City Construction Design Standards, Section
4.3.2.5, Retaining Walls Required. (Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.070: VACANT LOTS:
For the purpose of this chapter, it shall be presumed that a vacant lot shall
contain a minimum front, side and rear yard that are otherwise required by
ordinance. In any required side and rear yard on vacant lots, the maximum
height of fences shall not exceed six feet (6'). In any required front yard
setback, the maximum height of fences shall not exceed three feet (3'). A non-
site obstructing see-through fence that is at least fifty percent (50%) open is
allowed at four feet (4') in height and may be erected at the property line.
(Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.080: FENCES ON THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
No fence approved under this chapter shall be erected beyond a property line or
on the public right of way, without the issuance of a special permit by the
city. Approval of a fence on the public right of way shall be considered
subject to the following conditions:
   A.   No fence shall be erected within one foot (1') of an existing or future
sidewalk, within a four-foot (4') radius of a fire hydrant, or within a two-
foot (2') radius of small utility boxes, light and power poles. Obtain
verification from the electrical department for radii on other utility boxes.
   B.   The city shall retain the right to remove any fence on the public right
of way for any purpose it deems necessary. Removal shall be at the sole expense
of the property owner.
   C.   Maintenance of the area between the sidewalk and the property line
shall be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.090: FENCES ON CONTROLLED ACCESS STREETS:
On controlled access streets, walls, fences, or hedges may be erected to a
height of six feet (6') in the setback area, except that a six-foot (6') fence
may not be constructed within the area intersected by the right-of-way lines of
the curb returns, but not less than thirty feet (30'). See subsection 17.28.030
B. of this chapter. The triangular area may be either landscaped with low,
spreading shrubs, rock landscaping, or paved as part of the sidewalk area.
(Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.100: FENCES FOR RECREATION USE:
   A.   On interior side and rear property lines, a chain-link fence may be
erected to a height of twelve feet (12') for the purpose of enclosing a tennis
court, or other court game area. Said fence may not be located within the
setback area of yards abutting a front or street side yard.
   B.   A fence not less than four feet (4') in height shall be erected around
all private outdoor swimming pools, hot tubs, or other similar pools not
otherwise enclosed (or covered for hot tubs). The specifications for the fence
and gates, for residential application, shall be the same as those provided in
the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC). This required fence or
wall may encompass any amount of the lot or parcel, except that a swimming pool
on the same lot and accessory to a dwelling unit shall not be located within
the front yard setback. Exceptions:
      1.   Spas and hot tubs with lockable safety cover that complies with the
ASTM F 1346.
      2.   Swimming pools with a powered safety cover that complies with the
ASTM F 1346.
   C.   A fence not less than six feet (6') in height shall be erected around
all public or commercial swimming pools.
   D.   Fences at a minimum of six feet (6') in height shall be erected around
all ponds, canals, or ditches, where, in the opinion of the planning
commission, there is determined to be a potential hazard to the health, and
safety of surrounding areas or developments. (Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.110: FENCES REQUIRED IN CERTAIN AREAS:
   A.   Fences surrounding developments having no individual lots that front on
public streets, such as subdivisions with limited access, or planned
developments larger than one acre, may have a solid fence in the front setback
area to a height of six feet (6'), except that such fence shall be reduced to
three feet (3') at driveway entrances and intersections in the same manner as
required elsewhere in this chapter.
   B.   All commercial and industrial developments, in areas zoned accordingly,
having a common lot line with property used for residential purposes shall be
considered the same as the requirements of a residential interior lot line.
Refer to section 17.28.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2022-02 § 1: Ord. 2012-18)
17.28.120: NONCONFORMING FENCES:
Nonconforming fences shall not be reconstructed except in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.130: COURTYARD WALLS OR FENCES:
A courtyard wall or fence (a solid wall, or fence attached to the front
dwelling unit and located in the front yard setback area) is allowed as per the
following conditions:
   A.   Front Yard Setback: Front yard facing courtyard walls shall be located
fifteen feet (15') from the front property line.
   B.   Height: The height of such wall or fence shall not exceed four feet
(4') in height as measured from the main floor elevation of the dwelling.
   C.   Application And Review: A building permit as required by section
17.28.015 of this chapter shall be required for all courtyard walls and fences
subject to the following:
      1.   A plan shall be prepared showing the total front yard of the
dwelling unit drawn to scale and showing where the proposed courtyard will be
located. The application shall also include a front elevation of the dwelling,
or a picture of the front of the dwelling, showing how the front will appear
with the wall or fence constructed.
      2.   A detailed plan is required to show how the wall or fence would tie
in with the architectural theme of the home, which is complimentary in style
and materials of the primary residence.
      3.   The application shall be submitted to the TRC staff for review. In
addition to how the proposal complies with this section, the TRC shall also
consider how the proposed wall or fence may impact adjacent dwellings.
Construction materials and aesthetic appeal will also be considered in
determining whether to approve the request and authorize a building permit for
the courtyard fence. City staff may submit the request to the Planning
Commission for their review and consideration at the next available meeting.
(Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.140: UTILITY METERS:
Access to utility meters shall be readily accessible. Enclosing a utility meter
with a wall or fence is in violation of city code, section
13.08.270, Access to Premises. (Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.150: WALL AND FENCE MATERIAL:
Building materials that are not specifically manufactured, listed, or commonly
used to construct walls or fences are prohibited. (Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.160: FENCES NOT OTHERWISE IDENTIFIED:
The Planning Commission shall review all requests for any type of fence not
specifically identified in this chapter, and may approve said fence if, in the
opinion of the Commission, the fence does not impair the intent and purpose of
this title. (Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
17.28.170: BARBED WIRE:
Barbed wire, or similar fencing material shall be prohibited in all zones
except agricultural. However, barbed wire, or similar fencing material is
allowed for security purposes for public utilities and/or facility uses, and
shall conform to the following restrictions:
   A.   Barbed wire, or similar material shall be pulled tight and not rolled
or coiled.
   B.   Straight strands of barbed wire, or similar material on top of fences
or walls shall not exceed a total height of seven feet (7'). (Ord. 2022-02 § 1)
CHAPTER 17.32
OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
17.32.010: Off Street Parking Required
17.32.020: Size
17.32.030: Access To Individual Parking Spaces
17.32.040: Parking Spaces Required For Residential Areas
17.32.050: Parking Spaces Required For Nonresidential Areas
17.32.060: Parking On Unimproved Lots
17.32.070: Parking Lot Lights
17.32.080: Development Standards
17.32.090: Optional Provisions
17.32.100: Uses Not Specifically Identified In This Chapter
17.32.010: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIRED:
At the time any building or structure is erected, or enlarged, or increased in
capacity, or any use is established or changed, there shall be provided off
street parking spaces for motor vehicles in accordance with the following
requirements. (Ord. 97-06 § 7-1)
17.32.020: SIZE:
   A.   The dimensions of each off street parking space or stall shall be at
least nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') for diagonal or ninety degree (90°)
spaces; or nine feet by twenty two feet (9' x 22') for parallel spaces,
exclusive of drives or aisles.
   B.   A parking stall may be reduced by two feet (2') lengthwise if
landscaping, separated from the paved area of the parking stall by a curb or
wheel guard, is provided in the remaining two feet (2') of the parking stall.
All area within the parking area that is not paved shall be landscaped. (Ord.
97-06 § 7-2)
17.32.030: ACCESS TO INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACES:
Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, access to each parking space
shall be from a private driveway and not from a public street.
   A.   One-way driveways shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') in width.
   B.   Two-way driveways shall be a minimum of twenty five feet (25') in
width.
   C.   On private streets or access drives, a garage or carport shall be set
back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back of the sidewalk, or where no
sidewalk exists or is planned, from the curb, or lot boundary line.
   D.   Garage and carport spaces shall be counted as one (1) parking space
unless: 1) such garage or carport is a minimum of four hundred eighty (480)
square feet with a minimum width of twenty feet (20'), and 2) the individual
driveway to the garage or carport is at least eighteen feet (18') in length in
which case such parking area shall be counted as two (2) spaces. (Ord. 2017-10:
Ord. 97-06 § 7-3)
17.32.040: PARKING SPACES REQUIRED FOR RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
The number of off street parking spaces required for residential development
shall be as follows:
 
                                    1 parking space for each anticipated
                                    employee and 1 space for every 2
                                    occupants of the facility; at least 1
                                    of which must be covered. No street
Residential facilities for persons  parking shall be counted toward meeting
with a disability and residential   the parking requirement. No parking
facilities for the elderly          area shall be located within the
                                    required front setback area facing a
                                    public street, and it shall be on the
                                    property that it is intended to serve.
                                    All parking shall be on site.
                                    2 parking spaces per single-family
Single-family dwellings             dwelling, 1 of which shall be covered.
                                    Tandem parking shall not count toward
                                    the parking requirement.
                                    All other dwellings, including
                                    townhouses and condominiums, shall have
                                    2 parking spaces per dwelling unit, at
                                    least 1 of which shall be covered.
                                    Covered parking may be located within
                                    the side and rear setback areas. No
                                    street parking shall be counted toward
All other dwellings                 meeting the parking requirement. Tandem
                                    parking shall not count toward the
                                    parking requirement. No parking area
                                    shall be located within the required
                                    front setback area facing a public
                                    street, and it shall be located on the
                                    property that it is intended to serve.
                                    All parking shall be on site.
 
No motor home, travel trailer, boat, jet skis, other similar recreational
equipment, or construction equipment, shall be parked within the required front
yard setback area adjacent to a public street. (Ord. 2004-25 § 1: Ord. 97-06 §
7-4)
17.32.050: PARKING SPACES REQUIRED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL AREAS:
The number of off street parking spaces required for all nonresidential
developments shall be as follows:
                                            5 spaces for each alley plus 2
Bowling alleys and billiard halls           spaces for each billiard table
                                            contained therein.
Business or professional offices            1 space for each 250 square feet of
                                            gross floor area.
                                            1 space for each 3.5 fixed seats or
                                            maximum seating capacity, or one
Churches, sports arenas, auditoriums,       space for each 35 square feet of
theaters, assembly halls, lodge halls or    seating area within the main
other meeting rooms                         auditorium where there are no fixed
                                            seats. 18 linear inches of bench
                                            shall be considered equal to 1
                                            fixed seat.
                                            1 space for each staff member plus
Day nurseries in commercial zones,          1 space for each 5 children for
including preschools and nursery schools    which said establishment is
                                            licensed.
Educational uses:
   Elementary schools                    2 spaces per classroom.
   Junior high schools and intermediate  1 space for each member of the
schools                                     faculty and 1 space for each 5
                                            regularly enrolled students.
                                            1 space for each faculty member
High schools, colleges and universities,    plus 1 space for each 3 students,
trade schools, etc.                         plus the requirement above for
                                            auditoriums.
Furniture stores, appliance stores,and      1 space for each 600 square feet of
lumberyards                                 floor area.
Golf courses                                6 spaces per hole.
Golf driving ranges                         1 space per tee.
                                            1 space for each 250 square feet of
Health studios and spas                     gross floor area, or 10 spaces
                                            minimum, whichever is greater.
Hospitals                                   2 parking spaces for each bed.
                                            1 space for each living or sleeping
                                            unit plus 2 spaces for resident
Hotels, motels                              manager or owner. Also, the parking
                                            required by this title for any
                                            other use included in the hotel or
                                            motel.
Libraries                                   1 space for each 300 square feet of
                                            gross floor area.
Manufacturing plants, warehouses, storage   1 space for each 1,000 square feet
buildings, or structures for storage        of gross floor area and 1 space for
purposes                                    each 250 square feet of office or
                                            sales area.
                                            5 spaces plus 1 space for each 35
Mortuaries and funeral homes                square feet of assembly room floor
                                            area.
Motor vehicle sales, automotive repair and  1 space for each 400 square feet of
service, commercial                         gross floor area.
Nursing homes                               4 plus 1 parking space for each 3
                                            beds.
                                            1 customer parking space for each 7
Outdoor sales lots for autos, mobile homes  vehicles or items of equipment to
and RVs                                     be displayed plus 2 spaces for
                                            manager and employee parking.
Restaurants, taverns, lounges, drive-in,    10 spaces minimum or 1 space for
drive-through, takeout restaurants and      each 100 square feet of gross floor
other establishments where food or          area, whichever is greater.
beverages are consumed
                                            1 space for each 250 square feet of
Retail stores and shops, commercial banks,  gross floor area. For commercial
savings and loan offices, other financial   centers containing 500 or more
institutions, general retail stores, food   spaces, spaces in excess of 500
stores, supermarkets, drugstores, and       will be calculated on the basis of
other similar commercial businesses         1 space for each 500 square feet of
                                            gross floor area.
Service commercial businesses; businesses   1 space for each 250 square feet of
such as electrical, plumbing, cabinets,     retail or office area, and 1 space
printing, and other similar shops           for each 500 square feet of
                                            additional building area.
Skating rinks, ice or roller                1 space for each 300 square feet of
                                            gross floor area.
                                            1 space for each 100 square feet of
Swimming pools (commercial)                 water surface or 10 stalls,
                                            whichever is greater.
Tennis, handball and racquetball courts     6 spaces minimum, or 3 spaces per
(commercial)                                court, whichever is greater.
Veterinary hospitals                        5 spaces for each doctor.
 
Notwithstanding all provisions of this section, the planning commission shall
take into account in each instance of nonresidential parking, the type of
development, use, location, adjoining uses, and possible future uses, in
setting parking requirements. It shall recommend to the city council a
requirement of that number of spaces that it deems reasonably necessary in each
instance for all employees, business vehicles and equipment, customers,
clients, and patients, of such nonresidential property. (Ord. 2004-25 § 1: Ord.
97-06 § 7-5)
17.32.060: PARKING ON UNIMPROVED LOTS:
Parking of vehicles, including, but not limited to, travel trailers, RVs and
similar vehicles, on unimproved lots other than in approved areas shall be
prohibited. (Ord. 2004-25 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 7-6)
17.32.070: PARKING LOT LIGHTS:
Parking lots used during hours of darkness shall be lighted by standards a
maximum of sixteen feet (16') in height above grade and using indirect, hooded
light sources. (Ord. 97-06 § 7-7)
17.32.080: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Every parcel of property used as a parking lot shall be improved with a paved
surface approved by the city engineer and shall have appropriate bumper guards
where needed. Lights used shall be reflected away from adjoining premises
wherever these areas are used for residential purposes. (Ord. 97-06 § 7-8)
17.32.090: OPTIONAL PROVISIONS:
Shared parking facilities may be used jointly with parking facilities for other
uses when operations are not normally conducted during the same hours, or when
peak uses vary. Requests for shared parking are subject to the approval of the
planning commission and shall also be subject to the following guidelines:
   A.   Sufficient evidence shall be presented to show that there will be no
substantial conflict in the periods of peak demand of uses for which the joint
use is proposed.
   B.   The number of parking stalls which may be credited against the
requirements for the uses involved will not exceed the number of spaces that
may normally be required for any one of the uses sharing the parking.
   C.   Parking facilities should not be located further than two hundred fifty
feet (250') from any use proposing to use such parking unless otherwise
provided for in the historic district overlay zone.
   D.   A written agreement shall be executed by all parties concerned assuring
the continued availability of shared parking facilities in the event that one
of the uses shall be sold or otherwise change ownership or management. (Ord.
97-06 § 7-9)
17.32.100: USES NOT SPECIFICALLY IDENTIFIED IN THIS CHAPTER:
For all parking uses not listed above, the planning commission shall determine
the number of spaces required based upon the nearest comparable use standard
available. (Ord. 97-06 § 7-10)
CHAPTER 17.36
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESS AND LOADING
SECTION:
17.36.010: Access Requirements
17.36.020: Residential Lots; Access
17.36.030: Residential Private Streets; Access
17.36.040: Nonresidential Streets; Access
17.36.050: Screening Of Parking Lots
17.36.060: Maintenance
17.36.070: Lighting
17.36.080: Landscaping
17.36.090: Location Of Gasoline Pumps
17.36.100: Off Street Loading Space
17.36.110: Garbage Collection Access
17.36.120: Questions Not Otherwise Answered
17.36.010: ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
Adequate ingress and egress to and from all uses of land shall be provided as
follows herein. (Ord. 97-06 § 8-1)
17.36.020: RESIDENTIAL LOTS; ACCESS:
   A.   No residential lot shall have more than two (2) driveways unless
approved by the planning commission.
   B.   No driveway, or driveways, except for cul-de-sac lots, shall exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the lot frontage.
   C.   In no event shall a driveway on a major or collector street be placed
on any corner lot within a distance of fifty feet (50') from the point of
intersection of the property lines nearest the intersection.
      1.   On local streets, the distance may be reduced to forty feet (40') or
twenty five feet (25') from the point of curvature of the radius, whichever is
greater, with planning commission approval, after receiving a recommendation
from staff that:
         a.   The length of the local street is of such length that most local
traffic is diverted onto other local or collector streets and is not a
collector street by way of use, or
         b.   The lot is adjacent to a collector or major street which
restricts lot access, and is therefore feasible to enter only from the local
street, or
         c.   The size or shape of the lot is such that it justifies a
reduction as opposed to other lots in the area.
         d.   Other findings of the staff that may be peculiar to the specific
lot, and which may not be applicable to other lots in the area.
      2.   The reduction of the setback distance may not be to simply
accommodate the desire of the property owner without cause, as identified
above.
      3.   The approval of a reduced setback serves to modify the city
construction standards relative to the setback from the corner for any lot so
approved.
   D.   Any unused curb cuts for driveways shall be replaced with standard
curb, gutter, and sidewalk, unless otherwise approved by the city.
   E.   No single-family residential lot shall have an individual access on a
public street designated as a major street as shown on the general plan map of
streets. (Ord. 2007-04: Ord. 2004-26 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 8-2)
17.36.030: RESIDENTIAL PRIVATE STREETS; ACCESS:
   A.   On dead end private streets serving flag lots, a turnaround shall be
required.
   B.   On dead end private streets in residential planned developments, a cul-
de-sac may be required.
   C.   The maximum length of any dead end private street shall be six hundred
feet (600') unless otherwise approved by the planning commission.
   D.   All turnarounds that are not a regular cul-de-sac shall be used solely
as a turnaround, and not as a joint use for such things as parking, garbage
collection, or otherwise.
   E.   Flag lots approved by the planning commission and city council shall be
designed to meet all applicable requirements of section
17.20.220 of this title dealing with flag lots. (Ord. 2004-26 § 1: Ord. 97-06 §
8-3)
17.36.040: NONRESIDENTIAL STREETS; ACCESS:
   A.   Not more than two (2) driveways shall be used for each one hundred feet
(100'), or fraction thereof, of street frontage on any street. Greater spacing
may be required by the city on streets designated as major streets on the city
general plan of streets.
   B.   No two (2) driveways shall be closer together than twelve feet (12'). A
single drive may serve businesses on both sides of a common property line.
   C.   Each driveway shall be not more than fifty feet (50') in width, unless
otherwise approved by the planning commission, except as increased by
permissible curb return radius. In no case shall driveways exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the street frontage.
   D.   In cases where there is an existing curb and gutter, or sidewalk on the
street, the property owner shall provide a safety island along the entire
frontage of the property, except for the permitted driveways.
   E.   No driveway shall be located closer to a public street intersection
than fifty feet (50') from the point of intersection of the property lines
nearest the intersection. (Ord. 2004-26 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 8-4)
17.36.050: SCREENING OF PARKING LOTS:
The sides and rear of any parking lot which faces or adjoins a residential
district shall be screened from such district by a masonry wall, solid visual
barrier fence, or earth berm of a height six feet (6'), or as may be required
by chapter 17.28 of this title, or by the planning commission. (Ord. 2004-26 §
1: Ord. 97-06 § 8-5)
17.36.060: MAINTENANCE:
Each parking lot shall be permanently paved and maintained. (Ord. 97-06 § 8-6)
17.36.070: LIGHTING:
In nonresidential parking lots identified in section
17.36.040 of this chapter, lighting shall be used to illuminate the parking lot
during evening business hours. All lights shall be arranged to reflect the
light away from adjoining premises used for residential or sleeping purposes,
and away from street traffic. (Ord. 2004-26 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 8-7)
17.36.080: LANDSCAPING:
The requirements of the planned development residential and planned development
commercial zones shall apply. (Ord. 97-06 § 8-8)
17.36.090: LOCATION OF GASOLINE PUMPS:
Gasoline pumps shall be set back not less than eighteen feet (18') from any
street property line to which the pump island is vertical and fourteen feet
(14') from any street line to which the pump island is parallel, and not less
than twelve feet (12') from a side boundary line. If the pump island is set at
an angle on the property, it shall be so located that automobiles stopped for
service shall not extend over the property line. (Ord. 97-06 § 8-9)
17.36.100: OFF STREET LOADING SPACE:
On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, occupied
for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, department store, grocery
store, hotel, hospital, or similar use involving the receipt, or distribution
by vehicle of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained
on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading services, in
order to avoid undue interference with public use of streets. In no case shall
required loading and unloading spaces be part of those areas used to satisfy
the parking requirement. Exceptions may be granted by the planning commission
for businesses located in the historic district overlay zone. (Ord. 2004-26 §
1: Ord. 97-06 § 8-10)
17.36.110: GARBAGE COLLECTION ACCESS:
All projects requiring central garbage collection (dumpsters), shall provide
convenient access to collection areas. Collection areas shall be screened from
street views, and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner. (Ord. 97-
06 § 8-11)
17.36.120: QUESTIONS NOT OTHERWISE ANSWERED:
Questions dealing with vehicle access and loading not otherwise covered in this
chapter shall be determined by the planning commission using criteria most
closely related to the question placed before them. (Ord. 97-06 § 8-12)
CHAPTER 17.38
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
17.38.010: Purpose And Intent
17.38.020: Home Occupation Defined
17.38.030: Home Occupation Permit Required
17.38.040: Business License Required
17.38.050: Procedure
17.38.060: Inspection Authority
17.38.070: Requirements
17.38.080: Categories Of Permitted And Nonpermitted Uses
17.38.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to encourage the majority of business
activities to be conducted in appropriate commercial zones. Business activities
may be conducted within a residence on a limited basis if such activities
comply with the standards of this chapter. All home occupations shall be
secondary and incidental to the residential use. The use should be conducted so
that neighbors, under normal conditions, would not be aware of its existence.
Home occupations are a privilege which can be revoked if disruption of the
neighborhood occurs. (Ord. 2012-02)
17.38.020: HOME OCCUPATION DEFINED:
A "home occupation" as used herein shall mean the conducting of any business
transaction, or activity for which consideration of any nature is received in
any zone classified as residential under the land use ordinance. Occasional
"garage sales" held on an irregular basis not to exceed one per year, do not
constitute a home occupation. (Ord. 2012-02)
17.38.030: HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of residential neighborhoods, a home occupation
permit shall be obtained by filing an application, and paying the required fee,
to the city of Santa Clara. The application requires the submission of an
accurate and legible drawing of the home, and the yard, as may be necessary,
showing how the various parts of the home and parking areas will be used in
accommodating the requested use of the home. The request may be heard by either
the city staff, or the planning commission as may be determined by the staff.
(Ord. 2012-02)
17.38.040: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and to protect the
character of residential neighborhoods in the city, a business license shall be
obtained from the city after the home occupation permit has been approved, and
before a dwelling unit in a residential zone may be used for business purposes.
Business licenses shall be renewed annually. (Ord. 2012-02)
17.38.050: PROCEDURE:
Upon approval by the city staff, or planning commission, a permit will be
issued to the applicant and will allow them to obtain a business license from
the city office. The approval will contain whatever requirements will be
imposed on the applicant. The approval of the application is dependent upon
meeting all of the listed requirements in the following section, and the
applicant will agree in writing within the application form to comply with all
said requirements. (Ord. 2012-02)
17.38.060: INSPECTION AUTHORITY:
Any approved home occupation that may require changes in the home such as fire/
safety requirements that would be required for a child daycare business, or any
building code requirements, will require an inspection by the building official
to determine compliance, or to identify changes that would need to be made. The
zoning administrator, or building official, shall have authority at any time to
inspect the dwelling and premises to determine that all requirements for the
home occupation, and the requirements of the international building code, are
being complied with. (Ord. 2012-02)
17.38.070: REQUIREMENTS:
Each requirement listed below must be observed at all times by the holder of a
home occupation permit:
   A.   The holder of a home occupation permit shall be a bona fide resident of
the residence. Persons who are not bona fide residents of the premises shall
not be employed on said premises, or come to the premises to receive regular
work assignments.
   B.   The home occupation business shall be conducted wholly within the
dwelling on the premises, and shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
total floor area. The home occupation shall not occupy any area in the garage
unless the garage still functions for parking of at least one vehicle, and as
long as two (2) parking spaces for residential use are still available. Tandem
parking in the driveway is not permitted.
   C.   Promotional meetings for the purpose of selling merchandise, taking
orders, or training shall not be held more than once per month.
   D.   The home occupation may include the sale of commodities. However, it is
the intent of this chapter that the items be primarily limited to those
produced on the property, or items that are incidental to the service provided
(i.e., a beautician who sells hair care or other beauty products to the
clientele). Sales of products and services are allowed at the home with a
maximum of two (2) nonoverlapping customers per hour.
   E.   No business or commercial sign or advertising shall be displayed on the
premises except for an identification sign not larger than twelve inches by
twelve inches (12" x 12") located on the inside of a window on the front of the
home.
   F.   There shall be no storage of materials, samples, displays, or supplies
outdoors, nor shall any indoor storage be visible from the exterior of the
residence. In no case shall any materials, samples, supplies, machinery, or
equipment be left, placed, stored, or parked on any public street or sidewalk
area, or on any private street or sidewalk.
   G.   Only one vehicle may be used in connection with the home occupation.
The vehicle used for the home occupation shall be limited to a maximum of one
ton gross vehicle weight, nor shall a business be permitted that requires
receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods, or equipment by other than a
passenger vehicle, or parcel or delivery service vehicle in excess of those
usually and customarily used for residential deliveries. No regular deliveries
shall be made by semitractor, or semitrailer truck.
   H.   The home occupation shall not cause a demand for utility, garbage, or
community services beyond those usually provided for residential use.
   I.   The home occupation shall not alter the residential character of the
premises, nor unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet, including radio,
television, and computer reception of the neighborhood by reason of color,
design, materials, construction, lighting, sounds, noises, vibrations, or
electronic disruptions.
   J.   The home occupation shall not cause, directly or indirectly, any
excessive negative impacts on the residential neighborhood, including, but not
limited to, noise, traffic, vehicular or pedestrian, or parking impacts, which
cause three (3) or more persons residing within a five hundred foot (500')
radius of the home occupation to file legitimate complaints, as determined by
the zoning administrator, with the city concerning the home occupation. When
complaints are filed, they will be investigated, and may result in the permit
being called back before the planning commission for determination as to
whether to continue the use, or to terminate it.
   K.   Any requirements established by the staff, or by the planning
commission, authorized by this chapter regarding the home occupation
application shall be made of record, and shall become the basis upon which the
home occupation is approved or later reviewed.
   L.   A home occupation permit shall not be issued unless and until all other
federal, state, county, city, and any other public agency license requirements
to conduct said business have been met, unless city approval is a condition of
receiving state or federal approval.
   M.   Most home occupations can be approved by the planning staff unless the
staff feels that approval should be considered at a public meeting in order to
allow adjoining neighbors the opportunity to respond.
   N.   The planning commission may grant a permit for an indefinite period of
time, unless something in the nature of the use would require them to call it
back up again to be reheard, reinstated, or possibly terminated. In all cases a
permit shall be subject to termination for violating conditions of approval, of
the purpose and intent of this chapter.
   O.   Any use may still be called back for review for cause. (Ord. 2012-02)
17.38.080: CATEGORIES OF PERMITTED AND NONPERMITTED USES:
   A.   In order to minimize traffic and parking problems and to avoid health,
safety, and sanitation risks from the disposal of wastes, health service
businesses are not permitted except for emergency consultation. Other uses,
such as the repair or painting of automobiles, commercial kennels, commercial
stables, and major appliance repair, lawnmower repair, or repair of similar
motorized equipment, manufacturing and industrial type uses, and any other uses
that the planning commission deems to be not in harmony with intent and
character of the residential area, may be denied by the planning commission.
   B.   A sample of some uses that could be permitted as home occupations, as
long as they meet the requirements of this chapter could include artist
studios, architectural services, barber and beauty services, consulting
services, computer services, computer business with sales away from the home,
dance classes, music lessons, swimming lessons, tennis lessons, or any such
lessons (not to exceed 10 students at any 1 time), data processing, secretarial
services, family daycare not to exceed five (5) children plus those living at
the residence, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission and
licensed by the state of Utah. Other similar uses determined by the planning
commission to be compatible with the intent and purpose of the residential zone
and not specifically excluded herein, may also be approved. (Ord. 2012-02)
CHAPTER 17.40
CONDITIONAL USES
SECTION:
17.40.010: Purpose
17.40.020: Permit Required
17.40.030: Application Process
17.40.040: Application Fee
17.40.050: Development Plan
17.40.055: General Standards For Approval Of Conditional Uses
17.40.060: Planning Commission Action
17.40.070: Approval Of Plans And Inspection
17.40.080: Time Limitation
17.40.090: Revocation
17.40.100: Appeal Of Decision
17.40.010: PURPOSE:
To provide for the regulation of land uses to ensure their compatibility and
proper integration into the land use pattern of the City. Certain uses which
may be harmonious under special conditions, but improper under general
conditions, are classified as conditional uses and require conditional use
permits for approval prior to construction. (Ord. 97-06 § 9-1)
17.40.020: PERMIT REQUIRED:
An approved conditional use permit shall be required for each conditional use
listed in this title. No building permit or other permit or license shall be
issued for a use requiring conditional use approval unless a conditional use
permit shall first have been approved by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 97-06 §
9-2)
17.40.030: APPLICATION PROCESS:
Application for a conditional use permit shall be made at the City office in
the same manner as a request for a zone change, subdivision plat review, or
other similar planning request. (Ord. 97-06 § 9-3)
17.40.040: APPLICATION FEE:
The conditional use permit application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in
an amount as may be established by the City Council from time to time. (Ord.
97-06 § 9-4)
17.40.050: DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
The applicant for a conditional use permit shall prepare a site plan and
elevations (as may be necessary) for the site development proposed to be
developed. The plan shall be drawn to scale, and shall show all existing and
proposed buildings, fences, general landscape layout, automobile circulation,
and parking, loading, garbage, lighting, signs, topography for irregular land,
soils reports, vicinity map, drainage plan, and any other information that the
Planning Commission may deem necessary to properly consider the application.
The Planning Commission will not consider a conditional use permit without the
preparation and submission of an accurate and complete development plan. (Ord.
97-06 § 9-5)
17.40.055: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF CONDITIONAL USES:
A conditional use shall be approved if reasonable conditions are imposed to
mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the proposed use.
The following standards must be met in order to mitigate the reasonably
anticipated detrimental effects, if imposed as a condition of approval:
   A.   Noise:
      1.   Excessive noise (unwanted or undesired sound) can cause serious
impacts to health, property values, and economic productivity. Conditional uses
shall not impose excessive noise on surrounding uses. "Excessive noise"
generally means noise that is prolonged, unusual, or a level of noise that in
its time, place and use annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of others.
   B.   Dust:
      1.   Comply with all air quality standards, State, Federal and local.
      2.   Use shall not create unusual or obnoxious dust beyond the property
line.
   C.   Odors:
      1.   Comply with all air quality standards, State, Federal and local.
      2.   Use shall not create unusual or obnoxious odors beyond the property
line.
   D.   Aesthetics:
      1.   Blend harmoniously with the neighborhood so the use does not change
the characteristics of the zone.
   E.   Safety:
      1.   Take the necessary measures to avoid or mitigate any safety problems
created by the use, including problems due to traffic, rock fall, erosion,
flooding, fire, hazardous materials, or related problems.
      2.   Uses shall not locate within the 100-year floodplain as identified
by FEMA unless expressly recommended by the City Engineer in conformance with
City engineering standards and all State, local and Federal laws.
   F.   Traffic:
      1.   Traffic increases due to the conditional use shall not cause streets
or nearby intersections to fall more than one grade from the existing level of
service grade or fall below a level of service "C".
      2.   Uses shall follow City access management standards and not create
hazards to other drivers or pedestrians.
   G.   Height:
      1.   A building's height and scale shall fit into the overall context of
the surrounding area.
      2.   Photo simulations may be required by City staff or Planning
Commission showing all sides of the building(s) and showing how the building
fits into the surrounding area, including its relationship to nearby ridges,
hills, and buildings.
   H.   Hours Of Operation:
      1.   Nonresidential uses operating in proximity to or within a
residential zone shall limit hours of operation so as not to disturb the peace
and quiet of the adjacent residential area.
   I.   Utility Capacity:
      1.   Utility capacity is sufficient to support the use at normal service
levels.
   J.   Public Health:
      1.   Use shall comply with all Sanitation and Solid Waste Disposal Codes.
      2.   Use shall not create public health concerns. (Ord. 2015-11)
17.40.060: PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION:
The Planning Commission may approve, modify, and approve, or deny the
conditional use application made to the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall require such regulations and conditions as may deemed
necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the
area. In approving a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall
find:
   A.   That the proposed use is necessary or desirable and will contribute to
the general well being of the City;
   B.   That the use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, welfare, or
aesthetics, or detrimental to property or improvements in the area;
   C.   That the proposed use will comply with the regulations of this title;
   D.   That the proposed use is in harmony with the intent and purpose of the
general plan, or that the plan shall have first been amended through public
hearing. (Ord. 97-06 § 9-6)
17.40.070: APPROVAL OF PLANS AND INSPECTION:
Upon approval of plans by the Planning Commission, a copy of the approved plan
shall be placed on file in the City office. The City shall inspect the
conditional use site during the course of construction and shall ensure that it
complies with the conditions of the use permit that is on file. (Ord. 97-06 §
9-7)
17.40.080: TIME LIMITATION:
A conditional use permit shall be good for one year after approval. If, at the
end of one year, construction has not been started, or, in the case of a home
occupation business, a business license has not been issued, it shall become
null and void, unless a request is made for extension by the applicant. In
granting any request for extension, the commission shall find that substantial
work shall have been accomplished toward its completion, or, in the case of a
home occupation business, a business license application has been timely
submitted, or that through no fault of the applicant, it has been impossible to
diligently pursue the completion of the application. Extensions may be granted
for periods of time, not to exceed six (6) months at each extension. Once
construction is completed, or, in the case of a home occupation business, a
business license has been issued, the permit shall require no further renewal
except as provided in section
 17.40.090 of this chapter, unless stipulated by the Planning Commission. (Ord.
98-31 § 2: Ord. 97-06 § 9-8)
17.40.090: REVOCATION:
A conditional use permit may be revoked upon failure to comply with the
conditions imposed with the original approval of the permit, or, in the case of
a home occupation business, upon failure to renew the associated business
license for two (2) or more consecutive years, and the applicant shall be so
notified of the revocation. The permit may be reinstated upon determination by
the Planning Commission that the applicant intends to complete the project
according to the plan approved, or as may be amended from time to time during
construction or other performance of the conditional use through approval of
the amendment by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 98-31 § 2: Ord. 97-06 § 9-9)
17.40.100: APPEAL OF DECISION:
Any person shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Planning
Commission. Appeals from the decision of the Planning Commission shall be to
the City Council. (Ord. 97-06 § 9-10)
CHAPTER 17.42
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION:
17.42.010: Facility And Antenna Criteria
17.42.020: Definitions
17.42.030: General Requirements
17.42.040: Registration Of Telecommunications Carriers And Providers
17.42.050: Agreement
17.42.060: Nonexclusive Grant
17.42.070: Rights Granted
17.42.075: Exempt Facilities; Basic Requirements
17.42.080: Minifacilities; Basic Requirements
17.42.090: Minor Facilities; Basic Requirements
17.42.100: Minor Facilities; Referral
17.42.130: Minimum Application Requirements
17.42.140: Standard Agreements Required
17.42.150: Life Of Permits
17.42.160: Structural Requirements
17.42.170: Basic Tower And Building Design
17.42.180: Critical Disaster Response Facilities
17.42.190: Location
17.42.200: Height Determination
17.42.210: Collocated And Multiple User Facilities
17.42.220: Lighting
17.42.230: Roads And Parking
17.42.240: Vegetation Protection And Facility Screening
17.42.250: Fire Prevention
17.42.260: Environmental Resource Protection
17.42.270: Noise And Traffic
17.42.280: Visual Compatibility
17.42.290: NIER Exposure
17.42.310: Exceptions
17.42.320: Public Notice
17.42.330: Ambiguity
17.42.340: Appeal
17.42.010: FACILITY AND ANTENNA CRITERIA:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a uniform and
comprehensive set of standards for the development of telecommunication
facilities and installation of antennas. The regulations contained herein are
designed to protect and promote public health, safety, community welfare and
the aesthetic quality of Santa Clara as set forth within the goals, objectives
and policies of the Santa Clara general plan; while at the same time not unduly
restricting the development of needed telecommunications facilities and
important amateur radio installation and encouraging managed development of
telecommunication infrastructure to ensure Santa Clara's role in the evolution
of technology. It is also the stated intent of this chapter to provide a public
forum to ensure a balance between public concerns and private interest in
establishing telecommunication and related facilities.
It is furthermore intended that, to all extent permitted by law, the city shall
apply these regulations to specifically accomplish the following:
   A.   Protect the visual character of the city from the potential adverse
effects of telecommunication facility development and minor antenna
installation;
   B.   Ensure against the creation of visual blight within or along the city's
scenic corridors and ridge lines;
   C.   Retain local responsibility for and control over the use of public
rights of way to protect citizens and enhance the quality of their lives;
   D.   Protect the inhabitants of Santa Clara from the possible adverse health
effects associated with exposure to high levels of NIER (nonionizing
electromagnetic radiation);
   E.   Protect the environmental resources of Santa Clara;
   F.   Ensure that a competitive and broad range of telecommunications
services and high quality telecommunications infrastructure are provided to
serve the business community;
   G.   Create and preserve telecommunication facilities that will serve as an
important and effective part of Santa Clara's emergency response network;
   H.   Simplify and shorten the process for obtaining necessary permits for
telecommunication facilities while at the same time protecting the legitimate
interests of Santa Clara citizens; and
   I.   Provide for the charging of reasonable, competitively neutral,
nondiscriminatory fees for use of the public ways by telecommunication
providers. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section:
   ANTENNA: Any system of wires. poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar
devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves when
such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure.
Antennas shall included devices having active elements extending in any
direction, and directional beam type arrays having elements carried by and
disposed from a generally horizontal boom that may be mounted upon and rotated
through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the boom and antenna support,
all of which elements are deemed to be a part of the antenna. Antennas shall
include cellular on wheels (COWs) and cellular on light trucks (COLTs)
facilities; as well as dispatch carriers for specialized mobile radio (SMR)
services and enhanced SMR (ESMR).
      Building Mounted Antenna: Any antenna, other than an antenna with its
supports resting on the ground, directly attached or affixed to a building,
tank, tower, building mounted mast less than ten feet (10') tall and six inches
(6") in diameter, or structure other than a telecommunication tower.
      Directional Antenna Or Panel Antenna: Transmits and/or receives radio
frequency signals in a directional pattern of less than three hundred sixty
degrees (360°).
      Ground Mounted Antenna: Any antenna with its base, single or multiple
posts, placed directly on the ground or a mast less than ten feet (10') tall
and six inches (6") in diameter.
      Omni-Directional Antenna: Transmits and/or receives radio frequency
signals in a three hundred sixty degree (360°) radial pattern. For the purpose
of this chapter, an omni-directional antenna is up to fifteen feet (15') in
height and up to four inches (4") in diameter.
      Parabolic Antenna Or Satellite Dish Antenna: Any device incorporating a
reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured that is shallow
dish, cone, horn, bowl or cornucopia shaped and is used to transmit and/or
receive electromagnetic or radio frequency communication signals in a specific
directional pattern. This definition is meant to include, but is not limited
to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs and
satellite microwave antennas.
      Portable Antenna: Any device used to transmit and/or receive
electromagnetic or radio frequency communication/signals in a specific
directional pattern, located on a portable or moveable base designed to be
placed either for temporary or long term use at a given site.
      Vertical Antenna: A vertical type antenna without horizontal cross
sections greater than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter.
   COLLOCATION: See definition of Telecommunication Facility.
   COMMERCIAL USE: A use that involves the exchange of cash, goods or services,
barter, forgiveness of indebtedness, or any other form, or the right to occupy
space over any period of time.
   DIRECT BROADCAST SATELLITE SERVICE (DBS): A system in which signals are
transmitted directly from a satellite to a small (not exceeding 18 inches) home
receiving dish. DBS competes with cable television.
   EQUIPMENT BUILDING, SHELTER OR CABINET: A cabinet or building used to house
equipment used by telecommunication providers to house equipment at a facility.
   INHABITED AREA: Any residence, any other structure regularly occupied by
people, or any outdoor area used by people on a regular basis.
   LATTICE TOWER: A self-supporting support structure, erected on the ground,
which consists of metal crossed strips or bars to support antennas and related
equipment.
   MAXIMUM CREDIBLE EARTHQUAKE: As defined by the uniform building code, zone
2B.
   MONOPOLE: A wireless communication facility which consists of a monopolar
structure, erected on the ground to support wireless communication antennas and
connecting appurtenances.
   NIER: Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (i.e., electromagnetic radiation
primarily in the visible, infrared, and radio frequency portions of the
electromagnetic spectrum).
   PUBLIC SERVICE USE OR FACILITY: A use operated or used by a public body or
public utility in connection with any of the following services: water, waste
water management, public education, parks and recreation, fire and police
protection, solid waste management, transportation or utilities.
   PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public streets and utility easements, now
and hereafter owned by the city, but only to the extent of the city's right,
title, interest or authority to grant a license to occupy and use such streets
and easements for telecommunications facilities.
   QUASI-PUBLIC USE: A use serving the public at large, and operated by a
private entity under a franchise or other similar governmental authorization,
designed to promote the interests of the general public or operated by a
recognized civic organization for the benefit of the general public.
   READILY VISIBLE: An object that stands out as a prominent feature of the
landscape when viewed with the naked eye.
   RELATED EQUIPMENT: All equipment ancillary to the transmission and reception
of voice and data via radio frequencies. Such equipment may include, but is not
limited to, cable, conduit and connectors.
   SATELLITE EARTH STATION: A telecommunication facility consisting of more
than a single satellite dish smaller than ten feet (10') in diameter that
transmits to and/or receives signals from an orbiting satellite.
   SILHOUETTE: A representation of the outline of the towers and antenna
associated with a telecommunication facility, as seen from an elevation
perspective.
   STRUCTURE RIDGE LINE: The line along the top of a roof or top of a
structure, if it has no roof.
   TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY: A facility that transmits and/or receives
electromagnetic signals. It includes antennas, microwave dishes, horns, and
other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals,
telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting said equipment,
equipment buildings, parking area. and other accessory development.
      Collocated Telecommunications Facility: A telecommunication facility
comprised of a single telecommunication tower or building supporting one or
more antennas, dishes, or similar devices owned or used by more than one public
or private entity.
      Commercial Telecommunications Facility: A telecommunication facility that
is operated primarily for a business purpose or purposes.
      Exempt Telecommunications Facility: Includes, but is not limited to, the
following unless located within a recognized historic district:
         A.   A single ground or building mounted receive- only radio or
television antenna including any mast, for the sole use of the tenant occupying
a residential parcel on which the radio or television antenna is located;
within an antenna height not exceeding twenty five feet (25');
         B.   A ground or building mounted citizens band radio antenna
including any mast, if the height (post and antenna) does not exceed thirty
five feet (35');
         C.   A ground, building, or tower mounted antenna operated by
federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the amateur radio service,
if the height (post and antenna) does not exceed thirty five feet (35').
         D.   A ground or building mounted radio or television satellite dish
antenna, which does not exceed thirty six inches (36") in diameter, for the
sole use of the resident occupying a residential parcel on which the satellite
dish is located; provided the height of said dish does not exceed the height of
the ridge line of the primary structure on said parcel.
         E.   All citizens band radio antenna or antenna operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the amateur radio service
which existed at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this
chapter (September 1996).
         F.   Mobile services providing public information coverage of news
events of a temporary nature.
         G.   Handheld devices such as cell phones, business band mobile
radios, walkie talkies, cordless telephones, garage door openers and similar
devices as determined by the city.
         H.   City government owned and operated receive and/or transmit
telemetry station antennas for supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
systems for water, flood alert, traffic control devices and signals, storm
water, pump stations and/or irrigation systems, with heights not exceeding
thirty five feet (35').
         I.   A temporary facility with a monopole up to one hundred feet
(100') in height, installed on a two foot (2') tall prefabricated structural
steel frame foundation with concrete ballast blocks, equipment cabinets and a
diesel generator, or similar technology. In no case shall the above-mentioned
facility and associated equipment be located within three hundred feet (300')
of a residential property that includes any dwelling unit(s). Also, such
facilities must be approved as a temporary use under Chapter
17.24.100 to qualify for an exemption under this section of city code.
      Major Telecommunications Facility: All telecommunication facilities not
clearly set forth and included in the definitions of exempt, minor or
minifacilities.
      Mini Telecommunication Facility: An attached wireless communication
facility consisting, but not limited to, the following unless located on a
structure recognized as a historic landmark:
         A.   A single ground or building mounted receive- only radio or
television antenna including any mast, or the sole use of the tenant occupying
the parcel on which the radio or television antenna is located; with an antenna
height not exceeding fifty feet (50');
         B.   A ground or building mounted citizens band radio antenna
including any mast, if the height (tower, support structure, post and antenna)
does not exceed seventy feet (70');
         C.   A ground, building, or tower mounted antenna operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the amateur radio service,
if the height (post and antenna) does not exceed seventy feet (70').
         D.   A ground or building mounted received-only radio or television
satellite dish antenna, with diameter exceeding thirty six inches (36") but
less than eight feet (8') in diameter, for the sole use of the resident
occupying a residential parcel on which the satellite dish is located; provided
the height of said dish does not exceed the height of the ridgeline of the
primary structure on said parcel.
         E.   Exempt telecommunication facility located within a recognized
historic district.
         F.   City owned and operated antennas used for emergency response
services, public utilities, operations and maintenance if the height does not
exceed seventy feet (70').
      If a facility does not meet these criteria then it is considered either a
"exempt", "minor" or "major" telecommunication facility.
      Minor Telecommunications Facility: Any of the following:
         A.   Antenna which meet the definition of "mini" with the exception of
the height limit.
         B.   Telecommunication facilities less than thirty five feet (35') in
height and that adhere to section
17.42.090 of this chapter.
         C.   A single ground or building mounted whip (omni) antenna without a
reflector, less than four inches (4") in diameter whose total height does not
exceed thirty five feet (35'); including any mast to which it is attached,
located on commercial and/or industrial zoned property.
         D.   A ground or building mounted panel antenna whose height is equal
to or less than four feet (4') and whose area is not more than four hundred
eighty (480) square inches in the aggregate (e.g., 1 foot diameter parabola or
2 foot by 11/2 foot panel) as viewed from any one point, located on commercial
or industrial zoned property. The equipment cabinets shall be designed, placed
and screened to be unobtrusive and effectively unnoticeable.
         E.   More than three (3) antennas, satellite dishes (greater than 3
feet in diameter), panel antennas, or combination thereof are proposed to be
placed on the commercial or industrial parcel, including existing facilities.
         F.   Building mounted antennas which, in the opinion of the planning
director, are unobtrusive or undetectable by way of design and/or placement on
the building, regardless of number; when located on commercial or industrial
zoned property.
         G.   Telecommunication facilities less than fifty feet (50') in
height, in compliance with the applicable sections of this chapter, located on
a parcel owned by the city of Santa Clara and utilized for public and/or quasi-
public uses where it is found by the planning director to be compatible with
the existing city uses of the property.
         H.   Telecommunication facilities, including multiple antennas, in
compliance with the applicable sections of this chapter, located on an
industrial parcel and utilized for the sole use and purpose of a research and
development tenant of said parcel, where it is found by the city to be
aesthetically compatible with the existing and surrounding structures.
         I.   Telecommunication facilities located on a structure recognized as
a historic landmark.
      If a facility does not meet these criteria then is considered a "major"
telecommunication facility.
      Multiple User Telecommunications Facility: A telecommunication facility
comprised of multiple telecommunication towers or buildings supporting one or
more antennas owned or used by more than one public or private entity,
excluding research and development industries with antennas to serve internal
uses only.
      Noncommercial Telecommunications Facility: A telecommunication facility
that is operated solely for a nonbusiness purpose.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER: A mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice
tower, freestanding tower, or other structure designed and primarily used to
support antennas. A ground or building mounted mast greater than ten feet (10')
tall and six inches (6") in diameter supporting one or more antenna, dishes,
arrays, etc. shall be considered a telecommunications tower. (Ord. 2024-13:
Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.030: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements shall be met for all telecommunications facilities
in any zoning district:
   A.   Any applicable general plan goals, objectives, programs and policies,
specific plan, PUD standards, design guidelines, and the permit requirements of
any agencies which have jurisdiction over the project;
   B.   All the requirements established by the other chapters of this code and
Santa Clara zoning ordinance that are not in conflict with the requirements
contained in this chapter;
   C.   The uniform building code, national electrical code, uniform plumbing
code, uniform mechanical code, and uniform fire code, where applicable;
   D.   Any applicable airport land use compatibility criteria/policies and
federal aviation administration regulations;
   E.   Any applicable easements or similar restrictions on the subject
property, including adopted PUD standards;
   F.   Facilities and minor antennas cannot be located in any required yard
setback area of the zoning district in which it is located with the exception
of possible encroachment of the antenna array into airspace over said setback;
   G.   All setbacks shall be measured from the base of the tower or structure
closest to the applicable property line or structure;
   H.   All commercial telecommunication facilities and minor antenna shall
comply at all times with all FCC rules, regulations, and standards;
   I.   All telecommunication facilities shall maintain in place a security
program, when determined necessary by and subject to the review and approval of
the public safety director that will prevent unauthorized access and vandalism;
   J.   Satellite dish and parabolic antennas shall be situated as close to the
ground as possible to reduce visual impact without compromising their function;
and
   K.   All telecommunications carriers and providers engaged in the business
of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications originating or
terminating in the city of Santa Clara shall register with the city pursuant to
section
17.42.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.040: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS:
   A.   Registration Required: All telecommunications carriers and providers
that offer or provide any telecommunications services for a fee directly to the
public, either within the city of Santa Clara, or outside the corporate limits
from telecommunications facilities within the city, shall register with the
city pursuant to this chapter on forms to be provided by the city, which shall
include the following:
      1.   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any
affiliates;
      2.   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement;
      3.   A narrative and map description of registrant's existing or proposed
telecommunications facilities within the city of Santa Clara;
      4.   A description of the telecommunications services that the registrant
intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons,
firms, businesses or institutions within the city;
      5.   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied
for and has received a certificate of authority required by the Utah public
utility commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within
the city;
      6.   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied
for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals
required by the federal communications commission (FCC) to provide
telecommunications services or facilities within the city;
      7.   Such other information as the city may reasonably require.
   B.   Registration Fee: Each application for registration as a
telecommunications carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a fee as set
forth by resolution of the city council.
   C.   Purpose Of Registration: The purpose of registration under this section
is to:
      1.   Provide the city with accurate and current information concerning
the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the city, or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities with the city;
      2.   Assist the city in enforcement of this chapter;
      3.   Assist the city in the collection and enforcement of any license
fees or charges that may be due the city; and
      4.   Assist the city in monitoring compliance with local, state and
federal laws.
   D.   Amendment: Each registrant shall inform the city, within sixty (60)
days of any change of the information set forth in this section. (Ord. 99-26 §
1)
17.42.050: AGREEMENT:
No approval granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the
city have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which the approval to occupy and use public ways of the city
will be granted. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.060: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No approval granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the city
for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 99-26
§ 1)
17.42.070: RIGHTS GRANTED:
No approval granted under this chapter shall convey any right, title or
interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed approval only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and tenn stated in the
approval. Further, no approval shall be construed as any warranty of title.
(Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.075: EXEMPT FACILITIES; BASIC REQUIREMENTS:
Exempt facilities defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter may be installed, erected, maintained and/or operated
in any residential zoning district, except recognized historic districts, where
such antennas are permitted under this title, without benefit of a building
permit or other entitlement process, so long as all the following conditions
are met:
   A.   The antenna use involved is accessory to the primary use of the
property which is not a telecommunications facility;
   B.   In a residential zone, no more than one support structure for licensed
amateur radio operator, satellite dish eight feet (8') or less in diameter, is
allowed on the parcel;
   C.   Sufficient anticlimbing measures have been incorporated into the
facility, as needed, to reduce potential for trespass and injury. (Ord. 99-26 §
1)
17.42.080: MINIFACILITIES; BASIC REQUIREMENTS:
Minifacilities defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter may be installed, erected, maintained and/or operated
in any residential, commercial or industrial zoning district where such
antennas are permitted under this title, upon the issuance of a building permit
which has received site plan and architectural review and approval by the city,
so long as all the following conditions are met:
   A.   In a commercial or industrial zone, no more than three (3) antennas,
satellite dish eight feet (8') or less in diameter; where adequate screening,
at the discretion of the city, is provided; and the telecommunication
facilities are solely for the use of the project site tenants, location subject
to the discretional review and approval of the city.
   B.   Replacement of preexisting telecommunication facilities, installed
under a prior approval under this chapter which is being proposed for
replacement by equipment of identical or a smaller size, at the discretion of
the city.
   C.   In a residential zone, where more than one but no more than three (3)
antennas or satellite dishes (3 inches or less in diameter) are proposed.
   D.   Sufficient anticlimbing measures have been incorporated into the
facility, as needed, to reduce potential for trespass and injury. (Ord. 99-26 §
1)
17.42.090: MINOR FACILITIES; BASIC REQUIREMENTS:
Minor facilities as defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter may be installed, erected, maintained and/or operated
in any commercial or industrial zoning district where such antennas are
permitted under this title, upon the issuance of a minor conditional use
permit, so long as all the following conditions are met:
   A.   The minor antenna use involved is accessory to the primary use of the
property which is not a telecommunications facility.
   B.   The combined effective radiated power radiated by all the antenna
present on the parcel is less than one thousand five hundred (1,500) watts.
   C.   The combined NIER levels produced by all the antenna present on the
parcel does not exceed the NIER standard established in section 17.42.290 of
this chapter.
   D.   The antenna is not situated between the primary building on the parcel
and any public or private street adjoining the parcel, so as to create a
negative visual impact.
   E.   The antenna is located outside all yard and street setbacks specified
in the zoning district in which the antenna is to be located and no closer than
twenty feet (20') to any property line.
   F.   None of the guy wires employed are anchored within the area in front of
the primary structure on the parcel.
   G.   No portion of the antenna array extends beyond the property lines or
into the area in front of the primary building on the parcel, so as to create a
negative visual impact.
   H.   At least ten feet (10') of horizontal clearance exists between the
antenna and any power lines, unless more clearance is required to meet CPUC
standards.
   I.   All towers, masts and booms are made of a noncombustible material and
all hardware such as brackets, turnbuckles, clips, and similar type equipment
subject to rust or corrosion has been protected either by galvanizing or
sheradizing after forming.
   J.   The materials employed are not unnecessarily bright, shiny or
reflective and are of a color and type that blends with the surroundings to the
greatest extent possible.
   K.   The installation is in compliance with the manufacturer's structural
specifications and the requirements of the uniform building code.
   L.   The height of the facility shall include the height of any structure
upon which it is placed, unless otherwise defined within this chapter.
   M.   No more than two (2) satellite dishes are allowed on the parcel, one of
which may be over three feet (3') in diameter, but no larger than eight feet
(8') in diameter, with adequate screening, at the discretion of the city.
   N.   Any ground mounted satellite dish with a diameter greater than four
feet (4') that is situated less than five (5) times its actual diameter from
adjoining property lines has screening treatments located along the antenna's
nonreception window axes and low level landscape treatments along its reception
window axes.
   O.   Any roof mounted panel antenna with a face area greater than three and
one-half (31/2) square feet shall be located so as to be effectively
unnoticeable.
   P.   Sufficient anticlimbing measures have been incorporated into the
facility, as needed, to reduce potential for trespass and injury.
   Q.   The facility is located more than three hundred feet (300') from any
residential dwelling unit, unless recognized as an exempt facility as set forth
in section
17.42.020 of this chapter.
   R.   No trees larger than twenty inches (20") in diameter measured at four
and one-half feet (41/2') high on the tree would have to be removed.
   S.   Any new building(s), structure(s), control panel(s), etc. shall be
effectively screened from view from off site.
   T.   The site has an average cross slope of ten percent (10%) or less.
   U.   All utility lines to the facility from public or private streets shall
be underground.
   V.   If located within a recognized historic district, or on a structure
recognized as a historic landmark, that adequate screening has been provided.
   W.   The general criteria set forth in the chapter are met. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.100: MINOR FACILITIES; REFERRAL:
The city may refer a conditional use permit for a minor telecommunications
facility that meets all of the above standards if the city determines, at their
sole discretion, that the public interest would be furthered by having the
planning commission review this matter. In that case and the case of any
proposed facility that fails to meet one or more of the standards listed above,
a use permit approved by the planning commission shall be required to construct
the facility in question. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.130: MINIMUM APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
The following are the minimum criteria applicable to all telecommunication
facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter. In the event that a project is subject to
discretionary and/or environmental review, mitigation measures or other
conditions may also be necessary. All telecommunications facilities shall
comply with the following:
   A.   The city shall establish and maintain a list of information that must
accompany every application for the installation of a telecommunications
facility. Said information may include, but shall not be limited to, completed
supplemental project information forms, a specific maximum requested gross
cross sectional area, or silhouette, of the facility; service area maps,
network maps, alternative site analysis. visual impact demonstrations including
mock ups and/or photo montages, visual impact analysis, NIER (nonionizing
electromagnetic radiation) exposure studies, title reports identifying legal
access, security considerations, lists of other nearby telecommunication
facilities known to the city, master plan for all related facilities within the
city limits of Santa Clara and within one- fourth (1/4) mile therefrom; and
facility design alternatives to the proposal and deposits for peer review, if
deemed necessary by the city. The city may release an applicant from having to
provide one or more of the pieces of information on this list upon finding that
in the specific case involved said information is not necessary to process or
make a decision on the application being submitted; and
   B.   The city is explicitly authorized at their discretion to employ on
behalf of the city an independent technical expert to review any technical
materials submitted including, but not limited to, those required under this
section and in those cases where a technical demonstration of unavoidable need
or unavailability of alternatives is required. The applicant shall pay all the
costs of said review, including any administrative costs incurred by the city.
Any proprietary information disclosed to the city or the expert hired shall
remain confidential and shall not be disclosed to any third party. (Ord. 99-26
§ 1)
17.42.140: STANDARD AGREEMENTS REQUIRED:
   A.   A maintenance/facility removal agreement signed by the applicant shall
be submitted to the city prior to approval of the use permit or other
entitlement for use authorizing the establishment or modification of any
telecommunications facility which includes a telecommunication tower, one or
more new buildings/equipment enclosures larger in aggregate than three hundred
(300) square feet, more than three (3) satellite dishes of any size, or a
satellite dish larger than four feet (4') in diameter. Said agreement shall
bind the applicant and the applicant's successors in interest to properly
maintain the exterior appearance of and ultimately removal of the facility in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any conditions of approval.
It shall further bind them to pay all costs for monitoring compliance with, and
enforcement of, the agreement and to reimburse the city for all costs incurred
to perform any work required of the applicant by this agreement that the
applicant fails to perform. It shall also specifically authorize the city and/
or its agents to enter onto the property and undertake said work so long as:
      1.   The city has first provided the applicant the following written
notices:
         a.   An initial compliance request identifying the work needed to
comply with the agreement and providing the applicant at least thirty (30)
calendar days to complete it. If the work is deemed to be a health and/or
safety hazard to the general public, the city may take necessary steps to
remedy the problem immediately; and
         b.   A follow up notice of default specifying the applicant's failure
to comply with the work within the time period specified and indicating the
city's intent to commence the required work within ten (10) working days;
      2.   The applicant has not filed an appeal pursuant to section
17.42.340 of this chapter within fourteen (14) working days of the notice
required under subsection A1 of this section. If an appeal is filed, the city
shall be authorized to enter the property and perform the necessary work if the
appeal is dismissed or final action on it taken in favor of the city.
      3.   All costs incurred by the city to undertake any work required to be
performed by the applicant pursuant to the agreement referred to in this
section including, but not limited to, administrative and job supervision
costs, shall be borne solely by the applicant. The applicant shall deposit
within ten (10) working days of written request therefor such costs as the city
reasonably estimates or has actually incurred to complete such work. When
estimates are employed, additional monies shall be deposited as needed within
ten (10) working days of demand to cover actual costs. The agreement shall
specifically require the applicant to immediately cease operation of the
telecommunication facility involved if the applicant fails to pay the monies
demanded within ten (10) working days. It shall further require that operation
remain suspended until such costs are paid in full.
   B.   Standard agreement required by subsection A of this section shall be
accompanied by the payment of a fee, as established by resolution of the city
council.
   C.   Standard agreement required by subsection A of this section shall
include, but not be limited to, the following stipulations agreed to by the
applicant:
      1.   Telecommunication facilities lessors shall be strictly liable for
any and all sudden and accidental pollution and gradual pollution resulting
from their use within the city of Santa Clara. This liability shall include
cleanup, intentionally injury or damage to persons or property. Additionally,
telecommunication facilities lessors shall be responsible for any sanctions,
fines, or other monetary costs imposed as a result of the release of pollutants
from their operations. Pollutants means any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal
irritant or contaminant, including smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis,
chemicals, electromagnetic waves and waste. Waste includes materials to be
recycled, reconditioned or reclaimed.
      2.   The telecommunication facility provider shall defend, indemnify, and
hold harmless the city or any of its boards, commissions, agents, officers, and
employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the city, its boards,
commission, agents, officers, or employees to attack, set aside, void, or
annul, the approval of the project when such claim or action is brought within
the time period provided for in applicable state and/or local statutes. The
city shall promptly notify the provider(s) of any such claim, action or
proceeding. The city shall have the option of coordinating in the defense.
Nothing contained in this stipulation shall prohibit the city from
participating in a defense of any claim, action, or proceeding if the city
bears its own attorney fees and costs, and the city defends the action in good
faith. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.150: LIFE OF PERMITS:
   A.   A use permit issued pursuant to this chapter or a site plan approval
issued pursuant to this chapter authorizing establishment of a
telecommunication facility, except exempt facilities as defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter, shall be reviewed every five (5) years. Costs
associated with the review process shall be borne by the telecommunication
facility owner/provider. Grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit,
pursuant to section 26-509 of the Santa Clara zoning ordinance, shall be
limited to a finding that: 1) the use involved is no longer allowed in the
applicable zoning district, 2) the facility fails to comply with the relevant
requirements of this chapter as they exist at the time of renewal and the
permittee has failed to supply assurances acceptable to the city that the
facility will be brought into compliance within one hundred twenty (120) days,
3) the permittee has failed to comply with the conditions of approval imposed,
4) the facility has not been properly maintained, or 5) the facility has not
been upgraded to minimize its impact, including community aesthetics, to the
greatest extent permitted by the technology that exists at the time of renewal
and is consistent with the provisions of universal service at affordable rates.
The grounds for appeal of issuance of a renewal shall be limited to a showing
that one or more of the situations listed above do in fact exist or that the
notice required under section
17.42.320 of this chapter was not provided.
   B.   If a use permit or other entitlement for use is not renewed, it shall
automatically become null and void without notice or hearing ten (10) years
after it is used or upon cessation of use for more than a year and a day,
whichever comes first. Unless a new use permit or entitlement of use is issued,
within one hundred twenty (120) days thereafter all improvements installed
including their foundations down to three feet (3') below ground surface shall
be removed from the property and the site restored to its natural
preconstruction state within one hundred eighty (180) days of nonrenewal or
abandonment. Any access road installed shall also be removed and the ground
returned to its natural condition unless the property owner establishes to the
satisfaction of the city that these sections of road are necessary to serve
some other allowed use of the property that is permitted or is currently
present or to provide access to adjoining parcels. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.160: STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS:
No telecommunication facility shall be designed and/or sited such that it poses
a potential hazard to nearby residences or surrounding properties or
improvements. To this end, any telecommunication tower, except exempt
facilities as defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter, located at a distance of less than one hundred
percent (100%) of its height from a habitable structure, property line, or
other tower shall be designed and maintained to withstand without failure the
maximum forces expected from wind and earthquakes when the tower is fully
loaded with antennas, transmitters and other equipment, and camouflaging.
Initial demonstration of compliance with this requirement shall be provided via
submission of a report to the building official prepared by a structural
engineer licensed by the state of Utah a describing the tower structure,
specifying the number and type of antennas it is designed to accommodate,
providing the basis for the calculations done, and documenting the actual
calculations performed. Proof of ongoing compliance shall be provided via
submission to the city at least every five (5) (self-supporting and guyed
towers)/ten (10) (monopoles) years of an inspection report prepared by a Utah
licensed structural engineer indicating the number and types of antennas and
related equipment actually present and indicating the structural integrity of
the tower. Based on this report, the city may require repair or, if a serious
safety problem exists, removal of the tower. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.170: BASIC TOWER AND BUILDING DESIGN:
All telecommunication facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in
section
17.42.020 of this chapter, shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment to the greatest extent feasible. To this end all the following
measures shall be implemented:
   A.   Telecommunication towers shall be constructed out of metal or other
nonflammable material, unless specifically conditioned by the city to be
otherwise.
   B.   Telecommunication towers taller than thirty five feet (35') shall be
monopole or guyed/lattice towers except where satisfactory evidence is
submitted to the city, as appropriate, that a self-supporting tower is required
to provide the height and/or capacity necessary for the proposed
telecommunication use to minimize the need for screening from adjacent
properties, or to reduce the potential for bird strikes. Maximum height
allowance shall be eight feet (80') except that consideration may be given to
heights up to one hundred twenty feet (120') at the discretion of the city
council.
   C.   Satellite dishes other than microwave dishes shall be of mesh
construction, except where technical evidence is acceptable to the city, as
appropriate, is submitted showing that this is infeasible.
   D.   Telecommunication support facilities (i.e., vaults, equipment rooms,
utilities, and equipment enclosures) shall be constructed out of nonreflective
materials (visible exterior surfaces only) and shall be placed in underground
vaults to all extent possible.
   E.   Telecommunication support facilities in an area of high visibility
shall, where possible, be sited below the ridge line or designed (i.e., placed
underground, depressed, or located behind earth berms) to minimize their
profile.
   F.   All buildings, poles, towers, antenna supports, antennas, and other
components of each telecommunications site shall be initially painted and
thereafter repainted as necessary with a "flat" paint. The color selected shall
be one that in the opinion of the city, is appropriate, to minimize their
visibility to the greatest extent feasible.
   G.   The project description and permit shall include a specific maximum
allowable gross cross sectional area, or silhouette, of the facility. The
silhouette shall be measured from the "worst case" elevation perspective.
   H.   The city shall have the authority to require special design of the
telecommunication facilities where findings of particular sensitivity are made
(e.g., proximity to historic or aesthetically significant structures, views
and/or community features).
   I.   Telecommunication facilities shall ensure that sufficient anticlimbing
measures have been incorporated into the facility, as needed, to reduce
potential for trespass and injury. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.180: CRITICAL DISASTER RESPONSE FACILITIES:
   A.   All radio, television and voice communication facilities providing
service to government or the general public shall be designed to survive a
natural disaster without interruption in operation. To this end all the
following measures shall be implemented:
      1.   Nonflammable exterior wall and roof covering shall be used in the
construction of all buildings;
      2.   Openings in all buildings shall be protected against penetration by
fire and windblown embers;
      3.   The telecommunication tower when fully loaded with antennas,
transmitters, other equipment and camouflaging shall be designed to withstand
the forces expected during the "maximum credible earthquake". All equipment
mounting racks and equipment used shall be anchored in such a manner that such
a quake will not tip them over, throw the equipment off its shelves, or
otherwise act to damage it;
      4.   All connections between various components of the facility and with
necessary power and telephone lines shall be protected against damage by fire,
flooding, and earthquake; and
Measures shall be taken to keep the facility operational in the event of
disaster.
   B.   Demonstration of compliance with requirements of subsections A1, A2, A4
and A5 of this section (fire only) shall be evidenced by a certificate signed
by the public safety director on the building plans submitted.
   C.   Demonstration of compliance with requirements of subsections A3 through
A5 (earthquake only) shall be provided via a second certification on said plans
signed by a structural engineer or other appropriate professional licensed by
the state of Utah. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.190: LOCATION:
All telecommunication facilities shall be located so as to minimize their
visibility and the number of distinct facilities present. To this end all of
the following measures shall be implemented for all telecommunications
facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter:
   A.   No telecommunication facility shall be installed at a location where
special painting or lighting will be required by the FAA regulations unless
technical evidence acceptable to the city, as appropriate, is submitted showing
that this is the only technically feasible location for this facility.
   B.   No telecommunication facility shall be installed on an exposed ridge
line, in or at a location readily visible from Pioneer Parkway, a public trail,
public park or other outdoor recreation area, or in property designated with a
floodway (FW), park or open space (OS) on the Santa Clara general plan, unless
it blends with the surrounding existing natural and manmade environment in such
a manner as to be effectively unnoticeable and a finding is made that no other
location is technically feasible.
   C.   No telecommunication facility that is readily visible from off site
shall be installed closer than one-half (1/2) mile from another readily visible
uncamouflaged or unscreened telecommunication facility unless it is a
collocated facility, situated on a multiple user site, or blends with the
surrounding existing natural and manmade environment in such a manner as to be
effectively unnoticeable; or technical evidence acceptable to the city, as
appropriate, is submitted showing a clear need for this facility and the
infeasibility of collocating it on one of these former sites.
   D.   No telecommunication facility that is readily visible from off site
shall be installed on a site that is not already developed with
telecommunication facilities or other public or quasi-public uses unless it
blends with the surrounding existing natural and manmade environment in such a
manner so as to be effectively unnoticeable or technical evidence acceptable to
the city, as appropriate, is submitted showing a clear need for this facility
and the infeasibility of collocating it on one of these former sites. (Ord. 99-
26 § 1)
17.42.200: HEIGHT DETERMINATION:
The height of a telecommunication tower shall be measured from the natural
undisturbed ground surface below the center of the base of said tower to the
top of the tower itself or, if higher, to the tip of the highest antenna or
piece of equipment attached thereto. In the case of building mounted towers the
height of the tower includes the height of the portion of the building on which
it is mounted. In the case of "crank up" or other similar towers whose height
can be adjusted, the height of the tower shall be the maximum height to which
it is capable of being raised. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.210: COLLOCATED AND MULTIPLE USER FACILITIES:
   A.   An analysis shall be prepared by or on behalf of the applicant, subject
to the approval of the decision making body, which identifies all reasonable,
technically feasible, alternative locations and/or facilities which would
provide the proposed telecommunication service. The intention of the
alternatives analysis is to present alternative strategies which would minimize
the number, size, and adverse environmental impacts of facilities necessary to
provide the needed services to the city and surrounding rural and urban areas.
The analysis shall address the potential for collocation at an existing or a
new site and the potential to locate facilities as close as possible to the
intended service area. It shall also explain the rationale for selection of the
proposed site in view of the relative merits of any of the feasible
alternatives. Approval of the project is subject to the decision making body
making a finding that the proposed site results in fewer or less severe
environmental impacts than any feasible alternative site. The city may require
independent verification of this analysis at the applicant's expense.
Facilities which are not proposed to be collocated with another
telecommunication facility shall provide a written explanation why the subject
facility is not a candidate for collocation.
   B.   All collocated and multiple user telecommunication facilities shall be
designed to promote facility and site sharing. To this end telecommunication
towers and necessary appurtenances, including, but not limited to, parking
areas, access roads, utilities and equipment buildings shall be shared by site
users when in the determination of the city, as appropriate, this will minimize
overall visual impact to the community.
   C.   The facility shall make available unutilized space for collocation of
other telecommunication facilities, including space for these entities
providing similar, competing services. A good faith effort in achieving
collocation shall be required of the host entity. Requests for utilization of
facility space and responses to such requests shall be made in a timely manner
and in writing and copies shall be provided to the city's permit files.
Unresolved disputes may be mediated by the planning commission or city council.
Collocation is not required in cases where the addition of the new service or
facilities would cause quality of service impairment to the existing facility
or if it became necessary for the host to go off line for a significant period
of time.
   D.   Approval for the establishment of facilities improved with an existing
microwave band or other public service use or facility, which creates
interference or interference is anticipated as a result of said establishment
of additional facilities, shall include provisions for the relocation of said
existing public use facilities. All costs associated with said relocation shall
be borne by the applicant for the additional facilities. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.220: LIGHTING:
All telecommunication facilities shall be unit except for the following:
   A.   A manually operated or motion detector controlled light above the
equipment shed door which shall be kept off except when personnel are actually
present at night; and
   B.   The minimum tower lighting required under FAA regulations; and
   C.   Where tower lighting is required, it shall be shielded or directed to
the greatest extent possible in such a manner as to minimize the amount of
light that falls onto nearby properties. particularly residences. (Ord. 99-26 §
1)
17.42.230: ROADS AND PARKING:
All telecommunication facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in
section
17.42.020 of this chapter, shall be served by the minimum roads and parking
areas necessary. To this end all the following measures shall be implemented:
   A.   Existing roads shall be used for access, whenever possible, and be
upgraded the minimum amount necessary to meet standards specified by the public
safety director and public works director. Any new roads or parking areas built
shall, whenever feasible, be shared with subsequent telecommunication
facilities and/or other permitted uses. In addition, they shall meet the width
and structural requirements of the public safety director and public works
director.
   B.   Existing parking areas shall, whenever possible, be used; and
   C.   Any new parking areas constructed shall be no larger than three hundred
fifty (350) square feet. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.240: VEGETATION PROTECTION AND FACILITY SCREENING:
All telecommunications facilities shall be installed in such a manner so as to
maintain and enhance existing native vegetation and to install suitable
landscaping to screen the facility, where necessary. To this end all of the
following measures shall be implemented for all telecommunication facilities,
except exempt facilities as defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter:
   A.   A landscape plan shall be submitted with project application submittal
indicating all existing vegetation, identifying landscaping that is to be
retained on the site and any additional vegetation that is needed to
satisfactorily screen the facility from adjacent land uses and public view
areas. The landscape plan shall be subject to review and approval of the site
plan and architectural review process. All trees with trunks larger than four
inches (4") in diameter shall be identified in the landscape plan with
indication of species type, diameter at four and one- half feet (41/2') high,
and whether it is to be retained or removed with project development;
   B.   Existing trees and other screening vegetation in the vicinity of the
facility and along the access roads and power/telecommunication line routes
involved shall be protected from damage, both during the construction period
and thereafter. To this end, the following measures shall be implemented:
      1.   A tree protection plan shall be submitted with building permit or
improvement plan. This plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect
and give specific measures to protect trees during project construction,
      2.   Grading, cutting/filling, and the storage/parking of equipment/
vehicles shall be prohibited in landscaped areas to be protected and the drip
line of any trees required to be preserved. Such area shall be fenced to the
satisfaction of the city, as appropriate. Trash, debris, or spoils shall not be
placed within these fences nor shall the fences henceforth be opened or moved
until the project is complete and written approval to take the fences down has
been received from the city, and
      3.   All underground lines shall be routed such that a minimum amount of
damage is done to tree root systems;
   C.   All areas disturbed during project construction other than the access
road and parking areas required under section
17.42.230 of this chapter shall be replanted with vegetation compatible with
the vegetation in the surrounding area (e.g., ornamental shrubs or natural
brush, depending upon the circumstances) to the satisfaction of the city;
   D.   Any existing trees or significant vegetation, on the facilities site or
along the affected access area that die shall be replaced with native trees and
vegetation of a size and species acceptable to the city; and
   E.   No actions shall be taken subsequent to project completion with respect
to the vegetation present that would increase the visibility of the facility
itself or the access road and power/telecommunication lines serving it. (Ord.
99-26 § 1)
17.42.250: FIRE PREVENTION:
   A.   All telecommunication facilities shall be designed and operated in such
a manner so as to minimize the risk of igniting a fire or intensifying one that
otherwise occurs. To this end all of the following measures shall be
implemented for all telecommunication facilities, when determined necessary by
the public safety director, except exempt facilities as defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter:
      1.   At least one hour fire resistant interior surfaces shall be used in
the construction of all buildings;
      2.   Monitored automatic fire extinguishing systems approved by the
public safety director shall be installed in all equipment buildings and
enclosures;
      3.   Rapid entry (KNOX) systems shall be installed as required by the
public safety director;
      4.   Type and location of vegetation and other materials within ten feet
(10') of the facility and all new structures, including telecommunication
towers, shall have review for fire safety purposes by the public safety
director. Requirements established by the public safety director shall be
followed; and
      5.   All tree trimmings and trash generated by construction of the
facility shall be removed from the property and properly disposed of prior to
building permit finalization or commencement of operation, whichever comes
first.
   B.   Demonstration of compliance with requirements subsections A1 through A5
of this section shall be evidenced by a certificate signed by the public safety
director on the building plans submitted. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.260: ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE PROTECTION:
All telecommunication facilities shall be sited so as to minimize the effect on
environmental resources. To that end the following measures shall be
implemented for all telecommunication facilities, except exempt facilities as
defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter:
   A.   No telecommunications facility or related improvements including, but
not limited to, access roads and power lines shall be sited so as to create a
significant threat to the health or survival of rare, threatened or endangered
plant or animal species;
   B.   No telecommunications facility or related improvements shall be sited
such that their construction will damage an archaeological site or have an
adverse effect on the historic character of a historic feature or site;
   C.   No telecommunication facility shall be sited such that its presence
threatens the health or safety of migratory birds;
   D.   The facility shall comply with all applicable city floodplain, floodway
and storm drainage and erosion control regulations;
   E.   Potential adverse visual impacts which might result from project
related grading or road construction shall be minimized;
   F.   Potential adverse impacts upon nearby public use areas such as parks or
trails shall be minimized; and
   G.   Drainage, erosion, and sediment controls shall be required as necessary
to abide soil erosion and sedimentation of waterways. Structures and roads on
slopes of ten percent (10%) or greater shall be avoided. Erosion control
measures shall be incorporated for any proposed facility which involves grading
or construction near a waterway or on lands with slopes over ten percent (10%).
Natural vegetation and topography shall be retained to the extent feasible.
(Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.270: NOISE AND TRAFFIC:
All telecommunication facilities shall be constructed and operated in such a
manner as to minimize the amount of disruption caused to the residents of
nearby homes and the users of nearby recreational areas such as public parks
and trails. To that end all the following measures shall be implemented for all
telecommunication facilities, except exempt facilities as defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter:
   A.   Outdoor noise producing construction activities shall only take place
on weekdays (Monday through Friday, nonholiday) between the hours of seven
thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. and five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. unless allowed
at other times by the city;
   B.   Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages and for
testing and maintenance purposes. If the facility is located within three
hundred feet (300') of a residential dwelling unit, noise attenuation measures
shall be included to reduce noise levels to an exterior noise level of at least
an Ldn of sixty (60) dB at the property line and an interior noise level of Ldn
of forty five (45) dB. Testing and maintenance shall only take place on
weekdays between the hours of eight thirty o'clock (8:30) A.M. and four thirty
o'clock (4:30) P.M.; and
   C.   Traffic, at all times, shall be kept to an absolute minimum, but in no
case more than two (2) round trips per day on an average annualized basis once
construction is complete. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.280: VISUAL COMPATIBILITY:
   A.   Facility structures and equipment shall be located, designed and
screened to blend with the existing natural or built surroundings so as to
reduce visual impacts to the extent feasible considering the technological
requirements of the proposed telecommunication service and the need to be
compatible with neighboring residences and the character of the community.
   B.   The facility is designed to blend with any existing supporting
structure and does not substantially alter the character of the structure or
local area.
   C.   Following assembly and installation of the facility, all waste and
debris shall be removed and disposed of in a lawful manner.
   D.   A visual analysis, which may include photo montage, field mock up, or
other techniques shall be prepared by or on behalf of the applicant which
identifies the potential visual impacts, at design capacity, of the proposed
facility to the satisfaction of the city. Consideration shall be given to views
from public areas as well as from private residences. The analysis shall assess
the cumulative impacts of the proposed facility and other existing and
foreseeable telecommunication facilities in the area, and shall identify and
include all feasible mitigation measures consistent with the technological
requirements of the proposed telecommunication service. All costs for the
visual analysis, and applicable administrative costs, shall be borne by the
applicant. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.290: NIER EXPOSURE:
   A.   No telecommunication facility shall be sited or operated in such a
manner that it poses, either by itself or in combination with other such
facilities, a potential threat to public health. To that end no
telecommunication facility or combination of facilities shall produce at any
time power densities in any inhabited area as this term is defined in section
17.42.020 of this chapter that exceed the ANSI (American National Standards
Institute) C95.1-1992 standard for human exposure or any more restrictive
standard subsequently adopted or promulgated by the city, county, the state of
Utah, or the federal government.
   B.   Initial compliance with this requirement shall be demonstrated for any
facility within three hundred feet (300') of residential uses or sensitive
receptors such as schools, churches, hospitals, etc. and all broadcast radio
and television facilities, regardless of adjacent land uses, through
submission, at the time of application for the necessary permit or entitlement,
of NIER (nonionizing electromagnetic radiation calculations) specifying NIER
levels in the inhabited area where the levels produced are projected to be
highest. If these calculated NIER levels exceed eighty percent (80%) of the
NIER standard established by this section, the applicant shall hire a qualified
electrical engineer licensed by the state of Utah to measure NIER levels at
said location after the facility is in operation. A report of these
measurements and his/her findings with respect to compliance with the
established NIER standard shall be submitted to the city. Said facility shall
not commence normal operations until it complies with, or has been modified, to
comply with this standard. Proof of said compliance shall be a certification
provided by the engineer who prepared the original report. In order to assure
the objectivity of the analysis, the city may require, at the applicant's
expense, independent verification of the results of the analysis.
   C.   Every telecommunication facility within three hundred feet (300') of an
inhabited area and all broadcast radio and television facilities shall
demonstrate continued compliance with the NIER standard established by this
section. Every five (5) years a report listing each transmitter and antenna
present at the facility and the effective radiated power radiated shall be
submitted to the city. If either the equipment or effective radiated power has
changed, calculations specifying NIER levels in the inhabited areas where said
levels are projected to be highest shall be prepared. NIER calculations shall
also be prepared every time the adopted NIER standard changes. If calculated
levels in either of these cases exceed eighty percent (80%) of the standard
established by this section, the operator of the facility shall hire a
qualified electrical engineer licensed by the state of Utah to measure the
actual NIER levels produced. A report of these calculations, required
measurements, if any, and the author's/engineer's findings with respect to
compliance with the current NIER standard shall be submitted to the city within
five (5) years of facility approval and every five (5) years thereafter. In the
case of a change in the standard, the required report shall be submitted within
ninety (90) days of the date said change becomes effective.
   D.   Failure to supply the required reports or to remain in continued
compliance with the NIER standard established by this section shall be grounds
for revocation of the use permit or other entitlement. (Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.310: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Exceptions to the requirements specified within this chapter may be
granted through issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning
commission. Such a permit may only be approved if the planning commission
finds, after receipt of sufficient evidence, that failure to adhere to the
standard under consideration in the specific instance will not increase the
visibility of the facility or decrease public safety.
   B.   An exception to the requirements of sections
17.42.180 and
17.42.250 of this chapter may only be granted upon written concurrence by the
public safety director.
   C.   Tower setback requirements may be waived under any of the following
circumstances:
      1.   The facility is proposed to be collocated onto an existing, legally
established telecommunication tower; and
      2.   Overall, the reduced setback enables further mitigation of adverse
visual and other environmental impacts than would otherwise be possible. (Ord.
99-26 § 1)
17.42.320: PUBLIC NOTICE:
In addition to the public notice required within this chapter, the following
special noticing shall be provided:
   A.   Notice of consideration or a public hearing, as appropriate, on a minor
or major use permit authorizing the establishment or modification of a
telecommunication facility shall be provided to the operators of all
telecommunication facilities, registered with the city of Santa Clara pursuant
to section
17.42.040 of this chapter, within one mile of the subject parcel via mailing of
the standard legal notice prepared.
   B.   Notice of the approval of a minor use permit by the city authorizing
the establishment or modification of or the renewal of a permit for, a
telecommunication facility or minor antenna needing site plan review, shall be
mailed to all adjacent property owners within three hundred feet (300').
Mailing of said notice shall start a fourteen (14) calendar day appeal period.
(Ord. 99-26 § 1)
17.42.330: AMBIGUITY:
In order to achieve consistent and efficient coordination and enforcement in
the administration of this chapter, the city manager may delegate some person
within the city to act in his/her stead and shall have the power and duties set
forth below:
   A.   All duties as set forth in the Santa Clara zoning ordinance, including
the authority to interpret this chapter to members of the public, to city
departments and other branches of city government, including preliminary
negotiation with and advice to applicants for administrative approval, subject
to the policy of the city council. Said duties shall be carried out in
consultation with the director of public works and the city manager. (Ord. 99-
26 § 1)
17.42.340: APPEAL:
Any person who disagrees with a ruling or interpretation of the city regarding
this chapter may appeal the matter to the land use authority. Such appeal shall
be made in writing and filed with the city recorder within fourteen (14)
calendar days of the ruling or interpretation. The city recorder will then
transmit the appeal to the city manager, who will cause the matter to be placed
on the agenda of the land use authority. If no appeal is made within that time,
the ruling or interpretation shall be final. The appeal shall be addressed to
the city recorder and shall set forth in writing the grounds for the appeal and
the relief sought by the appellant. The hearing shall be scheduled within two
(2) regularly scheduled meetings. The city shall notify in writing all persons
who have demonstrated their interest in this matter of the time and place of
the meeting on the appeal at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the meeting.
The city shall transmit the application and all exhibits therewith to the land
use authority for consideration. For the purposes of this section, a ruling is
a discretionary action, e.g., a minor conditional use permit or a site plan and
architectural review; and, an interpretation refers to the determination of the
intent and application of provisions of this chapter. Application or
enforcement of provisions of this chapter shall not be considered
interpretations or rulings and are not subject to appeal. Notwithstanding this
section, an individual may file for an exception from the provisions of this
chapter pursuant to section
17.42.310 of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-02: Ord. 99-26 § 1)
CHAPTER 17.44
SIGNS
SECTION:
17.44.010: General Requirements
17.44.020: Interpretation
17.44.030: Application And Review Procedures
17.44.040: Sign Defined
17.44.050: Types Of Signs
17.44.060: Awnings And Canopies
17.44.070: Banners
17.44.080: Freestanding Signs
17.44.090: Wall Signs
17.44.100: Window Signs
17.44.110: Monument Signs
17.44.115: Menu Boards
17.44.120: Signs In Residential Areas
17.44.130: Temporary Signs
17.44.135: Political Signs
17.44.140: Directional Or Guide Signs
17.44.150: Public Necessity Signs
17.44.160: Historic Site Signs
17.44.170: Entrance/Exit Signs
17.44.180: Signs Not Otherwise Identified
17.44.190: Removal Of Abandoned, Dangerous Or Defective Signs
17.44.200: Prohibited Signs
17.44.010: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
The city council of Santa Clara, Utah, finds and declares that by controlling
and standardizing signs in the city, the regulations set forth in this chapter
will reduce potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians; encourage signs
which, by their good design, are integrated with and harmonious to, the
buildings and sites which they occupy; encourage legibility through the
elimination of excessive and confusing sign displays; prevents confusion of
business signs with traffic regulations; preserves and improves the appearance
of the city as a place in which to live and trade; allow each individual
business to clearly identify itself and the goods and services which it offers
in clear and distinctive manner, safeguards and enhances property values,
protects public and private investment in buildings and open space; supplements
and promotes the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Santa
Clara, Utah. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.020: INTERPRETATION:
The planning commission shall have the authority and duty to interpret the
provisions of this chapter. In interpreting and applying the provisions, the
sign requirements contained in this chapter are declared to be the maximum
allowable for the purpose set forth unless specifically approved otherwise by
the planning commission. The types of signs not specifically allowed, as set
forth within this chapter, shall be prohibited unless otherwise approved by the
planning commission. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.030: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES:
The application and review procedures for the installation of signs are
identified as follows:
   A.   Permits: No person shall erect, alter, or relocate any permanent or
temporary sign without first obtaining a sign permit, paying a permit fee, and
a building permit from the city, unless the sign is exempt under this chapter.
   B.   Failure To Obtain Permit: Any person who hangs, posts, or installs a
sign which requires a permit under this chapter, and who fails to obtain a
permit, and pay the fee, before installing the sign, shall be guilty of a class
C misdemeanor, and may be fined accordingly. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.040: SIGN DEFINED:
A "sign" means and includes every advertising message, announcement,
declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface, or space
erected or maintained in view of the observer thereof for identification,
advertisement, or promotion of the interest of any person, entity, product, or
service. The definition of a sign shall also include the sign structure,
supports, lighting system, and any attachments, or other features used to draw
attention of observers. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.050: TYPES OF SIGNS:
Abandoned, dangerous, or defective signs
Awnings and canopies
Banners
Construction signs
Directional or guide signs
Entrance/exit signs
Freestanding signs
Historic site signs
Monument signs
Prohibited signs
Project development signs
Public necessity signs
Residential signs
Signs not otherwise identified
Temporary or short term signs
Wall signs
Window signs (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.060: AWNINGS AND CANOPIES:
   A.   Definitions:
   AWNING: A covered structure of fabric or other material placed so as to
extend outward from a building providing a protective shield for doors,
windows, and other openings, supported by the building only.
   CANOPY: A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material placed so
as to extend outward from a building providing a protective shield for doors,
windows, and other openings, supported by the building and supports extended to
the ground directly under the canopy or cantilever from the building, or
freestanding supported from the ground.
   B.   Where Allowed: Awnings and canopies are permitted as signs in
commercial, planned commercial and the Santa Clara Drive commercial and the
mixed use corridor provided that they blend with the architecture and do not
obscure the details of the building design, but should not be the dominant
architectural features.
      1.   Awnings must be located in a traditional manner above doors,
windows, or walkways, provided that walkways lead to a bona fide entrance.
      2.   All other locations for awnings are prohibited. Canopies may be
attached to a building or may be freestanding, adjacent to the building.
   C.   Maximum Allowed:
      1.   Awnings and canopies are counted as signs to the extent that a part
of the awning or canopy is used for advertising purposes. The square footage of
the advertising portion of an awning or canopy shall be no greater than ten
percent (10%) of the total square footage of the front wall of the building.
      2.   Lighting shall be indirect only. No flashing on and off lighting is
allowed. Lights shall be installed in such a manner as to prevent rays of light
to penetrate beyond the property on which such lights are located.
      3.   All awnings and canopies shall conform to all provisions of the
building code. An awning or canopy shall maintain a minimum of eight feet (8')
of clearance above any sidewalk and shall have no additional signs affixed to
the awning or canopy or its support, apart from the building structure, that is
not a part of the awning or canopy.
      4.   No awning or canopy may extend over public property. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.070: BANNERS:
   A.   Definition: A sign made of fabric or other nonrigid material with no
enclosing framework and securely attached at each end to posts or to some rigid
structure, or hung flush against the building wall. Banners also include
pennants made out of a flexible, colored material, and inflatable materials,
i.e., balloons.
Banners are intended to be of a temporary nature and not a permanent
installation.
   B.   Banners Over Public Property:
      1.   Banners may be hung over public property for holidays, and community
celebrations, to inform the community of an upcoming community event, or other
special occasions that may be approved by the city. A "community event" shall
be defined as a public event which is of interest to the city of Santa Clara as
a whole.
      2.   Banners over public property shall require a sign permit, but may be
hung without a sign permit fee being charged if approved by the city. Banners
shall be hung by, or under the direction of, the city of Santa Clara, and in
locations approved by the city.
      3.   Banners may be approved by the city staff to be hung for up to
thirty (30) calendar days, depending on the event being advertised, and shall
be removed within five (5) working days following the conclusion of the event.
      4.   Reservation of dates for a banner site may be made to the city up to
three (3) months prior to the date of display. Sites will generally be given
preference to annual events, or those tied to a specific date, holiday, or
season.
      5.   All materials for hanging a banner shall be provided by the
applicant.
      6.   A fee shall be payable to the city for the display of a banner
unless otherwise set aside by the city council. Such fees shall be set from
time to time by resolution of the city council.
      7.   Banners, and other temporary signs, may be used in connection with
school activities on school property without a permit fee, and for periods of
time approved by school officials, but shall be guided by the requirements of
subsection B3 of this section.
   C.   Banners Over Private Property:
      1.   Banner signs for new businesses may be installed between poles or
flush against the building wall on the property on the premises of a new
business in order to announce the opening of such new business provided that
such signs may only be erected for thirty (30) days prior to the business
opening, and may remain for a period of thirty (30) days following the date of
the opening.
      2.   Banners for special sales events may be installed for the advertised
period of the sales event, and such events shall be separated by a minimum of a
thirty (30) day period of time unless otherwise extended by approval of the
city staff.
      3.   A permit shall be issued by the city staff, and a fee paid, for any
banner request. The banner location shall be approved by the city staff.
      4.   Banners may be approved to be installed flush against the building
wall, not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the wall surface of the building upon
which it is placed.
      5.   No more than one banner per street front may be displayed at any one
time on any business property.
      6.   Pennants and inflatable signs may be used under the same condition
as banners, and for the same period of time as for banners, for new businesses
or special sales events.
      7.   Banners, and other temporary type signs, may be used in connection
with school activities on school property without a permit fee, for periods of
time approved by school officials, but guided by the requirements of subsection
C2 of this section.
      8.   Banners may be used temporarily in residential zones for such
purposes as, "Welcome Home", "It's A Boy", "It's A Girl", "Congratulations", or
other similar purposes. No permit is required but such banners should be
removed within five (5) to ten (10) days following the event for which the
banner is being displayed unless extended for cause by approval of the city
staff. Any other use, without prior city approval is not permitted. (Ord. 2012-
03)
17.44.080: FREESTANDING SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: A sign which is supported by one or more uprights, or
braces which are fastened to, or embedded in the ground, or in a foundation in
the ground. A freestanding sign is self- supporting and stands in place without
support from any other source.
   B.   Where Allowed: Freestanding signs are permitted in the commercial zone
located in the commercial corridor located along Santa Clara Drive lying east
of the historic district/mixed use zone along Santa Clara Drive.
   C.   Maximum Allowed:
      1.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height. The
bottom of a freestanding sign shall be a minimum of seven feet (7') above
ground level. No portion of a freestanding sign shall be permitted to extend
over public property or to impair the line of sight of a motor vehicle when
located on private property.
      2.   Freestanding signs are limited to a maximum width of sixteen feet
(16'), a sign height of thirteen feet (13'), which is twenty feet (20') minus
seven feet (7'), and a sign area of two hundred eight (208) square feet, unless
otherwise approved by the planning commission.
      3.   Business, projects, or parcels are limited to one freestanding sign,
except that properties with more than five hundred feet (500') of continuous
frontage, or five hundred feet (500') of frontage on more than one street, may,
with staff approval, install two (2) freestanding signs.
      4.   Freestanding signs shall be located on the property so that no
portion of the sign structure is any closer than four feet (4') from any
property line.
      5.   No flashing on and off lighting is permitted. Message boards of most
kinds may be approved by the city staff, or at their decision, the planning
commission.
      6.   Buildings or clusters of buildings having more than one tenant or
use shall provide a sign plan for the entire structure or project. This plan
shall be approved by the city staff, or at their decision, the planning
commission.
      7.   Snipe, or multiple smaller signs, shall not be attached to the
signpost holding up a freestanding sign.
      8.   Projects using freestanding signs may also submit a plan for wall
signs to the city staff for approval in connection with a freestanding sign.
      9.   Real estate for sale or lease or "Coming Soon" signs are permitted
in the commercial zone. Signs may not be larger than four feet by eight feet
(4' x 8') or a total of thirty two (32) square feet, and shall not exceed eight
feet (8') in height. A sign permit for real estate signs shall not be required.
Such signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days of sale, lease, or
expiration of listing taking place. "Coming Soon" signs shall be approved by
the city staff for an agreed upon period of time and may be extended by the
city staff for cause, and shall be the same size as commercial real estate
signs. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.090: WALL SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: Signs with messages or copy erected parallel and attached
to or painted on the outside wall of a building and extending not more than ten
inches (10") from the wall. A wall includes all window and wall area of a
building in one plane of elevation.
   B.   Where Allowed: Wall signs may be placed so as to utilize existing
architectural features of a building without obscuring them. Wall signs shall
be oriented toward pedestrians or vehicles within close proximity of the sign.
Wall signs may be placed upon any side of a building in a commercial zone in
the eastern entrance to the city on Santa Clara Drive, east of the city office.
Wall signs may be allowed in a planned development commercial zone subject to
planning commission approval as part of the planned development zone approval.
   C.   Maximum Allowed: The area of a wall sign regardless of where on the
building it is placed shall be no greater than ten percent (10%) of the total
square footage of the wall on which the wall sign is placed.
      1.   Signs on a mansard roof will be considered to be a part of the wall
sign, and calculated as a part of the total square footage allowed.
      2.   Wall murals which are purely decorative in nature and content, and
do not include advertising by picture or verbal message may be approved by the
city staff, or may be referred to the planning commission for approval.
      3.   A plan for a wall sign may, with city staff approval, be approved in
connection with a freestanding sign in areas where freestanding signs are
approved, and may be approved in addition to a freestanding sign. (Ord. 2012-
03)
17.44.100: WINDOW SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: Any sign placed in a window or door of a commercial
business or professional office for the purpose of advertising any product or
service offered inside the business.
   B.   Where Allowed: In any window of a commercial business or professional
office space approved in this chapter.
   C.   Maximum Allowed: Window signs are not intended to be displayed for long
periods of time, but rather for a short sale period not to exceed thirty (30)
days.
      1.   Merchants, or professionals, may advertise special sales with signs
on the inside of the windows, provided that they do not cover the complete
window in which they are placed.
      2.   Window signs under this subsection C, do not require a permit from
the city.
      3.   One permanent "open or closed" sign may be located in any window or
door of a commercial business or professional office. Hours of operation signs
may also be permanently placed on any window or door. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.110: MONUMENT SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: A freestanding sign, located on site having a maximum
height depending upon the zone in which it is located, and having a closed base
that provides support for the sign.
   B.   Where Allowed: Monument signs are encouraged in all commercial zones.
Monument signs are required in all other areas of the city including planned
developments, commercial sites, subdivision entrances, and historical mixed use
zones, parks, schools, churches, and elsewhere as required or approved by the
city staff, or as may be referred by the city staff to the planning commission.
However, monument signs in a planned development commercial, PDC zone require
planning commission approval.
   C.   Maximum Allowed:
      1.   Monument signs in commercial zones:
         a.   The maximum height of a monument sign shall be eight feet (8')
including the sign base. The sign area of a monument sign shall not exceed
seven feet (7') in vertical height.
         b.   The width of monument signs shall be a maximum of twelve feet
(12').
         c.   The square footage of the monument sign shall not exceed eighty
(80) square feet of actual advertisement area unless otherwise approved by the
planning commission.
         d.   All monument signs shall be completely enclosed at the sign base.
A minimum sign base height of one foot (1') is required utilizing materials and
colors to match the building. The sign base will be required to run the entire
horizontal length of the sign and shall have no sign copy. The sign base shall
be designed to blend in with any proposed berming or contouring of the
property.
         e.   Lighting shall be indirect, or for two-faced signs it may be
illuminated from within the two (2) faces of the sign. Any lights used to
illuminate the face of a single-face sign shall be directed away from adjacent
properties or from oncoming vehicles or pedestrians.
         f.   No monument sign shall be located closer to the front property
line than two feet (2').
      2.   Monument signs in mixed use or historic districts:
         a.   The maximum height shall be six feet (6'), and a width of eight
feet (8').
         b.   The maximum sign advertising area shall be forty eight (48)
square feet.
         c.   Monument signs shall be a minimum of two feet (2') behind
property lines.
         d.   Lighting shall be indirect for a single-face sign and may be
between the two (2) sign faces for a two-faced sign.
         e.   Monument signs in the mixed use zone may take different forms as
may be approved by the planning commission. The planning commission may
determine that signs that are in harmony with the purpose and intent, and
architecturally compatible with the mixed use zone, may be approved as
alternatives to monument signs otherwise required. Freestanding signs meeting
the requirements of the commercial district may not be approved.
      3.   Monument signs in other areas:
         a.   Monument signs may be used as the permanent entrance to a
subdivision, other planned residential development, parks, schools, churches,
and elsewhere as required or approved by the planning commission. Such signs
will comply with all monument sign requirements contained herein, unless
otherwise approved by the planning commission. Applications shall indicate how
such signs will be maintained and kept in good repair at all times, or be
subject to removal by the city.
         b.   Sign height shall be limited to six feet (6'), and a width of
eight feet (8').
         c.   The maximum advertising space shall be forty eight (48) square
feet.
         d.   All monument signs shall be located a minimum of two feet (2')
behind the property line. (Ord. 2023-03; Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.115: MENU BOARDS:
   A.   Definition: A sign located at a drive-in or drive-up window restaurant.
   B.   Maximum Allowed:
      1.   Menu board signs in commercial zones:
         a.   Two (2) freestanding or wall mounted menu board signs are allowed
per business.
         b.   The maximum sign area shall be twenty-four (24) square feet per
sign.
         c.   The maximum sign height shall be eight feet (8') for freestanding
signs.
         d.   A menu board sign must be located on site in a location to not
impair traffic visibility. (Ord. 2023-03)
17.44.120: SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
   A.   Definition: "Residential signs" are signs that are allowed to be used
on individual residential properties.
   B.   Where Allowed: These signs are allowed in all residential zones in
connection with the existence of a residential dwelling being located on the
residential lot.
   C.   Maximum Allowed: Only one identification sign is permitted on each
parcel of property in all residential zones of the city and may be attached to
the face of the dwelling, or located in the front yard area. Such sign shall be
in the form of a nameplate not to exceed twelve inches by twenty four inches
(12" x 24") in size.
      1.   In addition, each residential dwelling shall display house numbers
attached to the dwelling not less than three inches (3") in height and two
inches (2") wide, and shall be placed in an unobstructed location on the
primary structure on the property, clearly visible from the street. The
numbering required shall be in place not later than the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the city.
      2.   Identification signs located in the front setback area of a
residence shall be approved by the city staff. If rocks or other similar
material is used for the base of an identification sign, the actual printed
area of the sign shall not exceed twelve inches by twenty four inches (12" x
24") unless otherwise approved by the city staff. No yard identification sign
or monument shall exceed thirty inches (30") in height.
      3.   No residential identification sign may be lighted in any fashion
except for backlighting of address numerals.
      4.   Short term yard signs may be used in residential areas immediately
prior to and during a yard sale, garage sale, or while an open house is in
progress. Such signs do not require prior city approval, but shall be removed
by sundown on the day of the sale. Signs not removed in twenty four (24) hours
shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be removed by the city.
      5.   Real estate property for sale or lease signs on individual lots
shall be no more than two feet by three feet (2' x 3') in size and shall not
exceed six (6) square feet in area. The top of the sign or supporting members
shall not exceed four feet (4') in height above the ground level.
      6.   All such signs shall be a minimum of two feet (2') inside the
property line.
      7.   A sign permit for real estate signs shall not be required. Such
signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the sale, lease, or the
expiration of the real estate listing taking place.
      8.   Temporary banners are allowed in a residential zone subject to the
requirements found in subsection
17.44.070C8 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.130: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: A temporary sign is a noncommercial sign intended for use
during a specified limited time and which is not specifically prohibited or
permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
   B.   Where Temporary Signs Are Prohibited: No person may post any temporary
sign on city property or within any public right-of-way unless the person is an
employee or agent of the city who is acting with authorization from the city
council to post the temporary sign. Temporary signs may be used on private
property only in accordance with this section.
   C.   Maximum Time Allowed: Temporary signs advertising an event or events
may be placed up to sixty (60) days prior to the event or events and should be
removed as quickly as possible after the event or events to which they relate.
Temporary signs advertising real property for sale or lease shall also be
removed as quickly as possible after the sale or lease closes. Any of the
foregoing signs left for longer than five (5) days following the event(s) or
closing to which they relate may be removed by the city.
   D.   Each temporary sign shall be maintained in good repair at all times, or
it may be subject to removal by the city.
   E.   Temporary signs must be located at least two feet (2') behind the
property line or public right-of-way, whichever is nearest. Only one (1)
temporary sign is allowed on any one (1) parcel of property at any time.
However. for up to sixty (60) days before a general. local government or
special election. an unlimited number of political signs (see Chapter
17.44.135, Political Signs) may also be placed on any one 1 parcel of Property.
   F.   No temporary sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, or
four feet (4') in height, except for project development signs or construction
site signs, addressed below.
   G.   No permit is required for temporary signs, except for project
development signs or construction site signs, addressed below. Permits for
project development signs or constructions signs shall be obtained from Santa
Clara City in the course of obtaining required development or construction
approvals.
   H.   Swiss Days Exception: For the city’s annual Swiss Days celebration,
temporary signs in the form of wood cow replicas may be displayed on private or
public property for up to thirty (30) days prior to the start of Swiss Days,
and fifteen (15) days following the conclusion of Swiss Days. The temporary
signs including the wood cow replicas shall be placed so as not to block
rights-of-way or create an obstruction of view when exiting a driveway or
entering a public street from an intersection.
   I.   Project Development Signs:
      1.   A temporary sign advertising a subdivision or housing project may be
used for a period of time not to exceed one (1) year from date of preliminary
plat approval, unless extended by the city staff. Such temporary signs shall be
removed when the project is sold out or completed.
      2.   Only one (1) such temporary sign may be erected per development
project unless there are several access roads serving the project, in which
case the city staff may determine the total number of signs to be allowed.
      3.   Project development signs may not exceed eight feet by eight feet
(8' x 8') and may not exceed a height of twelve feet (12').
      4.   All project signs shall be removed when all original lots have been
sold or when all lots for dwelling units have been sold. Project signs shall
also be removed whether or not, or when, a permanent monument sign has been
installed.
   J.   Construction Site Signs:
      1.   A construction site sign not exceeding six feet (6') in height shall
be allowed on each lot or parcel of land after a building permit for that lot
or parcel has been issued by the city. The sign shall be approved by the city
staff.
      2.   A construction site sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet
in size or four feet by four feet (4' x 4') in dimensions.
      3.   A construction site sign may also include the owner’s name, site
address, permit information, and any other information that may be required by
the city.
      4.   Construction site signs shall be removed within five (5) days
following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city.
   K.   Exception for Safety: Temporary signs of any kind that create a hazard
to health or safety may be moved or removed by city staff as they determine
necessary. (Ord. 2025-05 § 1: Ord. 2019-13 § 1: Ord. 2018-02: Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.135: POLITICAL SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: A temporary sign that does not advertise products, goods,
businesses, or services and that expresses an opinion or other point of view.
   B.   Political signs must be located at least two feet (2), from the back of
sidewalk, or twelve feet (12), from a travel lane (public right-of-way),
whichever is nearest. A park strip is located within the public right-of-way.
   C.   Political signs may be placed on private property with the owner’s
permission up to sixty (60) days before a general, local government or special
election and shall be removed within thirty (30) days following election day.
   D.   Political signs may not be located within 150 feet of a building where
a polling place is located.
   E.   Political signs are subject to all requirements and provisions of the
Annotated Utah Code and other laws as may be applicable. Such signs are
regulated as follows:
      1.   Residential Zone. Individual signs may not exceed twelve (12) square
feet in area. The maximum height of such signs shall be three feet.
      2.   Non-Residential Zones. Individual signs may not exceed twenty-four
(24) square feet in area. The maximum height of such signs shell be four feet.
(Ord. 2025-05, 5-28-2025)
17.44.140: DIRECTIONAL OR GUIDE SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: "Directional or guide signs" are signs which give direction
to areas recognized by the City of Santa Clara to be of regional importance;
may install a directional or guide sign at locations approved by the Planning
Commission.
   B.   Where Allowed: At sites specifically requested by the applicant and
approved by the Planning Commission.
   C.   Maximum Allowed: No sign may exceed thirty two (32) square feet in
area, unless otherwise approved by the City staff. No sign may be lighted
except by reflected lighting. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.150: PUBLIC NECESSITY SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: "Public necessity signs" include such things as no parking
signs, street name signs, bus stop signs, speed limit signs, and other similar
signs as approved by the city. These signs contain no advertising of any kind.
   B.   Where Allowed: Wherever it is determined by the city that such signs
are needed to provide information to residents and visitors to the city.
   C.   Maximum Allowed: These signs may be allowed by the city without
specific permits being granted for specific signs. However, permission for
signs included in this category requires specific approval by the city, and may
require city installation. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.160: HISTORIC SITE SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: Signs erected for the purpose of identifying sites of
historical importance. These sites shall have been placed on either the Utah
state historic register or the national historic register, or shall have been
identified by the city of Santa Clara as having historical significance to the
city.
   B.   Where Allowed: Historic signs are allowed anywhere in the city of Santa
Clara where historic sites meeting the definition of a historic site are
located.
   C.   Maximum Allowed: Standard signs in the historic/mixed use district on
properties listed on the state or national historic register, may display one
standardized sign in addition to any other signs allowed on the property. The
standardized historic sign shall be no more than two feet by three feet (2' x
3') in size, and no more than six (6) square feet in area. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.170: ENTRANCE/EXIT SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: Signs allowed at the entrances to and from commercial,
planned development, or mixed use property adjacent to a public street, or any
way where one-way driveways have been approved by the city.
   B.   Where Allowed: Not more than one sign is allowed at the entrance
driveway and one sign allowed at the exit driveway of business or professional
locations. Entrance and exit signs do not apply to individual residential
properties, but may be used in subdivision areas prior to the project being
sold out, or in other areas subject to prior city approval.
   C.   Maximum Allowed: Each sign shall be no more than three feet (3') in
height and may contain no more than six (6) square feet in area. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.180: SIGNS NOT OTHERWISE IDENTIFIED:
   A.   Definition: Signs not otherwise identified include all of the following
signs: no solicitation signs, no trespassing signs, interior signs, flags,
symbols, or insignias of government entities or agencies, and ball field signs.
   B.   Where Allowed: No soliciting signs may be located at the entranceway of
any commercial business in any commercial, planned development, historic/mixed
use zone. No trespassing signs may be posted on doors, windows, or other
property entrances, or on a fence or property line. An interior sign may be
located on the interior of buildings, set back at least two feet (2') from any
window. Flags, symbols or insignias of governmental entities may be located at
any location in the city where appropriate. Ball field signs may be located,
where approved, in any city owned or operated ball field.
   C.   Maximum Allowed: No solicitation signs may not exceed one and one-half
(1.5) square feet in size. No trespassing signs may not exceed one and one-half
(1.5) square feet in size. There is no limit in the size of flags, symbols, or
insignias identifying a governmental entity. There are no size requirements for
interior signs. Ball field signs are limited in size to no more than four feet
by eight feet (4' x 8'), shall be tastefully designed and painted, shall be
kept in good repair, and shall be approved by the city park and recreation
director prior to installation.
   D.   Review Of All Sign Requests: The planning commission shall review all
requests for any type of sign not specifically identified in this chapter, or
the detail of any sign identified but for which the requirements of this
chapter may not be exactly followed in the site plan submitted. The planning
commission may approve modifications of signs required by this chapter if doing
so does not impair the intent of this chapter, and the health, safety, and
welfare of the public. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.190: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, DANGEROUS OR DEFECTIVE SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: Any sign which is applicable to any use which has been
discontinued. Any sign in which the sign structure or body of advertisement is
not kept safe and in good repair, or is defective in any other manner.
   B.   What Required: All signs are to be kept in good repair physically, and
the content of advertising shall be kept in good, readable condition at all
times.
   C.   Maximum Allowed: These signs may be found in any area of the city. A
sign owner, if one can be located and identified, shall be notified of the
defect found in connection with the sign, and said defect shall be corrected
within thirty (30) days. If the sign is deemed by the city to be a public
hazard, the city shall retain the right to remove such sign in order to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the public.
   D.   Removal: If, on inspection, the city determines that a sign, or awning,
permitted by this chapter is unsafe, unmaintained, or abandoned, the city may
issue an order to the owner of the sign and occupant of the premises stating
the nature of the violation and requiring them to repair or remove the sign
within five (5) working days after receipt of a notice from the city. In an
emergency, or if no owner can be identified or located, the city may cause the
immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign presenting an immediate
hazard to public safety. (Ord. 2012-03)
17.44.200: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   A.   Definition: These signs include types of signs that are not allowed
within the city limits of the city of Santa Clara. These signs include any sign
or advertising structure that was unlawfully erected without a required permit,
or which fails to conform to any requirements of this chapter, or the
requirements hereof.
   B.   Where Allowed: Signs in this group are not permitted anywhere within
Santa Clara City.
   C.   Type Of Signs Included In This Category:
      1.   Abandoned signs.
      2.   A-frame signs.
      3.   Billboards designed for highway advertising.
      4.   Flashing on and off signs.
      5.   Hazardous or unsafe signs.
      6.   Mobile or portable signs.
      7.   Off premises signs - unless approved by the planning commission.
      8.   Roof signs projecting above the roofline.
      9.   Signs of any type in zones where they are not permitted by this
chapter.
      10.   Signs resembling traffic control signs not properly authorized.
   D.   Obstruction/Interference Prohibited: Any sign erected at the
intersection of any street, or driveway, in such a manner as to obstruct free
and clear vision, or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape,
color, size, or lighting, may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be
confused with, an authorized traffic sign, signal, or device, or which makes
the words "stop", "drive-in", "danger", or any other phrases, symbols or
characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
   E.   Removal: If an illegal sign is identified by the city, an effort shall
be made to identify or locate the owner of the sign. If such owner can be
located, they shall be notified of the illegal status of their sign and shall
be given five (5) days to bring the sign into conformance, or to remove the
sign. Following this notification period, the city retains the right to remove
any sign that is in violation of this chapter or that is not approved in some
manner by the sign ordinance. (Ord. 2012-03)
CHAPTER 17.45
HISTORIC DISTRICT SIGNS
SECTION:
17.45.010: Purpose And Scope
17.45.011: Interpretation
17.45.020: Definitions
17.45.030: Permits
17.45.040: Application Requirements
17.45.050: Review Procedures
17.45.060: Unsafe Signs And Signs In Violation Of This Chapter
17.45.070: Nonconforming Signs
17.45.080: Prohibited Signs
17.45.090: Nonregulated Signs
17.45.100: Master Sign Plans
17.45.110: Sign Standards
17.45.120: Permitted Permanent Signs
17.45.130: Other Signs
17.45.140: Temporary Signs
17.45.150: Banners On City Light Standards
17.45.160: Appeals
17.45.170: Liability
17.45.010: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens and the economic development of Santa Clara City, while
at the same time preserving the historic appearance and character of the city,
by:
   A.   Requiring signage that reduces potential hazards to motorists and
pedestrians;
   B.   Promoting signs which appear traditional (as defined in this chapter)
and by their good design are integrated with and harmonious to the buildings
and sites which they occupy;
   C.   Promoting signs that preserve and improve the appearance of the city's
historic district;
   D.   Encouraging pedestrian oriented signage that promotes a walkable
historic district;
   E.   Requiring sign legibility through the elimination of excessive and
confusing sign displays;
   F.   Regulating signs in order to create a unique environment to attract
visitors;
   G.   Preventing confusion of business signs with traffic regulation signs;
   H.   Allowing each individual business to clearly identify itself and the
goods and services which it offers in a clear and distinctive manner;
   I.   Requiring signage that will safeguard and enhance property values;
   J.   Protecting public and private investment in buildings and open space;
   K.   Supplementing and being part of the zoning regulations imposed by Santa
Clara City; and
   L.   Ensuring that commercial signs are designed for the purpose of
identifying a business and its products in an attractive and functional manner,
while serving primarily as general advertising for the business;
   M.   The historic and planning commissions shall not be prevented from
deciding on relevant matters unanticipated by this chapter. (Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.011: INTERPRETATION:
The planning commission shall have the authority and duty to interpret the
provisions of this chapter at the request of the city staff or when a written
appeal of the heritage commission and/or the city staff decision is filed with
the planning commission. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this
chapter, the sign requirements contained herein are declared to be the maximum
allowable for the purpose set forth. The city staff and/or the planning
commission may determine that a larger or smaller sign is more appropriate
based on the size and scale of the structure(s), pedestrian traffic, safety
issues, orientation, and neighborhood compatibility. Sign types not
specifically allowed as set forth within this chapter shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.020: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following abbreviations, terms, phrases, and
words shall be defined as specified in this section:
   ALTERATIONS: As applied to a sign, means change or rearrangement in the
structural parts or its design, whether by extending on a side, by increasing
in area or height, or in moving from one location or position to another.
   AREA OF SIGN: The area of a sign is measured by the area that encompasses
the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display,
including materials or colors of the background used to differentiate the sign
from the structure against which it is placed. Sign area does not include
structural supporting framework, bracing or wall to which the sign is attached.
See sign types for maximum area of supporting framework.
If individual letters are mounted directly on a wall or canopy, the sign area
shall be the area which encloses the letters, message or logo.
   AWNING: A secondary covering attached to the exterior wall of a building
used to keep the sun or rain off a storefront, window, or doorway. It is
composed of a light structure covered with fabric, metal, glass or wood
shutters.
   BANNER: A strip, typically of fabric or vinyl, on which letters or logos are
painted or written, hung up or carried on a crossbar, staff, string or between
two (2) poles.
   BILLBOARD: A permanent outdoor advertising sign that advertises goods,
products, or services not sold on the premises on which said sign is located.
   BUILDING FACE OR WALL: The window, door and wall area of a building on one
plane or elevation.
   CANOPY: A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material that
extends outward from a building, generally providing a protective shield for
doors, windows, and other openings, supported by the building and supports
extended to the ground directly under the canopy.
   COMMUNITY OR CIVIC EVENT: A public event not intended specifically for the
promotion of a product, political candidate or party, or commercial goods and
services.
   DISPLAY BOX: A freestanding or wall sign faced with glass or other similar
material designed for the express purpose of displaying menus, current
entertainment or other like items.
   ELECTRONIC DISPLAY TERMINAL: An electronic terminal, screen, or monitor used
to receive or provide information, advertise a good or service or promote an
event.
   FLIERS: A paper, sticker, poster, pamphlet, or other type of medium
distributed by hand for identification, advertisement, or promotion of the
interest of any person, entity, product, event, or service.
   GRADE: The ground surface elevation of a site or parcel of land.
Grade, Existing: The grade of a property prior to any proposed development or
construction activity.
Grade, Final: The finished or resulting grade where earth meets the building or
sign after completion of the proposed development activity. The final grade
shall not form a hill under a monument or pole sign for the purpose of raising
the height of the sign. For the purpose of regulating sign height the planning
commission may at its discretion establish final grade elevations, relative to
the curb fronting the signage, for any building or sign with a final grade
located more than twenty four inches (24") above or below the curb.
Grade, Natural: The grade of land prior to any development activity or any
other manmade disturbance or grading.
   HARMONY: Shall have the following meanings in this code:
   A.   In agreement;
   B.   Order or congruity of parts to their whole and one another;
   C.   Consistent, orderly, and pleasing arrangement of parts.
   HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical distance measured from final grade to the top
of the sign.
   MASTER SIGN PLAN: A plan designed to show the relationship of signs for any
building, cluster of buildings or any single building housing a number of users
or in any arrangement of buildings or shops, which constitute a visual entity
as a whole.
   NAMEPLATE: A sign that identifies the name, occupation, and/or professions
of the occupants of a premises.
   PRIVATE PLAZA: Private property that generally serves as common area to
adjoining commercial development and is free of structures, is hard surfaced
and/or landscaped. Private plazas generally provide an area for pedestrian
circulation, common amenities, and act as a gathering space for private or
public purposes.
   PROPERTY: Land and the buildings, owned or rented, upon it.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any property owned by a governmental entity.
   REPRODUCTION: An object that has been designed and built to resemble a
product or service.
   SIGN: Shall mean and include a display of an advertising message, usually
written, including an announcement, declaration, demonstration, product
reproduction, illustration, insignia, surface or space erected or maintained in
view of the observer thereof primarily for identification, advertisement, or
promotion of the interest of any person, entity, product, or service, and
visible from outdoors. The definition of a sign shall also include the sign
structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, flags, ornaments or
other features used to draw the attention of observers.
Sign, Abandoned: Any sign applicable to a use which has been discontinued for a
period of twelve (12) months.
Sign, Address: A sign which identifies only the address of a property or
tenant.
Sign, Awning: Any sign painted on or attached to an awning.
Sign, Cabinet: A frame covered by translucent material with the signage mounted
to the translucent material.
Sign, Campaign: A temporary sign on or off premises, announcing, promoting, or
drawing attention to a candidate seeking public office; or announcing political
issues.
Sign, Canopy: Any sign painted or attached to a canopy.
Sign, Changeable Copy: A manually operated sign that displays graphics or a
message that can be easily changed or altered.
Sign, Construction: A special use sign placed on a site identifying a new
development.
   A.   Project Marketing Sign: A sign identifying the financial institution or
real estate offerings of a development, and may include a plat map, and real
estate information.
   B.   Construction Sign: A sign identifying the contractor and/or builder
responsible for a project or development.
   C.   Construction/Project Marketing Sign: A combination of a construction
sign and project marketing sign.
Sign, Directional (Guide Sign): Signs which serve as directional guides to
recognized areas of regional importance and patronage, including:
   A.   Recreational and entertainment centers of recognized regional
significance.
   B.   Major sports stadiums, entertainment centers or convention centers.
   C.   Historic landmarks, churches, schools, community centers, hospitals and
parks.
   D.   Public safety, municipal directional, parking and essential services.
Sign, Directory: A sign to direct traffic, that contains the name of a
building, complex, neighborhood or center and name and address of two (2) or
more businesses being part of a building, complex, neighborhood or center.
Sign, Electronic: A window, wall, or other sign that changes messages through a
marquee, reader board, electronic message center, or other replaceable copy
area.
Sign, Gateway: A gateway sign is a sign mounted to or hanging from a wood or
steel trellis or bridge.
Sign, Hanging: A sign attached underneath a canopy, awning or porch.
Sign, Historic: A sign that has existed in the historic district for more than
fifty (50) years or did exist more than fifty (50) years ago.
Sign, Historic Replication: A sign, which is an exact replication, including
materials and size, of a historic sign which once existed in the same location.
Sign, Hours Of Operation: A sign that displays the hours during which the
building's tenant serves the public and may include basic business information
(see section
17.45.090 of this chapter).
Sign, Internally Illuminated: A sign face which is lit by a light source
located within the sign.
Sign, Monument: A sign that is supported by the ground or columns and not
attached to any building or wall.
Sign, Municipal Identification: A sign designed specifically for the purpose of
notifying motorists of Santa Clara City's municipal boundary and welcoming them
to Santa Clara City.
Sign, Neon: A sign that is outlined, or has characters, letters, figures, or
designs made with luminous tubes, such as neon, argon, LED or fluorescent.
Sign, Nonconforming (Legal): Any advertising structure or sign which was
lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the
purview of this chapter and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform
to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter.
Sign, Off Premises: A sign identifying a business, commodity, service, or
industry, which is not conducted upon the premises on which the sign is placed.
Sign, On Premises: A sign that identifies the name, occupation, and/or
professions of the occupants of the premises.
Sign, Open/Closed: A sign which reads "open" or "closed".
Sign, Pole: A freestanding sign that is supported by one or two (2) uprights.
Sign, Portable: A sign that can be moved from place to place.
Sign, Projection: A sign that utilizes a beam of light to project a visual
image or message onto a surface.
Sign, Public Necessity: A sign that informs the public of danger or a hazard.
Sign, Roof: A sign erected or painted upon or above the roof or parapet of a
building.
Sign, Solicitation: Sign used to communicate with solicitors.
Sign, Temporary: A sign which is intended for use during a specified limited
time.
Sign, Umbrella: A sign painted on or attached to an umbrella, including name
brands and symbols.
Sign, Wall: A sign with messages or copy erected parallel to and attached to or
painted on the outside wall of a building.
Sign, Window: A sign installed or painted upon the glazed portion of a window
or door. This term does not include merchandise displays.
   THEATER MARQUEE: A permanent sign, with changeable copy, that is used to
advertise theater events.
   TRADITIONAL SIGN: A sign that is constructed using sign making methods which
might have existed in Santa Clara up to the year 1959. Modern techniques may be
used to construct signs in the historic district if the resulting sign appears
as if it was constructed using traditional methods and materials (e.g., hand
painted signs, carved wood, cast metal, wrought iron, etc.).
   UMBRELLA: A collapsible shade for protection against weather consisting of
fabric stretched over hinged ribs radiating from a central pole.
   VILLAGE: A group of three (3) or more adjacent businesses on the same or
different parcels of land, all of which share a common architecture and a
common name (e.g., "Ancestor Square" in St. George, Utah).
   WALL MURAL: A work of art, such as a painting applied directly to a wall,
fence, pavement, or similar surface that is decorative in nature and content.
(Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.030: PERMITS:
No person shall erect, alter, or relocate any sign requiring a permit within
the historic district of Santa Clara City without first submitting a sign
application and receiving approval from the city staff when the master sign
plan has already been approved by the heritage commission; otherwise a permit
shall be brought before the heritage commission for approval. If the city staff
deems it necessary any permit application can be brought before the heritage
commission for approval. (Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.040: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
All sign applications shall be submitted to the city to be reviewed for
compliance with the requirements set forth in this chapter. A complete sign
application must include the following:
   A.   Building Elevations/Site Plan: Signs proposed to be mounted on a
building require a photorealistic image of the sign superimposed on a
photograph of the building elevation or a rendered image of the building with
the proposed sign. Monument, gateway and pole signs require a site plan
indicating the proposed sign location as it relates to property lines, adjacent
streets and adjacent buildings along with a color image of the proposed sign
and a color photograph of the building.
   B.   Scaled Design Drawing: A scaled drawing including dimensions of all
sign faces, descriptions of materials to be used, and color samples.
   C.   Calculations: Provide calculations showing compliance with this chapter
including the area of the building facade to receive signage, the area of each
sign and the total area of all signs.
   D.   Lighting: A drawing indicating the location, fixture type and lamp
color of all exterior lighting for the proposed signs.
   E.   Application Forms: A completed sign permit application.
   F.   Fees: Payment of the appropriate fees to Santa Clara City. (Ord. 2015-
13)
17.45.050: REVIEW PROCEDURES:
Completed sign permit applications will be initially reviewed by the city staff
within five (5) working days upon receipt of a complete application. Upon
request by city staff an application may be reviewed by the heritage commission
at the next regularly scheduled meeting. Applicants are encouraged to attend
the heritage commission meeting when the application will be discussed.
The application will be approved, denied or returned to the applicant with
requested modifications. Any denial shall clearly state in writing the reason
(s) for such denial. Refer to section
17.45.160, "Appeals", of this chapter.
The city staff shall inspect signs regulated by this chapter to determine if
they have been suitably installed and maintained per the requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.060: UNSAFE SIGNS AND SIGNS IN VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER:
If, upon inspection, the city determines a sign permitted by the Santa Clara
City sign ordinance to be unsafe, not maintained, or abandoned, or otherwise in
violation of this chapter, the city may issue a written order to the owner of
the sign and occupant of the premises stating the nature of the violation and
requiring them to repair or remove the sign within thirty (30) working days
after receipt of notice from the city. In cases of unsafe signs, the city may
require the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign. Signs removed
in this manner must present an imminent hazard to the public safety. Removal
costs shall be paid for by the property owner. (Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.070: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Nonconforming signs that have been lawfully erected shall be deemed to be legal
and lawful signs and may be maintained subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
A nonconforming sign may not be relocated except when such relocation brings
the sign into compliance with this chapter or the sign has significant historic
value. Relocated signs require the approval of the city staff.
   A.   Alteration Of Nonconforming Signs: Nonconforming signs may be
maintained and repaired provided that the maintenance and repairs are for the
purpose of maintaining the sign in its original condition. Alterations to a
nonconforming sign that change the size, use, color, lighting, or appearance of
a nonconforming sign shall comply with the applicable standards of this
chapter. (Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.080: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
No person shall erect any sign as specified in this section.
   A.   Animated Signs: A rotating or revolving sign, or signs where all or a
portion of the sign moves in some manner. Except for historic signs and
historic replica signs where the applicant is able to prove through
documentation or other evidence that the original historic sign produced the
same motion/movement and is proposed in the same location. This requirement
does not prohibit the installation of animated clocks where permitted by the
city of Santa Clara.
   B.   Banners: Except as approved as a temporary sign in section
17.45.150, "Banners On City Light Standards", of this chapter.
   C.   Bench Signs: Any outdoor bench or furniture with any signs.
   D.   Billboards: An off premises sign designed for highway advertising.
   E.   Electronic Signs: Electronic signs which change copy electronically
using switches and electric lamps, such as announcements, time, temperature and
date signs are prohibited except as permitted in subsection
17.45.120J of this chapter. Governmental public safety, municipal directional
and information signs are exempt.
   F.   Flashing Signs Or Lights: A sign that contains an intermittent or
flashing light source, or a sign that includes the illusion of intermittent or
flashing light by means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent
light source. Flashing light sources are prohibited.
   G.   Inflatable Signs Or Displays: Any inflatable object used for signs or
promotional purposes.
   H.   Off Premises Signs: No person shall erect a sign identifying a
business, commodity, service, or industry, which is not conducted upon the
premises on which the sign is placed except for directories. Temporary event
posters and fliers may be permitted (see subsection
17.45.090I of this chapter).
   I.   Projection Signs: A sign which projects a visual image or message onto
a surface is prohibited.
   J.   Reproduction: The use of an inanimate object that has been constructed
to look like a product or service for the purpose of advertisement or display
is prohibited.
   K.   Roof Signs: Any signs erected partly or wholly on or over the roof of a
building. Signs mounted anywhere on a mansard roof are not allowed. See figure
100.1 of this section.
   L.   Signs In Public Places: No person shall paint, mark, write on, staple,
tape, paste, post, or otherwise affix, any flier, sticker, poster, or sign to
any public building, structure, or property, including, but not limited to, a
work of art, sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, parking meter, park strip,
street lamp post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, electric light or
power or telephone wire or pole, or wire appurtenance thereof, or any lighting
system, public bridge, drinking fountain, lifesaving equipment, street sign,
street furniture, trash can, or traffic sign except as permitted in this
chapter. Swiss Days signs and Swiss Days sponsor signs may be located in the
landscape islands along Santa Clara Drive provided that the city determines
that they are not a hazard.
   M.   Wind Signs: Includes any propeller, whirling, or similar device that is
designed to flutter, rotate, or display other movement under the influence of
wind. This shall include "gasoline flags", or banners.
   N.   Video Signs: Animated visual messages that are projected on a screen.
   O.   Channel Letter Signs: See figure 100.2 of this section.
   P.   Neon Signs: Except for neon signs that spell out the words "Open" or
"Closed". Flashing neon signs are not permitted.
   Q.   Vinyl Signs: Signs printed on vinyl sheets shall not be approved except
as permitted by subsection
17.45.110G of this chapter.
   FIGURE 100.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-26.png]
 
   FIGURE 100.2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-28.png]
 
   FIGURE 100.3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-30.png]
 
(Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.090: NONREGULATED SIGNS:
The following signs are exempt from the application requirements as provided in
section
17.45.040 of this chapter. They shall be regulated as follows:
   A.   Application Requirements: Signs that are exempt from the application
requirements as stated in chapter 17.44 of this title.
   B.   Hours Of Operation Signs: One "hours of operation" sign is allowed per
entrance. Such sign may contain the following information: business name, day
and hours of operation, street address, and contact information such as
proprietor name, phone number, e-mail address, website, etc. Each sign may not
exceed one and one-half (1.5) square feet in area. The sign may not be
illuminated.
   C.   Private Plazas: Signs may be installed in private plazas without
obtaining individual sign permits provided that such signs conform to an
approved master sign plan and are not visible from the public way.
   D.   Public Necessity Signs: Public necessity signs for safety, warnings,
trailheads, bus stops, parking, no parking, and street name signs installed by
or with permission of Santa Clara City are exempt from permit requirements.
Approval of the city is required in order to ensure safe placement and prevent
unsightly or distracting sign placement.
   E.   Solicitation Signs: One "no solicitor" sign, not to exceed one square
foot, is allowed per major entrance to any building or apartment complex.
   F.   Trespassing Signs: "No trespassing" signs may be posted on doors,
windows or other property entrances, or on fence or property lines. They may
not exceed one square foot in area, and may not be illuminated.
   G.   Vacancy Signs: Vacancy signs are allowed only for those buildings that
are permitted and licensed for nightly rentals. Vacancy signs may be a maximum
of two (2) square feet. If illuminated, approval from the city staff and
heritage commission is required.
   H.   Open/Closed Signs: Each sign may not exceed one and one-half (1.5)
square feet in area. Only one sign may be illuminated.
   I.   Event Posters: Temporary event posters not exceeding twenty inches by
thirty inches (20" x 30") may be displayed in windows or on doors for a maximum
of thirty (30) days. Posters must be removed when the event date has passed.
Events may be on site or off site. The preferred location for event posters is
inside the building. (Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.100: MASTER SIGN PLANS:
Each business may have multiple permanent signs. These may be awning or canopy,
monument, hanging, wall, or pole style. These permanent signs may not be
printed on pliable material (such as vinyl or cloth); primary signs must be
constructed out of materials of a more permanent and rigid nature. In addition,
each business may be permitted to utilize a number of temporary signs; the
number of which can be used on a regular or rotating basis will be determined
by the commission. All signage must be applied for and presented to the
heritage commission through a master sign plan unless otherwise allowed by this
chapter. The master sign plan must include the number and area of both current
and proposed signage (including temporary signs) and should have a drawing(s),
sketch(es) or photorealistic depiction(s) of the proposed plan to help aid in
reasonably visualizing the proposal. The heritage commission will determine
what can reasonably be permitted giving consideration to street frontage, size
and scale of the building and of the property. Businesses are encouraged to
plan ahead for future signage needs.
   A.   Multiple Tenant Master Sign Plan: Buildings or clusters of buildings
within a project or premises, having more than one tenant or use, shall submit
a master sign plan application for the entire structure or project prior to any
sign permit approval.
      1.   Design: The master sign plan shall be designed to establish a common
theme or design for the entire building, using similar construction methods,
compatible colors, scale, and backgrounds. This is not meant to require
monotony, but to require variety while maintaining compatibility. All
regulations as stated in this chapter shall be addressed in the master sign
plan.
      2.   Master Sign Plans For Office Buildings: Master sign plans for office
buildings must focus primarily on the identification of the building.
Individual tenants may be identified with lettering on exterior windows, doors,
or a building directory.
      3.   Sign Area: Total sign area within the master sign plan is subject to
the size limitations of this chapter. Sign area cannot be transferred to a
single building or facade from other buildings in the project.
      4.   Lighting: Master sign plans shall include the location and fixture
type of all exterior lighting of the proposed signs. The lighting plan shall
comply with the lighting standards as stated in subsection
17.45.110J of this chapter. Lighting fixtures shall be similar in style,
compatible with the architecture and should direct all light onto the sign
surface.
   B.   Advertising Master Sign Plan: Individual business owners who anticipate
the need to change temporary signage frequently are encouraged to submit a
master sign plan for temporary advertising to the city. The purpose of said
plan is to eliminate the need to apply for repetitive sign permits for
temporary signs where such are used on a regular basis.
      1.   Where Permitted: This type of master sign plan is intended for
businesses that have a need to advertise new products for sale (when the
product will be available on a temporary basis) or where the business has
frequent or seasonal sales.
      2.   Permit: A permit shall be issued by the city for the master sign
plan and a fee required by the city. Review and approval of the master sign
plan is required before it may be implemented. Permits for temporary signage
covered under the master sign plan, once approved, will not require further
permits as long as the approved plan is followed. Said plan may be amended from
time to time through the same process. Refer to section
17.45.050 of this chapter for review procedures. Refer to the city general sign
ordinance for standards relative to temporary signs. (Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.110: SIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Cumulative Sign Area Requirements: The allowable sign area per sign is
specified in this section through section
17.45.130 of this chapter. The cumulative sign area per business shall not
exceed one hundred (100) square feet consistent with the master sign plan.
Signage affixed to a building facade may not exceed ten percent (10%) of the
building facade. For double faced signs (where both sides are the same) only
one side shall be counted against the square footage requirements. Nonregulated
signs (except for private plaza signs), murals and umbrella signs are not
included in the cumulative sign area. Signs included as part of a master sign
plan shall be included in the cumulative sign area.
   B.   Area Of Individual Signs: The area of a sign shall include the entire
area within any type of perimeter or border that may enclose the outer limits
of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character, exclusive of the
supporting framework.
   C.   Individual Letter Height: Signs shall be limited to a maximum letter
height of eighteen inches (18"). A single letter which is a signature letter or
logo of the business need not comply with this requirement. For information a
nine inch (9") high letter with clear type will be legible in the historic
district from vehicles passing at thirty (30) miles per hour.
   D.   Location On Building: The location of a sign on a structure or building
has a major impact on the overall architecture of the building. To ensure that
signs enhance this architecture, the following criteria must be met:
      1.   Height: The name of a building or business may be located at the top
of a building wall, but not above the parapet wall or roofline.
      2.   Location: Architectural details of a building often provide an
obvious location, size, or shape for a sign. Wherever possible, applicants
should utilize these features in the placement of signs. See figure 110.1 of
this section.
FIGURE 110.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-32.png]
 
      3.   Compatibility: A sign, including its supporting structure and
components, shall be designed as an integral design element of a building and
shall be architecturally compatible, including color, with the building to
which it is attached. Signs should not obscure historically significant
architectural details of the building.
   E.   Setback Requirements: Permanent or temporary signs shall not be placed
in the public right of way except as permitted in this chapter.
   F.   Projection And Clearance: No portion of a hanging, projecting, or pole
sign including its support may project more than forty eight inches (48") from
the face of a building or pole. Projecting and hanging signs must maintain at
least eight feet (8') of clearance from ground level. Awning clearances are
covered in section
17.45.120 of this chapter.
   G.   Sign Materials: The sign materials should be compatible with the face
of the building and should be colorfast and resistant to corrosion. Signs may
be made of any durable exterior grade materials so long as the appearance is
compatible with the associated business/building and the historic district.
Wall signs may not be suspended by ropes. Wall signs must be securely fastened
directly to the wall.
   H.   Color: Fluorescent colors are prohibited. Reflective colored materials
that give the appearance of changing color are prohibited.
   I.   Sign Characteristics:
      1.   Fonts: Fonts shall be traditional or otherwise compatible with the
historic district.
      2.   Supporting Framework: Frames supporting signs shall be traditional
or compatible with the architecture of the building. The following materials
are examples of acceptable frames for monument signs: rustic wood timbers,
ornamental wood, brick, stucco covered frames, adobe, or ornamental cast steel
poles. The following materials are examples of acceptable frames for hanging,
projecting and pole signs: rustic wood timbers, ornamental wood, ornamental
cast steel, or wrought iron.
   J.   Illumination: The purpose of regulating sign illumination is to prevent
light trespass, provide clear illumination of signs without causing potential
hazards to pedestrians or vehicles, and to promote the traditional character of
Santa Clara.
      1.   Illumination Types:
         a.   Externally Illuminated Signs: Externally lit signs shall be
illuminated only with steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed
solely onto the sign without causing glare. Light fixtures used for
illuminating a sign shall be simple in form and should not clutter the building
or structure. Light bulbs or lighting tubes should be shielded so as to not be
physically visible from adjacent public rights of way or residential
properties.
         b.   Backlit Letters And Logos: Letters and logos may be lit from
behind as long as the light source is not visible.
      2.   Intensity: The intensity of sign lighting shall not exceed that
necessary to illuminate and make legible a sign from the adjacent travelway or
closest right of way.
      3.   Prohibited Lighting:
         a.   Lights that flash or move in any manner are prohibited.
         b.   Internally illuminated signs which are lit by a light source
located within the sign are not permitted. See figure 110.2 of this section.
FIGURE 110.2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-34.png]
 
(Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.120: PERMITTED PERMANENT SIGNS:
In addition to the following regulations, all signs must be in compliance with
all other provisions of this chapter. Each business is allowed to have the
following permitted signs displaying the business name and advertisement:
   A.   Awning Or Canopy Sign:
      1.   Size: A maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the canvas area on each
face of an awning or canopy may be used for sign area. Fifty percent (50%) of
the valance may be used for signage.
      2.   Height Limit: Awnings and canopy signs must have a minimum clearance
of eight feet (8') to the frame and seven feet (7') to the bottom of the
valance.
      3.   Setback And Orientation: Awnings and canopy signs must be located in
a traditional manner above storefronts, doors, windows or walkways, provided
said walkways lead to a bona fide entrance. They shall be compatible with the
architecture of the building, and follow relevant design guideline criteria.
Freestanding awning signs are prohibited. Awnings and canopy signs may project
a maximum forty eight inches (48") from the face of the building except when
used as entrance canopies (in which case awnings and canopies may extend a
maximum of 20 feet) or for covered dining or display area (in which case
awnings and canopies may extend a maximum of 10 feet). See figures 120.1 and
120.3 of this section. In no case shall a dining or display area canopy
encroach upon the pedestrian walkway with less than an eight foot (8') vertical
clearance. The design must blend with the architecture of the building and
should not obscure details of the building. Awnings and canopy signs should
serve as an accent to the building's design but should not be the dominant
architectural feature. Awnings are counted as sign area if they have lettering
or other graphics conveying a commercial message or name of a business or
product sold in the building to which the awning/canopy is attached.
      4.   Design: Awning and canopy signs shall be traditional. Examples of
covering material are fabric, vinyl, polymer, metal, glass, wood shutters or
similar material. Materials shall be high quality, colorfast and sun fade
resistant. Glossy vinyl or plastic materials are not permitted. Awning and
canopy sign colors are limited to a single field color with a single
contrasting color for lettering and logos. Arched or barrel type awnings and
canopies are not permitted.
      5.   Illumination: Lighting intended to illuminate/backlight a
translucent awning is prohibited. Translucent letters on opaque backgrounds are
permitted to be backlit. Awnings illuminated from above, or indirectly from
below in a traditional manner, are permitted.
   FIGURE 120.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-36.png]
 
   FIGURE 120.3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-38.png]
 
   B.   Monument Sign:
      1.   Size: Monument signs shall be limited to a maximum of forty (40)
square feet of sign area. The sign and structure shall not exceed a total area
of forty eight (48) square feet. For double faced signs (where both sides are
the same) only one side shall be counted against the square footage
requirements.
      2.   Height Limit: Monument signs may not exceed a height of six feet
(6') measured from final grade.
      3.   Setback And Orientation: Monument signs shall be set back so as not
to be a safety hazard as determined by staff and shall be a minimum of two feet
(2') from the property line.
      4.   Design: Monument signs shall be supported by the ground or columns
and not attached to any building or wall. Signs must be compatible with the
architecture of the building to which they are associated and have a
traditional style. See figures 120.4 and 120.5 of this section. The height of
the open area beneath a sign cannot exceed fifty percent (50%) of the sign's
total height.
      5.   Illumination: Lighting of monument signs is permitted, provided that
the lighting complies with subsection
17.45.110J of this chapter.
   FIGURE 120.4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-40.png]
 
   FIGURE 120.5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-42.png]
 
   C.   Hanging Or Projecting Sign:
      1.   Size: No single hanging or projecting sign may exceed twelve (12)
square feet in area. Sign brackets that incorporate words or logos shall be
included as part of the sign area.
      2.   Height: Hanging and projecting signs must have at least eight feet
(8') of ground clearance.
      3.   Setback And Orientation: Hanging and projecting signs may not
project more than forty eight inches (48") from the face of the building to
which it is attached (inclusive of the supporting structure). They may not
extend beyond the applicant's property, except when approved.
      4.   Design: The sign materials should be compatible with the face of the
building and should be colorfast and resistant to corrosion. See figures
120.6A, 120.6B and 120.7 of this section. Double sided signs are required when
placement makes the sign visible to the public from both sides.
      5.   Illumination: Lighting of hanging and projecting signs is permitted,
provided that the lighting complies with subsection
17.45.110J of this chapter.
   FIGURE 120.6A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-44.png]
 
   FIGURE 120.6B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-46.png]
 
   FIGURE 120.7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-48.png]
 
   D.   Wall Sign: Wall signs may be placed upon a building provided that they
meet the following conditions of approval:
      1.   Size: The size of an individual wall sign shall not exceed thirty
(30) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the business facade, whichever is
less.
      2.   Setback: Wall signs shall not extend more than six inches (6") from
the wall.
      3.   Design: Wall signs shall be compatible with the building face,
colorfast, resistant to corrosion and reasonably integrated with the
architecture. See figures 120.9 through 120.11 of this section.
      4.   Illumination: Lighting of wall signs is permitted, provided that the
lighting complies with subsection
17.45.110J of this chapter.
   FIGURE 120.9
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-50.png]
 
   FIGURE 120.10
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-52.png]
 
   FIGURE 120.11
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-54.png]
 
   E.   Banner Sign:
      1.   Banner signs are considered to be temporary signs and are addressed
in the city's sign ordinance.
   F.   Pole Sign:
      1.   Size: The sign area is limited to a maximum of sixteen (16) square
feet in area. Sign bracket and pole(s) shall not be included as part of the
sign area.
      2.   Height Limit: Pole sign heights shall be appropriately matched to
the architecture and size of the building, but in no case exceed fifteen feet
(15') from sidewalk grade to the top of the sign.
      3.   Setback And Orientation: Pole signs may not project more than forty
eight inches (48") from the pole. The maximum distance between two (2) poles
shall not exceed six feet (6'). They may not extend beyond the applicant's
property line and must be a minimum of twenty four inches (24") from any
walkway or vehicularway.
      4.   Design: Sign poles shall be metal or wood. Poles shall have a
diameter of four inches (4") to six inches (6") excluding decoration and base.
The pole sign shall be constructed of traditional looking material and be in
harmony with the building architecture and the historic district. The sign
materials should be compatible with the face of the building and should be
colorfast and resistant to corrosion. See figure 120.12 of this section.
      5.   Illumination: Lighting of pole signs is permitted, provided that the
lighting complies with subsection
17.45.110J of this chapter.
   FIGURE 120.12
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-56.png]
 
In addition to the signs permitted above, each business shall be permitted to
have any of the following signage within the limits allowed in the following
subsections and in subsection
17.45.110A of this chapter. Logos may be used more than once.
   G.   Entrance/Exit Signs: Entrance/exit signs are not included in the total
sign area allowed for a structure. Entrance/exit signs are for the facilitation
of traffic onto and off a site.
      1.   Size: Entrance/exit signs shall be limited to a maximum of three (3)
square feet.
      2.   Height Limit: Entrance/exit signs shall be no higher than five feet
(5') above the ground at the top of the sign.
      3.   Number Of Signs: One entrance or exit sign is allowed at each
approved driveway opening for commercial uses and multi-tenant dwellings.
      4.   Setback And Orientation: Entrance/exit signs shall not be placed in
the city right of way.
      5.   Design: Entrance/exit signs shall be simple in form and shall be
compatible with the architectural elements of the property and historic
character of Santa Clara City.
      6.   Illumination: Illumination of entrance/exit signs is permitted,
provided that the lighting complies with subsection
17.45.110J of this chapter.
   H.   Portable, Changeable Copy Signs: Freestanding changeable copy signs
including A-frames are permitted, provided they are not the primary permanent
sign and comply with the following regulations:
      1.   Size: Freestanding changeable copy signs shall be limited to a
maximum of twelve (12) square feet in area per side, with a maximum height of
forty eight inches (48"), and a maximum width of thirty six inches (36").
      2.   Number Of Signs: The maximum number of changeable copy signs for any
business is one.
      3.   Setback And Orientation: Changeable copy signs shall not be placed
in a pedestrian walkway, vehicularway or any location that would cause a hazard
and must be set back a minimum of twelve inches (12") from the property line.
      4.   Design: The design shall be traditional. Freestanding changeable
copy signs shall be framed or supported and must be finished on both sides.
      5.   Illumination: Illumination of changeable copy signs is not
permitted.
      6.   Materials: The materials shall be resistant to corrosion and sun
fade resistant. See figures 120.13 and 120.14 of this section.
   FIGURE 120.13
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-58.png]
 
   FIGURE 120.14
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-60.png]
 
   I.   Display Boxes: Display boxes may contain an establishment's current
menu, current entertainment information or merchandise and must be compatible
with the architectural features of the building.
      1.   Size: The maximum size shall be five (5) square feet.
      2.   Number Of Signs: The maximum number of display boxes shall be one
per public entrance.
      3.   Setback And Orientation: Display boxes shall be wall mounted or
freestanding and oriented toward pedestrian viewers. Display boxes shall not be
placed in a pedestrian walkway, vehicularway or any location that would cause a
hazard.
      4.   Design: Display boxes must be constructed to coordinate with the
building design and must contain a clear face which would protect the menu/
event display from the weather and must not extend over public property.
      5.   Illumination: Lighting of the display box is permitted within the
display case. Lighting shall be down directed toward the items displayed.
   J.   Electronic Signs: Electronic signs are prohibited unless within a
completely enclosed building.
   K.   Umbrella Signs: Umbrella signs shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Size: A maximum of thirty percent (30%) of the canvas area on each
umbrella may be used for signage.
      2.   Number Of Umbrellas: The number of umbrellas and associated signs
shall be limited by the number of umbrellas that fit comfortably on the site
and are useful. Table and seating locations shall meet the requirements of the
international building code.
      3.   Setback And Orientation: Umbrellas must be set back a minimum of
twenty four inches (24") from the property line.
      4.   Design: Materials should be high quality vinyl, nylon, canvas or
other similar material in order to withstand the weather and climate changes.
Umbrella signs may only be used where umbrellas are an integral part of the
architecture and theme of the building.
      5.   Illumination: Illumination of umbrella signs is prohibited.
   L.   Murals: Wall murals shall be permitted if the content is in keeping
with a moral society and in keeping with the theme of the historic district and
is approved by the heritage commission. A maximum of ten percent (10%) of the
mural may be used for advertising as long as the advertisement is incorporated
into the mural.
      1.   Size: Limited to one wall.
      2.   Height Limit: The mural must be below the roofline of the wall on
which mural will be located.
      3.   Illumination: Murals may be illuminated. See subsection
17.45.110J of this chapter.
   M.   Reserved.
   N.   Address Signs: All buildings shall have an address sign.
      1.   Size: The size is limited to three (3) square feet. Letters shall be
a minimum of three inches (3") high.
      2.   Design: The address sign must be coordinated with the building
design and be of contrasting color. See figures 120.15 and 120.16 of this
section.
      3.   Illumination: Lighting of the address is permitted.
   FIGURE 120.15
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-62.png]
 
   FIGURE 120.16
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-64.png]
 
   O.   Reserved.
   P.   Window Sign: Window signs are permitted provided they meet the
following criteria:
      1.   Size: Permanent window signs may occupy no more than thirty five
percent (35%) of the total transparent area of the window.
      2.   Height Limit: Window signs are limited to the main floor level of
the building.
      3.   Setback And Orientation: Window signs include any signs within three
feet (3') of the front window which are clearly visible from the street.
      4.   Design: The window sign shall be compatible with the building face
and the historic character of Santa Clara. See figures 120.18 and 120.19 of
this section.
      5.   Illumination: Illumination of window signs is prohibited.
   FIGURE 120.18
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-66.png]
 
   FIGURE 120.19
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-68.png]
 
(Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.130: OTHER SIGNS:
   A.   Municipal Identification And Directional Signs: Municipal
identification and directional signs shall comply with the intent of this
chapter except where compliance would conflict with state or federal laws and
regulations. (Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.140: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Refer to city sign ordinance. (Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.150: BANNERS ON CITY LIGHT STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose Statement: Santa Clara City makes certain light standards
available for the display of banners in order to promote the visual interest
and economic vitality of Santa Clara City's historic community; to promote
aesthetic enhancement through artistic expression; and to contribute to the
festive nature of Santa Clara City.
   B.   Administration: Banners on city light standards shall be reviewed and
administered by the city staff pursuant to the criteria set forth in this
chapter.
   C.   Eligibility: Persons eligible to apply for and display banners on city
light standards shall be limited to those approved by the city.
   D.   Applications: Applications for banners on city light standards shall be
submitted to the special events department and shall be approved only if the
interdepartmental review team finds compliance with all criteria set forth in
this chapter. Applications shall be submitted no later than sixty (60) days
prior to the first date of the proposed display period. Applications shall at a
minimum contain the following information:
      1.   Proof of eligibility;
      2.   Requested display locations and dates, not to exceed a period of
four (4) weeks; and
      3.   A colored rendering or colored drawing of the proposed banner,
including facade dimensions and descriptions of materials and colors to be
used.
If more than one application for banners on city light standards is received
for the same time period, the special events director will determine which
applicant receives priority status. Priority shall be determined on a first
come, first served basis, based on the date a completed application is
received. Where competing applications are submitted display periods may be
limited to the actual event dates.
   E.   Design: Banners for display on city light standards must satisfy the
following design criteria:
      1.   Size: Unless otherwise approved by the city, banners shall be sized
to fit existing framework.
      2.   Fabrication: Fabric must be of a durable material able to withstand
the elements including heavy winds. Additionally, banners must be sewn for
mounting on existing brackets. Applicants are encouraged to contact the city
prior to submitting an application in order to ensure compliance with actual
specifications.
      3.   Sponsors: Name, logo, or imagery of the event along with event
sponsors may be shown on the banner, subject to the following criteria:
         a.   The sponsor's name, logo, or imagery shall occupy no more than
eight percent (8%) of the total banner area and must be within the bottom
fifteen percent (15%) of the banner area;
         b.   The font and scale of the sponsor's name, logo, or imagery must
be secondary to the event text and imagery, and must be smaller than the font
and scale of the event name, logo, and imagery.
         c.   Multiple sponsors are allowed for a single event, but only one
sponsor's name may be displayed on any one banner.
   F.   Artwork: Fluorescent colors and reflective surfaces are prohibited on
banners. Reflective colored materials that give the appearance of changing
color are also prohibited. Artwork should be approved at least two (2) months
prior to the proposed hanging date. The design must be on both sides of the
banners, unless otherwise approved by the city.
   G.   Text: Banner text shall be limited to the name of the event, a sponsor
and the dates of the event.
   H.   Period Of Display: Banners may be displayed for no more than four (4)
weeks at a time. Applicants shall accept that the display period is contingent
upon a workable arrangement within the overall schedule of other city banners
as well as prior commitments to other outside sponsors. Prior commitments may
preclude the desired display period of an otherwise acceptable applicant's
banner.
   I.   Installation And Removal: Banners must be received by the city no later
than one week prior to the first date of scheduled display. All banners on city
light standards shall be installed and removed by city personnel. Installation
and removal dates will be arranged by the applicant and the city staff. If the
banners are not retrieved from the city by the applicant within thirty (30)
days after removal, the banners shall become the property of the city and will
be disposed of.
   J.   Liability: The applicant shall agree to assume full liability and
indemnify the city for any damage to persons or property arising from the
display of the banners by the city. The city is not responsible for any damage
that may occur to the banners from any cause. (Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.160: APPEALS:
Any applicant who believes a denial is not justified, has the right to take the
application to the planning commission for review, and to appear at the next
regularly scheduled meeting for which proper notice can be given and agenda
time is available. If the decision of the planning commission is not
acceptable, the applicant can appeal to the city council if the appeal is filed
with the city staff in writing within ten (10) business days following the
decision of the planning commission. (Ord. 2015-13)
17.45.170: LIABILITY:
Any person erecting or owning a sign located within the city limits shall agree
to assume full liability and indemnify the city for any damage to persons or
property arising from the display of a sign. (Ord. 2015-13)
CHAPTER 17.48
CONSTRUCTION SUBJECT TO NATURAL HAZARDS 1
SECTION:
17.48.010: Purpose
17.48.020: Requirements
17.48.030: Hazardous Waste
17.48.040: Hillsides
 
Notes
1 1. Prior ordinance history: Ord. 95-22.
17.48.010: PURPOSE:
To protect the general public from geologic, flood, erosion, or other natural
hazards that might be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of
the residents of the city. Any application for a building permit, or a
conditional use permit which has, in the opinion of the city, potential soils,
earthquake, flood, erosion, or other discernable hazards or adverse
environmental impacts, may be required to provide a report addressing such
hazards or impacts. (Ord. 2004-31 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 11-1)
17.48.020: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The report shall be prepared by a licensed engineer, or recognized
environmental professional in the event of an environmental report, and shall
make recommendations for the suitability of the property to accommodate the
proposed construction.
   B.   Whenever a report indicates a parcel may be subject to potential or
actual hazards or impacts, the applicant shall meet the special conditions
required by such report and/or conditions established by the city. If such
conditions cannot be met, or will not be met, the application shall be denied.
   C.   All requests for permits in potential flood areas shall be subject to
all provisions of the Santa Clara flood control ordinance.
   D.   All reports shall be reviewed and approved by the city. (Ord. 2004-31 §
1: Ord. 97-06 § 11-2)
17.48.030: HAZARDOUS WASTE:
No hazardous waste of any type shall be disposed of inside the city limits.
Such material shall be transported to sites specifically approved for that
purpose. (Ord. 97-06 § 11-3)
17.48.040: HILLSIDES:
All construction proposed to be developed on hillside areas, shall be subject
to the hillside ordinance codified in chapter 17.80 of this title in addition
to all other requirements of this title. (Ord. 97-06 § 11-4)
CHAPTER 17.52
ZONES GENERALLY
SECTION:
17.52.010: Purpose
17.52.020: Boundaries
17.52.030: Supplementary Regulations To All Zones
17.52.035: Recreational Housing Units
17.52.040: Establishment Of Zoning Districts
17.52.010: PURPOSE:
For the purpose of this title, the following zones are created to be applied,
as necessary, to regulate the development of the land in the city.
   A.   This title specifies the permitted uses that are allowed within each
zone. Uses that may be conditionally approved are also shown in each zone.
   B.   If a particular use is not listed in this title as being either
permitted, or conditional, in a particular zone, this means that the use is not
permitted, and unless this title is amended to cause that particular use to
become permitted, or conditional, the use is in violation of the land use
ordinance, and cannot be permitted or allowed to continue in the zone in which
it is located.
   C.   This title does not attempt to identify all nonpermitted uses for each
zone. If they do not appear as a permitted, or conditional use, they are
automatically not permitted, and are in violation of the land use ordinance.
(Ord. 2015-05)
17.52.020: BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on city
maps, the following shall apply:
   A.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways, roads, waterways, canals, etc., shall be construed to follow
such centerlines, and in the event of change in the centerline, shall be
construed as moving with the centerline.
   B.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed to follow such lot lines.
   C.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in subsection A or B of this section, shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the official map shall be determined by the scale of
the map.
   D.   In case any further uncertainty exists, the land use authority shall
determine the location of such boundaries.
   E.   Boundaries of each of the said zones are established as described
herein, or as shown on the map entitled "zoning map of Santa Clara", which map
is on file in the city offices, and all boundaries shown thereon are made by
this reference as much a part of this title as if fully described and detailed
herein. (Ord. 2006-02: Ord. 97-06 § 12-2)
17.52.030: SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS TO ALL ZONES:
   A.   No trash, rubbish, tumbleweeds, or other combustible material shall be
allowed to remain on any lot outside of approved containers in any residential
or commercial zone. No junk, debris, inoperable, or dismantled motor vehicle,
or similar material shall be stored or allowed to remain on any lot in any
zone.
   B.   No zone change shall be approved unless the property involved shall
have access to city water, sewer, and electrical systems, and has access to a
dedicated and improved city street, unless otherwise approved by the city
council. (Ord. 2004-32 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 12-3)
17.52.035: RECREATIONAL HOUSING UNITS:
"Recreational housing unit" means a portable or mobile recreational unit such
as a camper, travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, tent trailer, tent, or any
other similar housing unit. A recreational housing unit shall not be used for
residential purposes in any residential neighborhood, except that such a unit
may be used to house guests of the primary dwelling for up to eight (8) days in
any calendar month without being in violation of the land use ordinance under
the following conditions:
   A.   No recreational housing unit may be located on any street or other part
of a public right of way, except for temporary loading and unloading of such
unit but not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours.
   B.   A recreational housing unit may be located in the side or rear yard of
the permanent residential dwelling.
   C.   The use of such recreational housing unit shall not cause unusual
noise, require additional automobile parking, or other problems to adjacent
neighbors.
   D.   No recreational housing unit shall be permitted on any property that
does not contain a dwelling or dwelling unit located on the property.
   E.   Where an unusual health related hardship exists for an extended family
member of the principal dwelling unit, the zoning administrator may grant a
time extension beyond the eight (8) daytime limit for occupancy of the
recreational housing unit. However, any time extension beyond sixty (60) days
shall require the approval of the city council. (Ord. 2020-10)
17.52.040: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
OS Open space zone.
RA Residential agriculture zone.
R-1-10 Single-family residential zone.
R-1-10/RA Mixed lot size residential zone.
Commercial zone.
Planned development residential zone.
Planned commercial development zone.
Planned office and institutional development zone.
Planned industrial development zone.
Historic district/mixed use zone.
HD Historic overlay zone.
HP Hillside protection overlay zone. (Ord. 2020-10: Ord. 2012-11: Ord. 2008-14:
Ord. 2004-36: Ord. 2004-03: Ord. 97-06 § 12-4)
CHAPTER 17.56
OS OPEN SPACE ZONE
SECTION:
17.56.010: Purpose
17.56.020: Permitted Uses
17.56.030: Conditional Uses
17.56.040: Height Regulations
17.56.050: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
17.56.060: Modifying Regulations
17.56.010: PURPOSE:
To permit the use of open space land within the city for uses compatible with
the protection of the natural and scenic resources of the city, for the benefit
of present and future generations. (Ord. 97-06 § 13-1)
17.56.020: PERMITTED USES:
Exotic animals. No exotic animals may be kept in the OS zone.
Livestock grazing, including incidental corrals, barns, or pens.
Raising of crops, horticulture and gardening.
Undeveloped land. (Ord. 2007-01 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 13-2)
17.56.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Cemeteries.
Golf courses.
Public or private recreation grounds and facilities, including public or
private park development or trail development.
Public utilities, transmission lines and communication towers.
Other uses similar to the above, and judged by the planning commission to be in
harmony with the character and intent of this zone. (Ord. 2004-33 § 1: Ord. 97-
06 § 13-3)
17.56.040: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall be erected to a height greater than thirty five feet (35')
unless approved by the planning commission through approval of a conditional
use permit. No accessory building shall be erected to a height greater than
twenty feet (20') unless approved by the planning commission through approval
of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 2004-33 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 13-4)
17.56.050: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
District Area Minimum Width Minimum Minimum Yard Setbacks
                                    Front   Side    Yard
OS       None         None          25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
 
(Ord. 2004-33 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 13-5)
17.56.060: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Livestock kept in a barn, corral, or pen shall be at least fifty feet
(50') from any residential dwelling.
   B.   Commercial feedlot operations, including, but not limited to,
commercial dairies and kennels, are not permitted within the open space zone
except as may be existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, or located
and approved as a conditional use by the planning commission on lots of ten
(10) acres or larger. (Ord. 2009-12 § 1)
CHAPTER 17.60
RA RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURE ZONE
SECTION:
17.60.010: Purpose
17.60.020: Permitted Uses
17.60.030: Conditional Uses
17.60.040: Height Regulations
17.60.050: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
17.60.060: Modifying Regulations
17.60.010: PURPOSE:
To promote and preserve, in appropriate areas, conditions favorable to large
lot family living and also allowing the keeping of a limited number of animals
and fowl. This zoning district is intended to be primarily residential in
character, but is intended to encourage the maintenance and continued use of
agricultural land. (Ord. 2009-01 § 1)
17.60.020: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings and uses.
Exotic animals. No exotic animals may be kept within the RA zone.
Large and small animals and fowl. The keeping of large (see definition of
"livestock") and small animals and fowl as an accessory use to a single-family
dwelling. The number and type of animals and fowl allowed shall be limited as
follows:
   A.   For every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area, two (2)
large animals; for lots over thirty thousand (30,000) square feet, three (3)
large animals, up to a total of four (4) large animals for the first acre. For
lots of two (2) or more acres, the requirement for one acre lots may be
repeated. Medium sized animals may be allowed up to the total allowed by this
zone, or may be interspersed with large animals up to the total number of large
and medium animals combined.
   B.   For every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area, not more
than twenty (20) small animals or fowl. For each additional ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of lot area over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, ten
(10) additional small animals or fowl may be included, up to a maximum of forty
(40) small animals or fowl. Small animals may include poultry, rabbits, and
fowl of similar size, or other animals judged by the planning commission to be
compatible with this category of small animals.
   C.   4-H projects that include wiener pigs may be permitted on an annual
basis subject to meeting specific conditions:
      1.   "Wiener pigs" shall be defined as pigs that will be one year of age
or less and do not weigh more than three hundred fifty (350) pounds at the end
of the five (5) month period in which the wiener pig is kept.
      2.   A wiener pig shall be considered a medium animal.
      3.   All wiener pigs shall only be permitted on one acre parcels, or
larger.
      4.   Setbacks for pens for wiener pigs shall be the same as required for
other large or medium sized animals.
      5.   All pens shall be cleaned regularly, a minimum of three (3) times
weekly.
      6.   No wiener pigs shall be allowed to run loose (not in a restricted
environment, such as a pen) unless attended by the owner or keeper of the pig.
      7.   No mud bogs shall be allowed in the pens. All pens shall have
drainage to keep water from pooling within the pen.
   D.   All large animals shall be fenced and sheltered in a stable, barn, or
covered outdoor shelter.
Raising of crops, horticulture, and gardening.
Single-family dwellings. (Ord. 2009-12 § 1: Ord. 2009-01 § 1)
17.60.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
A second dwelling subject to the modifying regulations of section
17.60.060 of this chapter.
Home occupations as defined herein and approved by the planning commission or
planning staff.
Park or playground.
Public utilities, including cable television, communication towers, and high
speed internet.
Schools or churches.
Other uses similar to the above and judged by the planning commission to be in
harmony with the intent and purpose of the zone. (Ord. 2009-01 § 1)
17.60.040: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No main building shall be erected to a height greater than thirty five feet
(35') and no accessory building shall be erected to a height greater than
twenty feet (20') without a conditional use permit approved by the planning
commission. (Ord. 2009-01 § 1)
17.60.050: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
District Area     Width    Front   Side      Rear
RA       1/2 acre 100 feet 25 feet 8–12 fee10 feet
 
(Ord. 2009-01 § 1)
17.60.060: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side yard setbacks on a “street side” shall be the same as for a front
yard setback.
   B.   Private garages and accessory buildings located to the rear, and at
least ten feet (10') away from the main dwelling may be built five feet (5')
from the property line provided that: 1) projection beyond exterior wall shall
not exceed twelve inches (12") into the area where openings are prohibited, 2)
stormwater runoff from the building shall not run onto adjacent property, 3)
all corner lots shall maintain required setbacks on street sides, and 4)
construction shall comply with current international residential code (IRC)
exterior wall and opening protection. No building, or swimming pool, shall be
in any easement without city approval.
      1.   After first obtaining a building permit from the Santa Clara City
building official, a carport or awning may be constructed in the required
twelve-foot (12') side yard setback or ten foot (10') rear yard area subject to
the following conditions:
         a.   All three (3) sides of the carport/awning away from the dwelling
shall be kept completely open. No storage areas shall be permitted as any part
of the carport/awnings.
         b.   The height of the carport/awning shall not exceed the height of
the top plate of the walls of the first floor of the dwelling, or a maximum of
ten feet (10') above the normal grade of the side yard setback.
         c.   A two-foot (2') setback shall be maintained from the side
property line.
         d.   The roof shall be sloped away from the dwelling, and a rain
gutter shall be installed along the roof edge on the side yard of the two-foot
(2') setback to keep all roof runoff on the property of the owner of the
carport/awning.
      2.   All construction materials shall be completely noncombustible and
shall meet all applicable requirements of the international residential code.
         a.   Color of the construction material shall be of earth tones or
harmonize with the colors of the dwelling unit.
         b.   The carport/awning shall always be well maintained and shall be
repainted from time to time as necessary.
      3.   The side of the carport/awning nearest the front street shall be set
back a minimum of ten feet (10') behind the front face of the dwelling unit.
   C.   The front yard width in a cul-de-sac may be approved by the land use
authority with less than the required width.
   D.   Other conditions that may be required by the land use authority to
protect the intent and purpose of the zone.
   E.   The minimum square footage of any main residence shall be one thousand
two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of living space on the main floor of a
single-story home. For a two-story home there shall be a minimum of one
thousand (1,000) square feet of living space on the main floor, and a minimum
of eight hundred (800) square feet of living space on the second floor. A
split-level home shall have a minimum of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250)
square feet on the main and upper floor combined, but not including the square
footage of the lower level.
   F.   No trash, weeds, or other combustible material shall be allowed to
remain on any lot outside of approved containers in any residential zone. No
junk, debris, abandoned, inoperable, or dismantled automobile or automobile
parts or similar material shall be stored or allowed to remain on any lot in
any residential zone. (Ord. 2022-04 § 1: Ord. 2020-03 § 1: Ord. 2015-05: Ord.
2009-12 § 1: Ord. 2009-01 § 1)
CHAPTER 17.63
R-1-6 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
17.63.010: Purpose
17.63.020: Permitted Uses
17.63.030: Conditional Uses
17.63.040: Height Regulations
17.63.050: Area, Width and Yard Regulations
17.63.060: Modifying Regulations
17.63.010: PURPOSE:
To provide appropriate locations where low to medium density residential
neighborhoods may be established, maintained, and protected. The regulations
also permit the establishment, with proper controls of uses such as churches,
schools, libraries, parks, and permitted open spaces which serve the needs of
families. The regulations are intended to prohibit those uses that would be
harmful to a single-family residential neighborhood. (Ord. 2022-21, 9-28-2022)
17.63.020: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory buildings on lots where a main dwelling exists, or for which a
building permit has been issued.
Home gardens and fruit trees, keeping of household pets, etc., but not
agricultural industry, or business, or the keeping of domestic animals or fowl.
Internal Accessory Dwelling Unit, IADU as per
Chapter 17.22 of city code.
Single-family dwellings and manufactured homes as defined herein. (Ord. 2022-
21, 9-28-2022)
17.63.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
Accessory Dwelling Unit, ADU as per
Chapter 17.22 of city code.
Child nursery, as defined herein. The dwelling shall be the permanent residence
of the operator. The land use authority will determine the maximum number of
children to be allowed, and other requirements, depending upon specific
conditions relating to the request.
Parking shall be as required by the land use authority. All other requirements
of the zone shall be complied with.
Churches, schools, parks, and open space.
Home occupation, as defined herein, and approved by the land use authority
staff, or as may be recommended to the land use authority.
Public buildings.
Public utilities and buildings.
Residential Facility for the Elderly. (Ord. 2022-21, 9-28-2022)
17.63.040: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall be erected to a height greater than thirty feet (30'), and no
accessory building shall be erected to a height greater than twenty feet (20').
An Accessory Dwelling Unit, ADU may not exceed a height of twenty feet (20').
(Ord. 2022-21, 9-28-2022)
17.63.050: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
District Area  Width   Front   Side       Rear
R-1-6    6,000 50 feet 20 feet 6 - 8 feet 10 feet
 
The front yard setback is required to be twenty feet (20') from property line
or back of sidewalk, whichever is closer to the structure. (Ord. 2022-21, 9-28-
2022)
17.63.060: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side yard setbacks on a "street side" (corner lot) shall be the same as
for a front yard setback.
   B.   Accessory buildings located to the rear of a main dwelling, and at
least ten feet (10') away from the main dwelling may be built five feet (5')
from the property line provided that: 1) projection beyond exterior wall shall
not exceed twelve inches (12") into the area where openings are prohibited, 2)
stormwater runoff from the building shall not run onto adjacent property, 3)
all corner lots shall maintain required setbacks on street sides, and 4)
construction shall comply with current International Residential Code (IRC)
exterior wall and opening protection. No building, or swimming pool, shall be
in any easement without city approval.
      1.   After first obtaining a building permit from the City Building
Official, a carport or awning may be constructed in the required six-foot (6')
side yard setback or ten-foot (10') rear yard area subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   All three (3) sides of the carport/awning away from the dwelling
shall be kept completely open. No storage areas shall be permitted in any part
of the carport/awning.
         b.   The height of the carport/awning shall not exceed the height of
the top plate of the walls of the first floor of the dwelling, or a maximum of
ten feet (10') above the normal grade of the side yard setback.
         c.   A two-foot (2') setback shall be maintained from the side
property line.
         d.   The roof shall be sloped away from the dwelling, and a rain
gutter shall be installed along the roof edge on the side yard of the two-foot
(2') setback to keep all roof runoff on the property of the owner of the
carport/awning.
      2.   All construction materials shall be completely noncombustible and
shall meet all applicable requirements of the international residential code.
         a.   Color of the construction material shall be of earth tones or
harmonize with the colors of the dwelling unit.
         b.   The carport/awning shall always be well maintained and shall be
repainted from time to time as necessary.
      3.   The side of the carport/awning nearest the front street shall be set
back a minimum of ten feet (10') behind the front face of the dwelling unit.
         a.   An accessory building or ADU shall be required to utilize
building materials and colors to blend in with the construction of the primary
dwelling unit on the property.
         b.   The lot width for cul-de-sac lots may be approved by the land use
authority with less than fifty feet (50') of frontage; however, this
requirement shall be meet at the twenty feet (20') front setback line.
         c.   Other conditions that may be required by the land use authority
to protect the intent and purpose of the zone.
         d.   The minimum square footage of any main residence shall be one
thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of living space on the main floor of a
single-story home. For a two-story home there shall be a minimum of eight
hundred (800) square feet of living space on the main floor, and a minimum of
seven hundred (700) square feet of living space on the second floor. A split-
level home shall have a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet on the main
and upper floor combined, but not including the square footage of the lower
level.
         e.   No trash, weeds, or other combustible material shall be allowed
to remain on any lot outside of approved containers in any residential zone. No
junk, debris, abandoned, inoperable, or dismantled automobile or automobile
parts or similar material shall be stored or allowed to remain on any lot in
any residential zone. (Ord. 2022-21, 9-28-2022)
CHAPTER 17.64
R-1-10 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
17.64.010: Purpose
17.64.020: Permitted Uses
17.64.030: Conditional Uses
17.64.040: Height Regulations
17.64.050: Area, Width And Yard Regulations
17.64.060: Modifying Regulations
17.64.010: PURPOSE:
To provide appropriate locations where low density residential neighborhoods
may be established, maintained, and protected. The regulations also permit the
establishment, with proper controls, of public and semipublic uses such as
churches, schools, libraries, parks, and playgrounds which serve the needs of
families. The regulations are intended to prohibit those uses that would be
harmful to a single-family residential neighborhood. (Ord. 97-06 § 15-1)
17.64.020: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses and buildings on lots where a main dwelling exists, or for which
a building permit has been issued.
Home gardens and fruit trees, keeping of household pets, etc., but not
agricultural industry, or business, or the keeping of domestic animals or fowl.
Single-family dwellings and manufactured homes as defined herein. (Ord. 2008-11
§ 1: Ord. 2007-01 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 15-2)
17.64.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
"Child nursery", as defined herein. The dwelling shall be the permanent
residence of the operator. The land use authority will determine the maximum
number of children to be allowed, and other requirements, depending upon
specific conditions relating to the request.
Parking shall be as required by the land use authority. All other requirements
of the zone shall be complied with.
Church.
"Home occupation", as defined herein, and approved by the land use authority
staff, or as may be recommended to the land use authority for hearing.
Keeping of livestock animals or fowl subject to the conditions found in the
modifying regulations of this zone.
Park or playground.
Public buildings.
Public utilities, including cable television.
School.
Second dwelling - subject to modifying regulations in section
17.64.060 of this chapter.
Other uses recommended by the land use authority as being in harmony with the
intent of the zone and similar in nature to the above listed uses. (Ord. 2009-
12 § 1: Ord. 2008-11 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 15-3)
17.64.040: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building, shall be erected to a height greater than thirty five feet (35'),
and no accessory building shall be erected to a height greater than twenty feet
(20') without a conditional use permit approved by the land use authority.
(Ord. 2008-11 § 1: Ord. 2004-35 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 15-4)
17.64.050: AREA, WIDTH AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
District Area   Width   Front   Side        Rear
R-1-10   10,000 80 feet 25 feet 8 - 12 feet 10 feet
 
Where a sidewalk and a driveway are located in the same setback of a dwelling,
the garage setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back edge
of the sidewalk to the garage. Where no sidewalk is located in the setback, or
where a side entry garage has a minimum twenty foot (20') long driveway from
the back edge of the sidewalk, the garage setback shall be the same as required
for the dwelling unit. (Ord. 2017-07: Ord. 97-06 § 15-5)
17.64.060: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Side yard setbacks on a “street side” shall be the same as for a front
yard setback.
   B.   Accessory Structures (Non-habitable structures accessory to the primary
residence)
      1.   Accessory Structures shall only be authorized concurrently or
following the establishment of the primary residence.
      2.   An accessory garage may be attached to, or detached from, the
primary building.
         a.   An accessory garage that is attached to a primary building shall
meet all requirements for the location of the primary building.
         b.   All garages and other accessory buildings located within ten feet
(10') of the primary building shall be considered attached and part of the
primary building and the setback and height requirements applicable to the
primary building shall apply.
         c.   An accessory garage that is detached from a primary building
shall meet all requirements for the location of a detached accessory building,
as provided.
         d.   The cumulative square footage of all accessory structures shall
not be greater than twenty five percent (25%) of the rear yard area as measured
from the rear wall line of the primary structure to the rear property line
(pools excluded).
      3.   All garages and other accessory buildings located ten feet (10') or
more away from the primary residence may be constructed five feet (5') from the
side and rear property lines provided that.
         a.   Setbacks may be allowed to be reduced with clearance from city
utility departments.
         b.   Structures permitted to have reduced setbacks shall only utilize
40% of the rear property line width.
         c.   Maximum Height: twenty feet (20') for structures with flat roofs
and twenty-five feet (25') for structures with pitched roofs.
         d.   Projection beyond exterior walls shall not exceed twelve inches
(12") into the area where openings are prohibited.
         e.   Stormwater runoff from the building shall not run onto adjacent
property. Exception: Small accessory structures that are less than two hundred
(200) square feet in area do not require a building permit unless; power,
plumbing, or HVAC utilities are intended to be installed. A small accessory
structure may be located in the rear yard, three feet (3') from side and rear
property lines so long as the structure does not exceed ten feet (10') maximum
height.
      4.   Accessory structures located on corner lots shall meet the required
corner side yard setback applicable to the zone.
      5.   Accessory structures shall use finish materials colored to blend
with the primary structure.
      6.   Accessory structures shall comply with the most recently adopted
International Residential Code (IRC).
      7.   No shipping container, cargo container, shipping crate, box trailer
or similar movable pieces of equipment or object shall be used as an accessory
structure.
      8.   No utility connections or meters, separate from the primary
residence, shall be allowed for accessory structures.
      9.   No accessory structure shall be used as a permanent dwelling unit.
      10.   No accessory structure shall be located in any required front yard
setback.
   C.   Carports:
      1.   A building permit shall be required to construct or install all
carports. Installations shall comply with the requirements of this section and
the adopted Building Code, as applicable.
      2.   Any enclosed carport (a carport enclosed on more than 2 sides, or
60% of wall areas, whichever is less) shall comply with the required setbacks
applicable to the primary residence.
      3.   Carports constructed completely of noncombustible materials may be
allowed in the side and rear yard area so long as no portion of the carport
structure is closer than two feet (2') to any side or rear property line.
Reduced setbacks shall only be allowed with clearance from city utility
departments.
      4.   Maximum height of a noncombustible carport shall not exceed fifteen
feet (15') or the height of the primary structure, whichever is less.
      5.   Carports constructed from any combustible materials may be allowed
in the required rear yard area when located ten feet (10') or more away from
the primary residence. No portion of any such carport shall be closer than five
feet (5') to any side or rear property line and shall not exceed twenty feet
(20') in height.
      6.   No stormwater runoff from any carport shall be allowed to run onto
adjacent properties.
      7.   Construction material of carports and awnings shall be color tones
designed to blend/harmonize with the primary structure.
      8.   Carports shall always be well maintained and kept in good repair.
   D.   Awnings and Patio Covers:
      1.   A building permit shall be required to construct all awnings and
patio covers.
      2.   Any enclosed awning or patio cover (a structure enclosed on more
than 2 sides) shall comply with the required setbacks applicable to the primary
residence.
      3.   Awnings and patio covers constructed of noncombustible materials may
be allowed in the side and rear yard area so long as no portion of the awning/
patio cover structure is closer than two feet (2') to any side or rear property
line. Reduced setbacks shall only be allowed with clearance from city utility
departments.
      4.   Awnings and patio covers constructed of any combustible materials
may be allowed in the side and rear yard area so long as no portion of the
awning/patio cover structure is closer than five feet (5') to any side or rear
property line.
      5.   No stormwater runoff from any awning or patio cover shall be allowed
to run onto adjacent property.
      6.   Construction material of awnings and patio covers shall be color
tones designed to blend/harmonize with the primary structure.
      7.   Awnings and patio covers shall always be well maintained and kept in
good repair.
      8.   Awnings proposed in front yard areas shall comply with section
17.20.090 of this title.
   E.   Swimming Pools:
      1.   A building permit shall be required to construct all hot tubs,
swimming pools and swimming pool accessory features.
      2.   Swimming pools must be constructed and protected in compliance with
the adopted International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC).
      3.   Swimming pools are allowed to be constructed within the prescribed
setbacks and public utility easements with clearance from city utility
departments.
         a.   Exception: Swimming pools proposed along the street facing front
and side yards, and rear yards on double-fronted lots, shall not be constructed
within public utility easements.
         b.   Swimming pools installed in street-facing yard areas will require
a safety barrier compliant with the adopted International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code (ISPSC).
      4.   Swimming pools may be constructed within three feet (3') of property
lines as measured from property line to water’s edge.
      5.   Pool equipment shall be placed in an area compliant with the
Residential Electrical, Fuel and Gas Codes.
      6.   Privacy of neighboring properties shall be considered when
installing accessory pool features such as slides, diving platforms, and faux
rock. Pool amenities shall be placed at a height to distance ratio of 1:1 from
property line until meeting the prescribed setback for the residential zone.
   F.   Domestic Livestock and Fowl:
      1.   On lots of less than two (2) acres in size, no large or medium sized
animals shall be kept or maintained.
      2.   On lots of two (2) acres or more, domestic livestock shall be
limited to one (1) domestic animal for each one-half acre.
      3.   On lots of less than two (2) acres, ten (10) hen chickens (no
roosters) may be kept per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area.
      4.   Residential lots may have one chicken run.
      5.   Chicken runs are limited to a maximum size of one hundred twenty
(120) square feet and a maximum height of eight feet (8').
      6.   No chicken shall be allowed to roam outside the chicken run.
      7.   Household Pets: (See Title 6: Animals). (Ord. 2025-06 § 1: Ord.
2022-04 § 1: Ord. 2020-03 § 1: Ord. 2015-05: Ord. 2014-02: Ord. 2012-06: Ord.
2009-12 § 1: Ord. 2008-11 § 1: Ord. 2007-20 § 1: Ord. 2004-35 § 1: Ord. 99-23 §
1: Ord. 97-06 § 15-6)
CHAPTER 17.65
R-1-10/RA MIXED LOT SIZE RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
17.65.010: Purpose
17.65.020: Permitted Uses
17.65.030: Conditional Uses
17.65.040: Height Regulations
17.65.050: Area, Width, And Yard Regulations
17.65.060: Modifying Regulations
17.65.010: PURPOSE:
To provide appropriate locations where low to medium density mixed lot
residential neighborhoods may be established, maintained, and protected.
Residential agriculture areas which preserve agricultural use of the land may
also allow a variety of lot sizes. The regulations permit the establishment,
with proper controls, of uses such as churches, schools, parks, and permitted
open spaces which serve the needs of families. The regulations are intended to
prohibit those uses that would be harmful to a single-family residential
neighborhood. (Ord. 2012-11)
17.65.020: PERMITTED USES:
The uses permitted in the R-1-10 zone, except for small animals, on ten
thousand (10,000) square foot lots in the mixed lot size zone.
Accessory uses on lots where a main dwelling exists, or for which a building
permit has been issued.
Home gardens and fruit trees. The keeping of household pets are permitted, but
not agricultural industry, commercial business, or the keeping of domestic
animals or fowl.
Single-family dwellings and manufactured homes as defined herein. (Ord. 2012-
11)
17.65.030: CONDITIONAL USES:
A "child nursery", as defined herein. The dwelling shall be the permanent
residence of the operator. The number of children shall not exceed the number
five (5) allowed by the home occupation ordinance contained in this code. All
other requirements of the home occupation ordinance (chapter 17.38 of this
title) shall be complied with.
A residential facility for the elderly.
Accessory structures on lots where a main dwelling exists, or for which a
building permit has been issued, but not including detached second dwellings
unless permitted on ten thousand (10,000) square foot lots by the R-1-10 zone.
Churches, schools, parks, and open space.
All requirements for a single-family dwelling, i.e., setbacks, heights, parking
requirements, street access locations, utilities, occupancy permits, signs,
etc., shall be complied with as required for such uses by this chapter. (Ord.
2012-11)
17.65.040: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No main dwelling shall be erected to a height greater than thirty five feet
(35'), and no detached accessory building shall be erected to a height greater
than twenty feet (20') without approval of the planning commission. (Ord. 2012-
11)
17.65.050: AREA, WIDTH, AND YARD REGULATIONS:
 
Mixed Lot Sizes    Width   Front   Side        Rear
10,000 square feet 80 feet 20 feet 8 - 12 feet 10 feet
9,000 square feet  75 feet 20 feet 8 - 10 feet 10 feet
8,000 square feet  70 feet 20 feet 8 - 10 feet 10 feet
7,000 square feet  60 feet 20 feet 6 - 10 feet 10 feet
 
Where a sidewalk and a driveway are located in the same setback of a dwelling,
the garage setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back edge
of the sidewalk to the garage. Where no sidewalk is located in the setback, or
where a side entry garage has a minimum twenty foot (20') long driveway from
the back edge of the sidewalk, the garage setback shall be the same as required
for the dwelling unit. (Ord. 2017-07: Ord. 2012-11)
17.65.060: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   For all lots in the mixed lot zone the side yard setbacks on a street
side shall be the same as for a front yard setback unless the development has
no dwellings fronting on any side yard in the entire phase of development, in
which case the side yard may be reduced to fifteen feet (15').
   B.   The percentage of mixed lot sizes shall be:
   40 percent that are 10,000 square feet,
   20 percent that are 9,000 square feet,
   20 percent that are 8,000 square feet, and
   20 percent that are 7,000 square feet.
   C.   The number of lots allowed in the development will be determined by the
gross area of the proposed phase or development, and subtracting fifteen
percent (15%) of the gross area for streets and public rights of way. The net
land area may be divided into mixed lot sizes as shown by the percentages in
subsection B of this section.
   D.   Eight thousand (8,000) and nine thousand (9,000) square foot lots in
the mixed lot development may include a casita or "mother-in-law" attached
apartments if all requirements of this chapter, and the international
residential building code, are complied with. Such units shall not be less than
four hundred fifty (450) square feet in size or greater in size than eight
hundred (800) square feet.
   E.   The additional units approved above for eight thousand (8,000) and nine
thousand (9,000) square foot lots are not approved for public rental, and may
only be occupied by persons related to those residing in the primary dwelling.
No additional parking spaces will be required for such units.
   F.   In the residential agricultural zone, mixed lot developments may be
approved. However the number of parcels shall not exceed the density, or number
of lots allowed by the RA zone. All excess land must be maintained in some form
of agricultural use, and may be maintained by the lot owners, leased to someone
else, deeded to a conservation group, or to the city of Santa Clara at the
city's option. The land may be requested to be placed in an agricultural
protection zone as provided by the RA zoning classification.
   G.   The minimum square footage of any main dwelling on any lot shall be one
thousand (1,000) square feet of living space on the main floor of a single-
story home, or one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet of living
space on the main floor of any dwelling on a ten thousand (10,000) square foot
lot.
   H.   Parking shall be as required by chapter 17.32 of this title (off street
parking standards), except that no additional parking shall be required on an
eight thousand (8,000) or nine thousand (9,000) square foot lot for a casita or
mother-in-law apartment in the R-1-10/RA mixed lot zone.
   I.   One purpose of the R-1-10/RA mixed lot size zone is to allow for all
individual lots and homes having front yards fully completed at the time of
occupancy.
      1.   Drawings showing the development layout, landscaping, and fencing
shall be submitted to the planning staff at the time of application for a
building permit being requested by the developer or the owner. Developers are
encouraged to arrange for completion of the required front yard landscaping as
a part of the lot sales in the development.
      2.   In order to achieve a harmonious subdivision appearance and assure
compliance, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until a dwelling has
been completely finished and includes all front yard landscaping, driveways,
sidewalks, and fencing where necessary.
      3.   The front yard of a cul-de-sac shall maintain a twenty foot (20')
setback. However, this setback may be reduced to fifteen feet (15') upon the
approval of the staff, or, if referred, by the planning commission.
   J.   Private garages and accessory buildings located to the rear, and at
least ten feet (10') away from the main dwelling may be built five feet (5')
from the property line. All building code requirements shall be complied with.
No detached garage shall be supplied with utilities except for electricity and
water for a sink and/or toilet.
   K.   All other modifying regulations of the R-1-10 residential zone shall
apply to ten thousand (10,000) square foot lots in the R-1-10/RA mixed lot size
zone.
   L.   In small projects not exceeding ten (10) units, the planning commission
may recommend, and the council may approve any mixture of lot sizes that may or
may not match the percentages of each lot size as found in subsection B of this
section.
   M.   No lot may be less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet. The project
must include more than one lot size, and the project must include two (2) or
more lots that are ten thousand (10,000) square feet, or forty percent (40%) of
lots if the total number is less than ten (10).
   N.   In any zone in which residential dwellings or dwelling units are
permitted, portable or mobile recreational units such as campers, travel
trailers, fifth wheel trailers, tent trailers, tents or any other type of
recreational, mobile or portable housing unit ("recreational housing unit") are
not permitted for housing use, except that such a unit may be used to house
guests of the primary dwelling for up to eight (8) days in any calendar month
without being in violation of the land use ordinance subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   No recreational housing unit may be located on any street or other
part of a public right of way, except for temporary loading and unloading of
such unit but not to exceed forty eight (48) hours.
      2.   A recreational housing unit may be located in the side or rear yard
of the permanent residential dwelling.
      3.   The use of such recreational housing unit shall not cause unusual
noise, require additional automobile parking, or other problems to adjacent
neighbors.
      4.   No recreational housing unit shall be permitted on any property that
does not contain a dwelling or dwelling unit located on the property.
      5.   Where an unusual health related hardship exists for an extended
family member of the principal dwelling unit, the zoning administrator may
grant a time extension beyond the eight (8) day time limit for occupancy of the
recreational housing unit. However, any time extension beyond sixty (60) days
shall require the approval of the city council. (Ord. 2015-05: Ord. 2013-06:
Ord. 2012-11)
CHAPTER 17.66
COMMERCIAL ZONE
SECTION:
17.66.020: Purpose
17.66.030: Permitted Uses
17.66.040: General Requirements
17.66.050: Special Provisions
17.66.020: PURPOSE:
The objective of the city of Santa Clara in creating a commercial zone is to
provide space within the city where many types of commercial goods and services
may be provided. Because of the nature of this commercial zone many of the
protective features normally afforded to adjacent properties, particularly
residential areas, may not exist. Therefore, commercial zones should only be
located in areas where the relationship of the commercial area to surrounding
developments is judged by the city to be as compatible as may be possible to
accomplish. Owners of commercial property should develop and maintain their
property in a manner which will be as compatible to surrounding uses as
possible. (Ord. 2004-03 § 2)
17.66.030: PERMITTED USES:
The following listed uses are not intended to be all inclusive, but rather,
indicative of uses permitted in this zone:
Amusement enterprises, including miniature golf and coin operated game
machines.
Animal hospital for small animals, conducted entirely within an enclosed
building.
Antique, import, or souvenir shop.
Athletic and sporting goods store, excluding sale or repair of motor vehicles,
motor boats, or off road vehicles, or motorized vehicles in general.
Athletic clubs.
Automobile parts sales (new).
Bakery manufacture limited to foods retailed on premises.
Bank or financial institution.
Barber or beauty shop.
Bicycle sales and service.
Bookstore, retail.
Cafe.
Camera store.
Candy store, confectionery.
Child nursery.
Clinics, medical or dental.
Clothing and accessory store.
Convenience markets, including sale of gasoline.
Delicatessen.
Department store.
Drugstore.
Electronic equipment sales.
Exotic animals. No exotic animals may be kept in the C zone.
Florist shop.
Furniture sales.
Gift store.
Government buildings or uses, nonindustrial.
Grocery store.
Hardware store.
Health food store.
Hobby and craft store.
Home appliance sales, new.
Hospital.
Hotel.
Ice cream parlor.
Insurance agency.
Interior decorating and designing business.
Jewelry store sales and service.
Laundry or dry cleaners.
Legal office.
Library.
Locksmith.
Medical office.
Mortuary.
Motel.
Museum.
Music store.
Nursery school.
Office supply, office machines sales.
Optometrist, optician, or ophthalmologist.
Paint or wallpaper store.
Pawnshop.
Pet and pet supply store.
Pharmacy.
Physician or surgeon office and clinic.
Professional office.
Real estate agency.
Reception center.
Restaurant or drive-in.
Shoe store.
Theater.
Tire sales and service.
Travel agency.
Variety store.
Other uses as may be determined to be in harmony with the character, intent and
purpose of this zone may be approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 2007-01
§ 1: Ord. 2004-03 § 2)
17.66.040: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Minimum lot area: No minimum.
   B.   Minimum zone area: No minimum.
   C.   Minimum yard setbacks, unless otherwise approved by the planning
commission:
      1.   Front: Twenty five feet (25') (see also subsection C5 of this
section).
      2.   Side facing street: Twenty five feet (25') (see also subsection C5
of this section).
      3.   Interior side: Ten feet (10').
      4.   Rear: Ten feet (10').
      5.   The planning commission may reduce the front and side facing street
setback to promote a more walkable, urban type environment. The reduced front
setback area may be used for a combination of walkways, landscaping, and
outdoor seating, but not parking.
   D.   Building height: Thirty five feet (35') unless specifically approved to
a greater height by the planning commission.
   E.   Site plan and building elevations approval:
      1.   A site plan along with building elevations shall be submitted, drawn
to scale, and of sufficient size and detail to show building appearance and
location, yard setbacks, ingress and egress drives, parking areas, landscaped
areas, and such other improvements as may be required relating to specific use
proposed.
      2.   The site plan shall show utility locations, including water, power,
telephone, cable TV, natural gas, sewer, fire hydrants, street improvements,
and such other public improvements as may be required. The building elevations
plan shall show and describe the exterior building materials and colors,
including roof materials and exterior appearance for all sides of a proposed
building.
      3.   The planning commission shall review and approve all plans prior to
the issuance of any building permit for site improvement, or construction
permit for utility systems and building construction. (Ord. 2020-13 § 1: Ord.
2017-05: Ord. 2004-03 § 2)
17.66.050: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   All materials and merchandise, except vehicles in running order, shall
be stored in an enclosed building or within an enclosure surrounded by a sight
obscuring fence or wall of not less than six feet (6') in height and no
material or merchandise shall be stored to a height of more than the height of
the enclosing fence or wall.
   B.   No trash, rubbish, weeds, or other combustible material shall be
allowed to remain on any lot outside of approved containers in any commercial
zone. No junk, debris, abandoned or dismantled automobile or automobile parts
or similar material shall be stored or allowed to remain on any lot in any
commercial zone.
   C.   All solid waste storage facilities shall be located at the rear of the
main building or else behind a sight obscuring fence or wall which will prevent
the facility from being seen from a public street.
   D.   Where a commercial development adjoins any lot or parcel of ground in
any residential zone, there shall be provided along the adjoining property
line, a decorative sight obscuring fence, or a ten foot (10') wide planting
strip or any combination of fencing or landscaping, which, in the opinion of
the planning commission, adequately protects the adjoining residential
property. (Ord. 2004-03 § 2)
CHAPTER 17.68
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONES
SECTION:
17.68.010: General Purpose And Description
17.68.020: Allowed Uses In The Planned Development Zones
17.68.030: Planned Development Process
17.68.040: Planned Development Standards And Requirements
17.68.050: PDR Zone Density Bonus Criteria And Limitations
17.68.060: Short-Term Rental Restrictions And Requirements
17.68.070: Project Plan Amendments
17.68.080: Planned Developments Approved Prior To The Adoption Of This Chapter
17.68.090: Density, Setbacks, And Other Requirements
17.68.010: GENERAL PURPOSE AND DESCRIPTION:
The purpose of the planned development (PD) zones are to encourage flexibility
and creativity in comprehensively planned projects. The following zones are
authorized under this chapter:
   A.   Planned Development Residential Zone (PDR).
   B.   Planned Commercial Development Zone (PDC).
   C.   Planned Office and Institutional Development Zone (PDO); and
   D.   Planned Industrial Development Zone (PDI). (Ord. 2020-10: Ord. 2004-36)
17.68.020: ALLOWED USES IN THE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONES:
A use that is indicated with a "P" in the table below is permitted in the
applicable zone if approved as part of a zone change. A use that is indicated
with a "C" in the table below is allowed in the applicable zone only with a
conditional use permit and if approved as part of a zone change. Any use that
is indicated as "N" in the table below is prohibited in the applicable zone
unless it is specifically approved by the city council as a mixed use. Any use
that is not permitted or conditionally permitted under this section is
prohibited.
Use Zone
    PDR PDC PDO PDI
Use                                                             Zone
                                                                PDR PDC PDO PDI
Accessory structure                                             N   C   N   N
Ambulance service                                               N   C   C   N
Apartments                                                      P   C   N   N
Assisted living or independent living care                      P   C   N   N
Auto repair, completely enclosed by solid wall including        N   C   N   C
storage
Bank or other similar financial institution                     N   P   N   N
Churches, fraternal organizations, or social organizations      P   N   C   N
City facilities, including fire protection facilities, public   P   P   P   P
works facilities, etc.
Clubs, including, but not limited to, golf and country clubs    C   N   N   N
Condominiums                                                    P   C   N   N
Convention center, meeting facility or other similar use        N   P   N   N
Daycare facility                                                C   P   P   N
Detached units, including standard large lot single-family
detached residences, zero lot line residences and cluster       P   N   N   N
housing
Funeral home or crematorium                                     N   N   C   N
Hotel, motel, or bed and breakfast                              N   P   N   N
Home occupations as defined herein and approved by the planning C   N   N   N
commission
Hospital or public health center                                N   N   P   N
Manufacturing, processing, assembly, packaging, repair or
servicing of any commodity or product; provided that all such   N   N   N   P
uses are conducted entirely within closed buildings or are at
least one hundred feet (100') from any property line.
Medical or dental office or clinic                              N   P   P   N
Mixed uses (i.e., commercial, office or residential) within the N   C   N   N
same building or on the same site
Museum or art gallery                                           N   P   P   N
Office, not including a wholesale outlet or storage of          N   P   P   P
commodities
Parking lot or garage as a principal use                        N   C   N   N
Public libraries                                                C   N   P   N
Public utility structures, including distribution lines,
transformer stations, transmission towers, telephone exchanges
and other similar uses and structures; excluding warehouses,    C   P   N   P
repair storage, vehicle maintenance, truck or road equipment
storage, radio, and television studios and cell towers
Recreational building or land, including theaters               N   P   N   N
Restaurant, including a dining club or other eating or drinking N   P   P   N
establishment
Retail sales and the servicing or repair of items sold at       N   P   N   N
retail, not including servicing or repair of automobiles
Retail uses that are accessory to the principal use             N   P   C   P
Self-service laundry, laundry, or dry-cleaning processing       N   P   N   N
facility
Schools or studios                                              C   C   C   N
Short-term residential property, subject to section             C   C   N   N
17.68.060
Timeshares/fractional interests                                 C   N   N   N
Townhouses                                                      P   N   N   N
Trade shop or service business such as shoe repair; dry
cleaning or laundering counter service; pressing, altering, or  N   P   N   N
tailoring of wearing apparel; radio, TV, or appliance repair;
watch or jewelry repair, barber or beauty shop
Veterinary clinic or hospital (small animals only and           N   P   P   N
completely enclosed building)
Warehousing, wholesaling, or storage of any product; provided
that all such uses are conducted entirely within closed         N   N   N   P
buildings or are at least one hundred feet 100' from any
property line
Other use proposed by the applicant that is similar to the
allowable uses within the zone if determined by the city        C   C   C   C
council to be in harmony with the intent and purpose of the
zone and if approved as part of the project plan
 
(Ord. 2020-10)
17.68.030: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT PROCESS:
   A.   A request for a PDR, PDC, PDO, or PDI zoning designation must include
the following:
      1.   All submittals required under
chapter 17.18 for a zoning amendment;
      2.   A project plan that meets the requirements of subsection C below;
and
      3.   A detailed landscape plan that shows landscaped areas, any areas to
be preserved in their natural state, and any common open space areas.
   B.   The planning commission and city council will consider any request for
a PDR, PDC, PDO, or PDI zoning designation in accordance with
chapter 17.18 and this chapter.
   C.   Project Plan: A project plan is a professionally designed schematic
plan showing the layout of the development and associated text. The applicant
shall submit the project plan in digital format and submit twelve (12) hard
copies of the plan, ten (10) of which must be eleven inches by seventeen inches
(11" X 17"), and two (2) copies must be twenty four inches by thirty six inches
(24" x 36"). The plan must include the following elements:
      1.   The boundary of the project property;
      2.   Phase boundaries (if applicable) and acreage associated with each
phase;
      3.   Total project site area and area by type of land use;
      4.   Proposed land uses including square footage or acreage and
percentage of each component;
      5.   The number of residential units and/or square footage of floor area
of nonresidential uses by type;
      6.   Density of uses within each land use component or phase using units
per acre for residential uses and floor area ratio (FAR) for nonresidential
components;
      7.   Proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan including
entrances and exits and connections to vehicular and pedestrian facilities
external to the project property. The project should have primarily public
roadways, but private roadways may be approved by the city council in limited
circumstances;
      8.   Existing natural features of the site including rivers, lakes,
ponds, streams, wetlands, steep slopes, mature trees, and tree stands,
topography at contour intervals of two feet (2'), and other natural features;
      9.   Square footage or acreage and percentage of open space as a part of
the total project;
      10.   Show where common open space will be provided and limits on
accessibility;
      11.   Typical elevations; and
      12.   If only one phase of the project is proposed, a preliminary plat
that conforms to
chapter 16.16.
   D.   Preliminary Plats: For any planned development that will be subdivided,
the applicant may submit a preliminary plat at the same time as the zone-change
application for the planned development. To be considered for concurrent
review, the application must include all preliminary plat requirements set
forth in
chapter 16.16. A preliminary or final plat may not be approved in any planned
development zone unless the plat is consistent with the approved project plan.
The city council may allow exceptions to city standards and subdivision
requirements relating to roadway design standards and layout, but only if the
exceptions are supported by adequate studies and approved with the project
plan. If any part of this chapter conflicts with any part of the subdivision
ordinance, this chapter controls.
   E.   Detailed Site Plan: The applicant shall submit a detailed site plan for
any individual lot other than single-family lots. The planning commission
considers any request for site plan review of a lot in any planned development.
The planning commission may not approve a site plan unless it is consistent
with the approved project plan. A request for site plan review must include a
digital copy and ten (10) site development plans, of which one set must be in
color. A site plan submittal shall include, in addition to the requirements for
all other site plans, the following items:
      1.   A plan showing how the lot relates to the plat including previously
developed sites in the project, the location, required open space, ingress, and
egress to the lot from the rest of the phase and other adjacent land;
      2.   Location of building(s); and
      3.   Typical elevations.
   F.   Other Data Or Information: An applicant who has requested a PDR, PDC,
PDO, or PDI zoning designation shall provide any additional information,
detail, or analysis requested by the planning commission or city council at any
point in the zone change process. The city council may deny a request for a
PDR, PDC, PDO, or PDI zoning designation if the city council determines, in its
sole discretion, that it does not have adequate information, detail, or
analysis to approve a zone change request.
   G.   Subsequent Land Use Approvals: The city shall not approve any land use
entitlement or permit for property within an approved project plan area unless
the entitlement or permit is consistent with the approved project plan and any
conditions to the city council's approval of the project plan. Property in an
approved project plan area shall not be used in any manner that is inconsistent
with the approved project plan.
   H.   General Plan: An applicant that has a master plan for development is
encouraged to seek a general plan amendment to incorporate the applicant's
master plan into the general plan. (Ord. 2020-10)
17.68.040: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The following landscaping requirements apply in the PDR zone:
      1.   Entry points to the development shall be landscaped using plant
specimens used throughout the development.
      2.   Landscaping shall be provided adjacent to all buildings and
structures including solid waste receptacles.
      3.   Landscaping shall be provided in all front setback areas along
streets, whether the streets are public or private.
   B.   Common Open Space Standards and Requirements for Residential
Development: This subsection B applies only in a PDR zone and in any
residential component in any other planned development. This subsection B does
not apply to nonresidential development, lots, or buildings.
      1.   Definitions: "Common open space" under this chapter is defined as a
portion of a project or development that is accessible by all residents in the
development and provides scenic, recreational, resting, or similar purposes.
Common open space may include gathering places, recreation areas, natural
areas, and other similar areas. Common open space should, in general, be
available for entry and use by the residents of the development with which it
is associated. Common open space does not include any parking area, any area
where a charge is made for use (except for a fifty percent (50%) common open
space credit as provided in subsection B2 below), or any area to which access
is limited due to runoff, such as retention basins or areas with steep slopes
or similarly difficult terrain if determined by the city council to be
similarly restrictive.
      2.   Common Open Space Requirement: At least thirty percent (30%) of a
project area must be common open space. The following natural areas do not
count toward the fulfillment of the common open space requirement: an area with
a slope of thirty percent (30%) or more, any area within a federally designated
floodway, and any wetland area. Up to fifty percent (50%) of the land in a
public golf course within a development may be credited toward the minimum
common open space required in this subsection.
   C.   Nonresidential Standards And Requirements: The following requirements
apply to nonresidential components of any PD zone:
      1.   Location: Location of commercial phases or service uses shall be
concentrated for maximum pedestrian convenience and located for easy
accessibility by any residents of the zone, workers within the zone, and
visitors.
      2.   Common Walls: Common walls between residential and nonresidential
uses should be constructed to minimize noise transmission.
      3.   Nuisances: No commercial use may expose residential uses to
offensive odors, dust, electrical interface, and/or vibration.
      4.   Outdoor Lighting: All outdoor lighting shall not adversely impact
surrounding residential uses. Lighting shall not be directed toward residential
units and shall not include lighting that blinks, flashes, oscillates, or is of
unusual brightness or intensity. Outdoor lighting shall be directed downward
unless otherwise approved.
      5.   Building Design: The city requires buildings that have architectural
interest and strong curb appeal. The design guidelines in this section are
imposed to achieve this objective. All sides of a commercial building that are
visible from any public street or adjacent residential zone shall include a
combination of at least two (2) of the following exterior finishing materials:
masonry, decorative wood, stone, stucco, cinder block, metal panels, Masonite,
or other exterior finishing that is approved as part of the project plan. The
rear and sides of a building shall be finished similarly to the front of the
building. Unfinished concrete, plywood, and vinyl siding are discouraged
finishes for commercial buildings. Where feasible, building setbacks should be
varied. In addition, each commercial building must include the following:
         a.   Features such as trellises or awnings to provide shadows at
ground level;
         b.   Variations in rooflines, belt courses, and trim colors;
         c.   Recessed windows and doors; and
         d.   Exterior landscaping along storefront areas.
      6.   Density And Minimum Square Feet: The maximum density for any
residential component within a PDC zone is twelve (12) dwelling units per acre
for horizontal mixed-use projects. For projects with vertical mixed-use (i.e.,
residential and commercial combined in the same building), the density shall be
as approved by the Planning Commission and City Council as part of the project
plan review and approval, and subject to the development standards in this
chapter. Each dwelling unit within a vertical mixed-use building must have at
least four hundred fifty (450) square feet of living area on its main floor.
      7.   Landscaping:
         a.   The entire area along the public street frontage between the
street curb and setback line shall be landscaped. This landscape area may
include a sidewalk and a driveway crossing the landscape strip when part of the
site plan approved by the city. On a corner lot, both street frontages shall be
landscaped.
         b.   Notwithstanding the requirement stated in subsection C7a above,
the city council may approve a reduced landscape strip of no less than ten feet
(10') in width, provided that the city council determines that the additional
landscaping elsewhere on the site (including any landscaping that is provided
in fulfillment of subsection C7c below) compensates for reduced landscaping
within the front setback area.
         c.   If a parking lot includes thirty (30) or more off-street parking
spaces, at least five percent (5%) of the parking lot area shall contain
interior parking lot landscaping. This requirement applies without regard to
the location of lot lines so that when a parking lot with thirty (30) or more
off-street parking spaces is fully constructed, including one that allows for
shared parking, the total parking lot area will have at least the five percent
(5%) landscaping required by this section. Shade trees shall be planted in
parking areas to reduce the "heat island" effect and provide aesthetic beauty
to the site. Interior parking lot landscape requirements may be met using
terminal islands, divider medians, or landscaping on the perimeter of the
parking lot.
      8.   Parking:
         a.   Conflict Between Provisions: If there is a conflict between the
provisions of
chapter 17.32 and this section, the more restrictive provision shall govern.
         b.   Shared Parking: A shared parking plan may be submitted that
indicates a shared parking formula and supporting information. Up to thirty
percent (30%) of total combined required parking may be waived with an approved
shared parking plan.
         c.   Location Of Parking: Parking should be located to the rear, a
mixture of side and rear, or underground.
         d.   Illumination Of Parking: All parking areas shall be illuminated
with light that is focused down and light fixtures that will not create a
nuisance to other uses within the PD development or to uses near the PD
development.
   D.   Ownership And Management Standards And Requirements:
      1.   Ownership And Management Control:
         a.   Initial Ownership: If the property located in a planned
development will be owned individually or jointly, where the property is not
intended to be resold in separate parcels, the property shall be made subject
to permanent covenants, conditions and restrictions requiring that the property
be built and operated consistent with the approved planned development zone.
         b.   Subdivided Properties: Properties in a planned development zone
that are intended to be subdivided and sold in separate ownership shall be made
subject to covenants, conditions and restrictions which shall require that the
property be built and maintained consistent with the requirements of the
planned development zone for the property. If the property will have commonly
owned properties, they shall be owned by an appropriate owners' association
that shall be responsible for the ownership and maintenance of the project,
consistent with the requirements of the zone. In this event, the owners'
association shall be separately incorporated as a Utah nonprofit corporation
with appropriate articles of incorporation and bylaws, and a declaration of
covenants, conditions and restrictions that are subject to the approval of the
city attorney of the city of Santa Clara as being legally sufficient. If the
property will be a condominium project, the property shall be made subject to a
declaration of condominium and other documentation prepared pursuant to the
requirements of the Utah Condominium Act and shall include a provision that the
owners' association thereof shall manage the property consistent with the
requirements of the planned development zone.
         c.   Owner/Developer Responsibilities: Initial owners/developers of PD
projects are responsible for the following elements of the project:
            (1)   Development And Maintenance: Development and maintenance of
general common areas (this may be accomplished through the establishment of an
owners' association which the developer shall agree to subsidize until seventy
five percent (75%) of the lots or units are sold). In the case of
condominiumization or subdivision of the property, the developer shall deed the
common areas to the owners' association, free and clear of all money liens or
encumbrances, or in the case of a blanket lien, the lender shall subordinate
its security interest in the project to the planned unit development or
condominium plan. This shall be accomplished by covenant in the declaration of
covenants, conditions and restrictions (or declaration of condominium, as the
case may be) that shall require this to be accomplished upon completion of
construction of the project, provided that if at least forty percent (40%) of
the units in the project have been sold, the developer shall also be required
to make this conveyance. The city of Santa Clara shall not be responsible to
the unit or lot owners for this, but the documentation shall provide for this
as a matter of requirement in the documentation, which shall confer upon any
purchasing unit owners the right to enforce the deeding of the common areas as
required just above.
            (2)   Arterials, Roadways, Related Infrastructures: Development of
arterial and other major roadways and related infrastructures serving the
development including the extension of utilities to serve the development.
            (3)   Development Of Management Plan: Development of the management
plan including management association setup, and related responsibilities to
assure that ownership and management standards are met in full.
            (4)   Approvals And Conditions: All approvals and conditions
therefrom received related to the PD and its elements.
            (5)   Landscaping And Open Space: All overall requirements such as
landscaping and open space meet PD requirements.
            (6)   Change Of Ownership: Any conditions attached to an approved
PD plan or subdivision plat shall not lapse or be waived as a result of any
subsequent change in tenancy or ownership of said land.
   E.   Mixed Uses: The minimum and maximum component of each use and type of
mixed use within a development shall be as recommended by the planning
commission and approved by the city council.
   F.   A proposed accessory retail use in a PDQ zone must be clearly
subordinate to the principal use.
   G.   Gated Communities: No gated communities are permitted in any planned
development zone.
   H.   Density Equivalency For Assisted Living and/or Independent Care
Facilities:
      1.   For living units wherein each unit has its own cooking facilities,
each such unit shall be considered as equivalent to a standard residential
dwelling unit for the purpose of calculating the facility’s overall density.
      2.   For living units without their own cooking facilities (i.e., where
meals are primarily served at, or delivered to each unit from, a central dining
facility two (2) of such units shall be considered the equivalent of one (1)
standard residential dwelling unit for the purpose of calculating the
facility’s overall density.
      3.   For purposes of this regulation, if a unit has only a microwave, a
small capacity refrigerator, a sink, or some combination of the three, such
amenities will not be considered “cooking facilities”, provided meals for the
residents of such unit are primarily served at, or delivered to each unit from
a central dining facility. (Ord. 2020-10: Ord. 2004-36: Ord. 2021-09)
17.68.050: PDR ZONE DENSITY BONUS CRITERIA AND LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The base maximum density for the PDR zone is eight (8) du/acre.
   B.   The city council, after receiving a recommendation from the planning
commission, may approve a density bonus of up to four (4) du/acre, for a total
of up to twelve (12) du/acre, based on the following criteria:
      1.   Exceptional Building Design And Materials: The building elevations
shall show variation in roof height, variation in the building footprint, and
building features that improve visual interest by the use of balconies, patios,
roof overhang, and use of varied colors and textures. Exterior building
materials consisting primarily of brick, stone, or stucco. On the front
elevation and also street side elevation for corner lots, stucco may not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the wall area, not including windows. Wood, metal, or
hardy board may be used for accents. Roofing materials shall be durable such as
tile, slate, or similar material (not asphalt shingles).
      2.   Site Design: Site design shall provide for compatibility with any
adjacent residential areas. Site design shall emphasize overall project
aesthetics, with scattered parking areas rather than large asphalt areas,
masonry walls on the perimeter where walls are required, and blending building
heights to adjacent residential buildings.
      3.   Landscaping: Landscape design shall incorporate water conservation
principles while providing suitable trees, shrubs, and ground covers throughout
the project. The landscape plan shall describe both the type of plant materials
used and the initial plant container size. Trees shall be planted throughout
the project site at approximately one tree per five hundred (500) square feet
of landscaped area.
      4.   Project Amenities: Project amenities include recreational facilities
such as tennis courts, playground equipment, swimming pool, clubhouse, and
other common amenities such as outdoor cooking/eating areas, gazebo, or
gardens. Based on the project size, a development should have one or more
significant project amenities. Each unit should have some form of private
outdoor space in the form of balconies or patios.
   C.   An apartment project is limited to thirty (30) dwelling units per
project unless the proposed project is a senior housing project with half or
more of the units designed for single occupancy, or is an affordable housing
project meeting the criteria for federal tax credits, or similar state or local
affordable housing criteria, and is approved for such credits prior to
beginning construction. (Ord. 2020-10: Ord. 2015-17; Ord. 2021-12, 9-8-2021)
17.68.060: SHORT-TERM RENTAL RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
"Short-Term Residential" has the meaning provided under section
17.20.260. Any short-term residential use must comply with the following:
   A.   The entire project shall be designated for short-term residential
unless otherwise approved by the city council, in which case the city council
may designate a maximum number of units that may be used for short-term
residential.
   B.   All approved short-term residential rental units within a project must
be managed by one or more licensed property managers, or by a property
management company.
   C.   The owner of any short-term residential unit shall maintain a Utah
sales tax license and shall collect the required transient room tax for all
short-term residential rental units.
   D.   The manager (company) shall be located in Washington County and shall
be available at all times upon the request of the city.
   E.   Off-street parking shall be available for RV/boat parking. On-street
parking of such vehicles is not allowed, except for temporary loading and
unloading not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours.
   F.   The city may require one or more garbage collection bins to be located
on site in addition to garbage cans for individual units.
   G.   The recorded plat, CC&Rs, and all sales literature shall clearly state
that the project, or any approved part thereof, is approved for short-term
rental purposes.
   H.   The PDR zone map will designate where short-term residential property
has been approved.
   I.   No short-term rental use may be approved in an existing development
without the consent of all other owners of record within the development.
   J.   The property shall have two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit
plus one additional space for every two (2) guest bedrooms. (A "guest bedroom"
means any bedroom in the dwelling other than the first bedroom.)
   K.   On-street parking may be used to meet the parking requirement for a
"self-contained" project as may be recommended by the planning commission and
approved by the city council. "Self-contained" means that all units in the
project are designated for short-term rental.
   L.   Tandem parking in driveways may be used to meet the parking requirement
for a "self-contained" project as may be recommended by the planning commission
and approved by the city council.
   M.   The owner or the property manager shall maintain a residential rental
business license as required by the City of Santa Clara.
   N.   The project shall contain recreation facilities consistent with the
size of the project or as may be recommended by the planning commission.
   O.   Short term rental of residential properties must meet all other
requirements of the PDR zone.
   P.   Any other requirement recommended by the planning commission and
adopted by the city council to promote compatibility between short-term rental
properties and permanent residents. (Ord. 2020-10)
17.68.070: PROJECT PLAN AMENDMENTS:
   A.   The planning commission may approve an amendment to a previously
approved project plan if:
      1.   The applicant submits a revised set of plans detailing the proposed
change;
      2.   The proposed amendment:
         a.   Increases residential density by no more than a five percent
(5%);
         b.   Increases nonresidential floor area by no more than a five
percent (5%);
         c.   Decreases allocated parking by no more than a ten percent (10%);
         d.   Modifies a dimension by no more than a five percent (5%),
including but not limited to setbacks, height, or lot width;
         e.   Modifies any other measurable criteria by no more than a five
percent (5%);
         f.   Involves no more than five percent (5%) change in landscape
requirements;
      3.   The proposed amendment meets all of the requirements and provisions
of this chapter; and
      4.   The proposed amendment does not alter any approved site development
regulations of the plan and does not materially alter other aspects of the
plan, including traffic circulation, mixture of use types, or general physical
layout.
   B.   To request any project plan amendment that cannot be approved by the
planning commission above, an applicant must comply with the zone change
procedures required under
chapter 17.18 and section 17.68.30 above to request an amendment to the project
plan. (Ord. 2020-10)
17.68.080: PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS APPROVED PRIOR TO THE ADOPTION OF THIS CHAPTER:
If any property has been zoned as planned development without an approved
project plan, the property owner must apply for a complete zone amendment under
this chapter and
chapter 17.18 and obtain approval of the zone-change application before any
land use entitlements may be granted for development on the property. If a
property has been zoned as planned development with an approved project plan
under an earlier version of this chapter, the project plan is still valid.
(Ord. 2020-10)
17.68.090: DENSITY, SETBACKS, AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The requirements provided in the table below apply to the PDR, PDC,
PDO, and PDI zones as specified below:
Project Dimensions PDR PDC PDO PDI
Project Dimensions PDR              PDC               PDO              PDI
Minimum Zone Size  0                0                 0                0
Base Maximum       8 dwelling units 12 du/acre        n/a              n/a
Density            per acre         horizontal
Minimum Common     30%              n/a               n/a              n/a
Open Space
   Building Setbacks for Detached Residences
Front              20 feet          20 feet           n/a              n/a
Side               10 feet          10 feet           n/a              n/a
Street side        20 feet          20 feet           n/a              n/a
setback
Rear               10 feet          10 feet           n/a              n/a
   Building Setbacks for Attached Residences
Front              20 feet          Per approved plan n/a              n/a
Side               10 feet          Per approved plan n/a              n/a
Street side        20 feet          Per approved plan n/a              n/a
setback
Rear               20 feet          Per approved plan n/a              n/a
   Building Setbacks for Other Uses
Front              20 feet          20 feet           20 feet          40 feet
Side               10 feet          10 feet           10 feet          15 feet
Street side        20 feet          20 feet           20 feet          40 feet
setback
Rear               10 feet          10 feet           10 feet          15 feet
Minimum Lot Depth  100 feet         100 feet          100 feet         125 feet
Principal Building 35 feet          35 feet           35 feet          35 feet
Height
Accessory Building n/a              20 feet           n/a              n/a
Height
Minimum Distance   10 feet          10 feet           10 feet          5 feet
Between Buildings
   Storefront Development Option
Front              None             None              None             n/a
                   None except 10   None except 10    None except 10
Side               feet next to     feet next to      feet next to     n/a
                   residential uses residential uses  residential uses
Street side        None             None              n/a              n/a
setback
Rear               None             None              n/a              n/a
Minimum Lot Depth  100 feet         100 feet          n/a              n/a
Principal Building 35 feet          35 feet           n/a              n/a
Height
Accessory Building 20 feet          20 feet           n/a              n/a
Height
Minimum Distance   10 feet          10 feet           n/a              n/a
Between Buildings
 
   B.   Density: Land used for common open space, interior streets, drives,
sidewalks, and other circulation ways may be included as part of the land area
used for determining the number of dwelling units allowed, or the amount of
required land. Land characterized by floodway, steep slopes, wetlands, or other
unbuildable or sensitive lands may not be included as part of the land area for
density calculations, except that a twenty five percent (25%) density provision
may be applied to the buildable portion of the development. Therefore, twenty
five percent (25%) of the land area of the unbuildable area may be added to the
buildable portion of the property to increase net density. Density is
calculated for the project and for individual phases. Within phases, density
for a specific phase may exceed that permitted provided that the overall
density for the project meets the required maximum density. The phase with the
highest density may not be the first phase developed.
   C.   Where a sidewalk and a driveway are located in the same setback of a
dwelling, the garage setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the
back edge of the sidewalk to the garage. Where no sidewalk is located in the
setback, or where a side entry garage has a minimum twenty foot (20') long
driveway from the back edge of the sidewalk, the garage setback shall be the
same as required for the dwelling unit.
   D.   The setback and height minimums and maximums listed in this section are
intended to guide the planning commission, the city council, and the project
developer in reviewing the standard requirements for development throughout the
city. The city council, after receiving a recommendation from the planning
commission, may adopt modifications to the above specifications to provide
harmony within a PD zone and as may be requested by the developer. Items of a
life/safety nature (i.e., building separation as per fire code, and building
code requirements) may not be modified. However, other elements of the plan may
be approved according to the specific development plan, map, and text being
considered as a part of the PD zone change approval. (Ord. 2020-10: Ord. 2017-
07: Ord. 2016-10: Ord. 2006-02: Ord. 2004-36)
CHAPTER 17.72
CPD COMMERCIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
(Rep. by Ord. 2004-36)
CHAPTER 17.74
HISTORIC DISTRICT/MIXED USE ZONE
SECTION:
17.74.010: Purpose
17.74.020: Fees And Permits
17.74.030: Permitted Uses
17.74.035: Conditional Uses
17.74.040: Development Standards
17.74.050: Modifying Regulations
17.74.060: Supplementary And Qualifying Regulations
17.74.070: Walls, Fences And Hedges
17.74.080: Access And Loading
17.74.090: Parking Areas
17.74.100: Signs
17.74.110: Natural Hazards
17.74.120: Property Rezoning
17.74.130: Site Plan Review
17.74.140: Plan Approval
17.74.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Historic District/Mixed Use Zone is:
   A.   Santa Clara has a strong historical background. There is a special
character about the early pioneer homes that were constructed along, and near
Santa Clara Drive that the city wants to maintain and preserve. Many of these
early pioneer homes are already listed on the State and national list of
historic places. The city has previously created a Historic District from east
to west along Santa Clara Drive. Development that takes place in the Historic
District will be subject to architectural design review and careful site plan
review by the Heritage Commission, Planning Commission, and City Council.
   B.   Santa Clara City has adopted Historic District Design Guidelines that
are intended to be a companion document to Chapters
17.74 and
17.76 of city code. The design guidelines are intended to promote sensitive
design. The design guidelines provide a framework to create an environment that
respects the special setting of the Santa Clara Historic District. All
commercial and residential buildings within the Historic Districts shall be
compatible with both the visual qualities of the immediate area in which the
property is located, as well as the overall context of the Historic District.
   C.   To encourage the continued use, maintenance and special character of
homes and businesses in the Historic District, this chapter contains provisions
allowing for the mixed use of land for residential and commercial uses. The
intent of these provisions is to encourage flexibility and creativity in the
design and development of comprehensively planned mixed use of property that
would not be possible under conventional zoning districts. Some of the specific
purposes of this zone are to:
      1.   Encourage residential uses in conjunction with commercial and other
compatible activities to create an active street life, enhance the vitality of
businesses, reduce vehicular traffic, and maintain the special character of the
Historic District;
      2.   Encourage orderly, planned development of mixed-use developments in
the Historic District by providing procedures for plan review and approval;
      3.   Assure compatibility of proposed land uses with surrounding historic
uses by incorporating higher standards designed specifically for the Historic
District;
      4.   Strengthen the City's economic base and to provide linkages between
employment opportunities and housing;
      5.   Encourage open space to function for the general benefit of the
City;
      6.   Encourage and provide for non-vehicular circulation linking
developed areas, open spaces and public facilities;
      7.   Promote the reuse of existing historic structures for the purpose of
stabilizing and improving property values;
      8.   Foster civic pride in the beauty, history, and accomplishments of
the past;
      9.   Protect and enhance the City's attractions for tourists and
visitors; and
      10.   Strengthen and help diversify the economic well-being of the City
and promote the use of historical-cultural landmarks for education, pleasure,
and the welfare of the community. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22: Ord. 2017-14:
Ord. 2004-01 § 2)
17.74.020: FEES AND PERMITS:
The requirements of
chapter 17.04 of this title regarding such things as fees, enforcement,
permits, violation, and all other similar items, including penalties, shall
apply to this chapter. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22: Ord. 2004-01 § 2)
17.74.030: PERMITTED USES:
Subject to the requirements imposed in this chapter, permitted uses within this
zone include:
   Commercial Uses:
   Animal hospital for small animals conducted within an enclosed building.
   Antique, import, or souvenir shop.
   Athletic and sporting goods store.
   Bakery manufacture limited to foods retailed on the premises.
   Barber or beauty shop.
   Bed and breakfast.
   Bicycle sales and service.
   Bookstore, retail.
   Camera and small electronic sales.
   Candy store, confectionary.
   Clinics, medical or dental.
   Coffee shop, walk-up.
   Florist shop.
   Fruit and produce stand.
   Gift store.
   Government buildings or uses, non-industrial.
   Grocery store, neighborhood market.
   Hardware store.
   Health food store.
   Hobby and craft store.
   Ice cream parlor.
   Insurance agency.
   Interior decorating and design.
   Jewelry store sales and service.
   Legal office.
   Library.
   Medical office.
   Mortuary.
   Museum.
   Music store.
   Open space and recreation facilities.
   Optometrist, optician, or ophthalmologist.
   Outdoor dining area.
   Pet and pet supply store.
   Pharmacy/drugstore.
   Physician or surgeon office and clinic.
   Professional office.
   Real estate agency.
   Retail sales.
   Restaurant, sit down.
   Soda shop, walk-up.
   Shoe store and repair.
   Theater.
   Travel agency.
   Variety store.
   Residential Uses:
   Accessory buildings on lots where a main building exists, or for which a
building permit has been issued.
   Conversion between single-family residential and commercial use.
   Home gardens and fruit trees, keeping of household pets, etc.
   Internal accessory dwelling unit, IADU as per
Chapter 17.22 of city code.
   Multi-family dwellings, such as a duplex, twin home, or townhome, but only
in the following circumstances:
      A.   When attached to a commercial building (vertical or horizontal), or
part of a commercial, mixed-use development;
      B.   When constructed to the rear of an existing single-family dwelling;
or
      C.   When constructed on a vacant parcel which does not have frontage on
Santa Clara Drive.
   Single-family residential dwellings.
(Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22: Ord. 2017-14)
17.74.035: CONDITIONAL USES:
Subject to the requirements imposed in this chapter, or as may be recommended
by the Heritage Commission and approved by the Planning Commission, conditional
uses within this zone may include:
Accessory dwelling unit, ADU as per Chapter 17.22 of city code.
Childcare or nursery school.
Coffee shop, drive-through.
Commercial warehouse constructed on a vacant parcel that does not have frontage
on Santa Clara Drive.
Convenience store, including gasoline sales.
Public and quasi-public buildings and facilities.
Restaurant, drive-through.
Short term rental properties, which shall be subject to the applicable
requirements of this chapter along with the following specific requirements:
   A.   Each short term residential rental property shall have one parking
space for each bedroom.
   B.   The owner, or the property manager, of a short-term residential
property shall obtain a yearly residential business license as required by the
City of Santa Clara.
   C.   Short term residential properties shall meet all other standard
requirements of the zone.
   D.   There shall be no violations of laws, ordinances, or regulations of
this Code, with any violation being grounds for termination/revocation of the
conditional use permit.
Soda shop, drive-through.
Other uses determined by the Planning Commission, with input from the Heritage
Commission, as being in harmony with the intent and purpose of the zone.
(Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22: Ord. 2017-14: Ord. 2013-16)
17.74.040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Primary Building Height: Primary building height shall be the average
height of adjacent units on the same block unless a greater height is approved
by the Planning Commission, upon recommendation from the Heritage Commission,
as being necessary for proper compatibility of various elements of the overall
development plan, and to ensure that any infill and replacement dwellings are
compatible with the dimensions of the adjacent dwellings. In no event shall the
maximum height of any building exceed thirty feet (30'). Accessory buildings
shall not exceed two (2) stories, up to twenty-five feet (25') in height.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size: Six thousand (6,000) square feet for a single-family
dwelling unit, and eight thousand (8,000) square feet for a multi-family
dwelling unit.
   C.   Density: The maximum residential density shall not exceed eight (8)
dwelling units per acre whether single-family or multi-family residential. This
also applies to projects without individual lots but rather building pads and
common area. For properties with an existing dwelling unit(s), this will apply
to density calculations.
   D.   Front Yard Setbacks: Front yard setbacks shall be twenty feet (20')
from the property line for residential uses unless the dwellings (buildings) on
adjacent lots are less than twenty feet (20'), in which case the building may
be located at the average of the buildings on each side of the subject parcel.
The front setback of any commercial use building with frontage along Santa
Clara Drive shall be determined through discussion with, and approval of, the
Planning Commission, but shall not be less than ten feet (10') from the front
property line.
   E.   Corner Side Yards: Side yards on a corner lot having street frontage on
two (2) or more sides shall be the same as that required for the front yard, or
the average of adjacent units or the block, or as may be approved by the
Planning Commission.
   F.   Interior Lot Line Side Yards: Side yards on the interior lot line shall
be a minimum of five feet (5') to property line, with a minimum of ten feet
(10') between structures on adjacent parcels.
   G.   Rear Yards: Rear yards shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.
   H.   Multiple Building Setbacks on The Same Lot: Setbacks between multiple
detached buildings on the same lot shall be a minimum of ten feet (10').
   I.   Floor Area: In new developments the minimum floor area shall be a
minimum of seven hundred (700) square feet living space per unit unless
otherwise recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City
Council, plus required parking, and landscaped areas.
   J.   Minimum Lot Frontage: Fifty feet (50') for a six thousand (6,000)
square foot lot, and seventy feet (70') for an eight thousand (8,000) square
foot lot, unless approved as a flag lot, or as may be otherwise approved by the
Planning Commission.
   K.   Maximum Size of Accessory Buildings: The maximum ground floor area of
any accessory building shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet,
unless a larger building is approved by the City Council after considering the
recommendations of the Heritage Commission and Planning Commission. (Ord. 2024-
12: Ord. 2022-22: Ord. 2019-01: Ord. 2017-14)
17.74.050: MODIFYING REGULATIONS:
   A.   It is the intent of the city to encourage creative design. Existing
historical dwellings and buildings may be preserved and enhanced with
commercial, residential, or mixed uses.
   B.   Open spaces and outdoor living areas are encouraged. Lack of such areas
may be the basis for denial of a zone change request. Circulation between
developments in the Historic District is encouraged. Visitors to the area
should be encouraged to visit, park, walk between developments, and enjoy the
time spent in a quiet and relaxing atmosphere. Public access to open space
areas will also be considered in approving the Development Plan.
   C.   Cooperation between property owners on adjacent properties is strongly
encouraged.
   D.   In any zone in which residential dwellings or dwelling units are
permitted, portable or mobile recreational units such as campers, travel
trailers, fifth wheel trailers, tent trailers, tents or any other type of
recreational, mobile or portable housing unit ("recreational housing unit") are
not permitted for housing use, except that such a unit may be used to house
guests of the primary dwelling for up to eight (8) days in any calendar month
without being in violation of this title subject to the following conditions:
      1.   No recreational housing unit may be located on any street or other
part of a public right-of-way, except for temporary loading and unloading of
such unit but not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours.
      2.   A recreational housing unit may be in the side or rear yard of the
permanent residential dwelling.
      3.   The use of such recreational housing unit shall not cause unusual
noise, require additional automobile parking, or other problems to adjacent
neighbors.
      4.   No recreational housing unit shall be permitted on any property that
does not contain a dwelling or dwelling unit located on the property.
      5.   Where an unusual health related hardship exists for an extended
family member of the principal dwelling unit, the Planning Manager or designee
may grant a time extension beyond the eight (8) daytime limit for occupancy of
the recreational housing unit. However, any time extension beyond sixty (60)
days shall require the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-
22: Ord. 2015-05: Ord. 2004-01 § 2)
17.74.060: SUPPLEMENTARY AND QUALIFYING REGULATIONS:
The requirements of
chapter 17.20, "Supplementary and Qualifying Regulations", of this title,
regarding such things as lot ownership and standards, utility requirements,
dumping or disposal, moving of dwellings, shall apply to the extent applicable
to this chapter. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22: Ord. 2004-01 § 2)
17.74.070: WALLS, FENCES AND HEDGES:
Any wall, fence, or hedge proposed to be located on any parcel of land shall be
specifically approved by the Planning Commission. Walls, fences, and hedges
separating adjoining propertiesshall be sensitively designed as per the
Historic District Design Guidelines. All applicable requirements of
Chapter 17.28, “Walls, Fences and Hedges,” of this title, shall apply unless
modified by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22: Ord. 2004-01
§ 2)
17.74.080: ACCESS AND LOADING:
Access to parcels of property shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission. Requirements of
chapter 17.36, "Motor Vehicle Access and Loading", of this title, shall be used
as a guideline but may be modified to fit individual situations as part of the
site plan review. Some access drives may be approved as being temporary until
such time as additional properties in an area are changed to this zone.
All other requirements of
chapter 17.36, "Motor Vehicle Access and Loading", of this title, will be
reviewed as part of the site plan review and exceptions to the requirements may
be made as indicated above to the extent that such exceptions will enhance the
overall development of the property and will not compromise the health, safety,
and welfare of the public. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22: Ord. 2004-01 § 2)
17.74.090: PARKING AREAS:
All parking areas shall be approved by the Planning Commission as to number of
spaces required and the location of off-street parking in relation to the
balance of the development. The guideline for parking shall be one (1) space
for every two hundred fifty (250) square feet of commercial floor area and two
(2) spaces, one (1) of which shall be covered, for each residential dwelling.
   A.   The Planning Commission may use the additional requirements of
chapter 17.32, "Off Street Parking Requirements", of this title, but shall
determine the number of spaces required based upon the plan submitted, and the
type of use proposed. Shared parking between adjacent parcels is encouraged,
and excessive parking shall be avoided. Parking should be located to the side
or behind a building, where its visual impact will be minimized.
   B.   Exceptions to the parking requirements contained in
Chapter 17.32 of city code may be considered on a case-by-case basis to promote
compatibility with the character of the Historic District. The property owner/
developer will be required to submit technical information done by a licensed
professional that justifies any requested exception.
   C.   All access drives shall be approved as part of the site plan approval.
Reduced widths of driveways will be considered on an individual site plan
basis. Curb cuts, driveways, and off-street parking shall be carefully designed
to protect the historic character of the district.
   D.   All driveways and parking areas, unless determined to be temporary in
nature, shall be surrounded by a concrete curb or other appropriate material as
approved with the Site Plan. Surface of parking areas may be as approved by the
Planning Commission. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22: Ord. 2017-14: Ord. 2004-01 §
2)
17.74.100: SIGNS:
The requirements of
chapter 17.44, "Signs", of this title, will be followed in allowing signs
within the zone, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission in
harmony with the intent and purpose of this zone. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22:
Ord. 2004-01 § 2)
17.74.110: NATURAL HAZARDS:
The requirements of
chapter 17.48, "Construction Subject to Natural Hazards", of this title,
relative to hazards related to site development, will be reviewed by the
Planning Commission as may be applicable to the development plan submitted.
(Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22: Ord. 2004-01 § 2)
17.74.120: PROPERTY REZONING:
An application to rezone property to the Historic District/Mixed Use (HD/MU)
Zone shall be made in the same manner as a zone change to any other zone in the
City. An application shall be filled out in the City office requesting the zone
change. After paying all fees, and submitting all information required by this
chapter, or by other chapters of the zoning ordinance where applicable, the
zone change will be processed by the city.
Where zoning requests are tied to a parcel of property upon which is located an
existing dwelling unit, all requests shall be considered based on creatively
maintaining, enhancing and preserving the historical character of the original
dwelling as a part of the approved zone change. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22:
Ord. 2017-14)
17.74.130: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
The Site Plan Review process includes review and recommendations by the TRC,
Heritage Commission, Planning Commission and approval by the City Council. The
following elements shall be addressed as a part of the site plan review. Other
elements that may be required by Heritage Commission, TRC, the Planning
Commission, and City Council shall also be included. The site plan shall be
drawn to a reasonable scale by an engineer, land surveyor, architect, or a
landscape architect, or a combination thereof.
   A.   Existing Conditions:
      1.   The boundary line of the property including dimensions of property
lines. An electronic copy shall be submitted showing the property survey so
that it can be integrated into the City system;
      2.   The location and names of existing adjacent streets;
      3.   Topography at two feet (2') intervals unless waived by City staff;
      4.   The acreage or square footage of the proposed site;
      5.   The location of all existing structures and the square footage of
each;
      6.   A sketch of the floor plan of all existing buildings including the
location of all entrances and exits;
      7.   The location of any existing parking or paved areas;
      8.   The location of accessory buildings, sidewalks, large trees, or
other site features planned to be retained as part of the new development;
      9.   New buildings will require a soils (geotechnical) report to be
submitted. A soils report is not required for existing buildings;
      10.    If stormwater runoff is handled on site, a document showing how
the drainage will be handled, stamped by an engineer, must be submitted. Credit
may be given for on-site retention;
      11.   Any other features required to be identified by the TRC and/or the
Planning Commission.
   B.   Proposed Development Requirements: The proposed development shall show
and include the following information:
      1.   Common facilities such as recreation, sitting, walking, or other
such uses;
      2.   Site amenities such as patios, pools, fountains, play areas, etc.;
      3.   Location of all proposed new buildings including:
         a.   Heights;
         b.   Number of residential dwelling units or commercial units;
         c.   Proposed use of each area;
         d.   Floor plan sketch of proposed residential areas; and
         e.   Entrances and exits.
      4.   Location and type of open space all of which shall show how it is to
be developed and used. It may be left as undeveloped property. Plan shall pay
special attention to soils conditions and the relationship of development to
the toe of the hill if it is adjacent to, or includes any property on, the
hillside;
      5.   Location of driveways and parking areas;
      6.   The percentage of land to be used for various purposes;
      7.   A generalized landscape plan of the entire parcel;
      8.   Utility services. The location of all utility services, including
fire hydrants shall be indicated on the development plan or a separate sheet;
      9.   Lighting proposal for businesses, residential areas, parking, and
driveway locations. All parking areas shall be lighted during hours of darkness
using light fixtures that control the spread of light (shielded and directed
downward) so that lights will not create a nuisance to other uses;
      10.   Refuse storage areas;
      11.   Locations and plans for all proposed signs;
      12.   Elevation drawings of all proposed buildings;
      13.   Other items that may be required by the Planning Commission as a
part of the site plan review.
   C.   Architectural Standards: See also "Historic District Design
Guidelines".
      1.   The architectural character of all existing buildings, including
accessory buildings, shall not be changed until reviewed and approved as a part
of the site plan review and approval of the City.
      2.   The architectural character of new construction on the site shall
harmonize with the existing structure unless otherwise approved by the City as
a part of the site plan approved by the City.
      3.   Developers are encouraged to review early pioneer architecture along
Santa Clara Drive, and in adjacent cities such as St. George and Washington, to
develop an architectural character that is compatible with the early pioneer
development of the area.
      4.   No residential dwelling shall have less than seven hundred (700)
square feet of living area unless specifically approved by the Planning
Commission and City Council as a part of a mixed-use dwelling already existing
on the property.
      5.   The proposed architectural character of all new development and any
changes to the existing structures shall be reviewed by the Heritage Commission
and Planning Commission. Drawings and elevations are useful in showing how
structures are to be designed and constructed.
      6.   Santa Clara has adopted a "streetscape" plan for the development of
Santa Clara Drive right-of-way. For all properties having frontage along this
street, the development plan shall include all recommendations of the
streetscape plan as it relates to the proposed development. It is important
that continuity be created between properties in the Historic District.
   D.   Impact: The impact on surrounding neighborhood uses shall be considered
as a part of the development plan. The developer may submit estimates as to the
impact of the project on the following elements, or the Planning Commission may
examine these types of issues based upon their knowledge and understanding of
the City. Staff opinions may also be considered by the Planning Commission.
      1.   Any significant impact on traffic;
      2.   The impact on utility systems;
      3.   Any anticipated noise levels;
      4.   Stormwater runoff from the property;
      5.   Visual and aesthetic qualities;
      6.   Other considerations, such as hours of operation, that may be raised
by the Planning Commission during plan review. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22:
Ord. 2017-14: Ord. 2004-01 § 2)
17.74.140: PLAN APPROVAL:
After review of the proposed site plan and following receipt of any
recommendations of the TRC and Heritage Commission, the Planning Commission may
recommend the site plan as submitted, or as may be amended because of site plan
review, to the City Council for final review and approval. Following action by
the City Council, the applicant may request permits for the development to be
issued by the Building Department. Upon City Council approval, the development
project shall be diligently pursued to final completion.
On the date the site plan and zoning are approved by the City Council, all
conditions and requirements attached to that approval are binding on the
property unless an amendment is approved. All subsequent development and use of
the property shall be in accordance with the approved plan. If a subdivision
was a part of the application, the effect of approval will also result in an
approved preliminary plat. The requirements for final subdivision approval and
recording shall be met by complying with all requirements of the City
subdivision ordinance prior to any development taking place on the property.
The rezoning of property, along with the approval of a site-specific
development plan for the property so zoned, shall run with the land. Any
subsequent owner will be bound by the same plans and requirements as originally
approved unless the specific plans are subsequently amended by the Planning
Commission and City Council. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-22: Ord. 2017-14: Ord.
2004-01 § 2)
CHAPTER 17.76
HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
17.76.010: Purpose
17.76.020: Definitions
17.76.030: Overlay Zone And Boundaries
17.76.040: Boundaries
17.76.050: Heritage Commission
17.76.060: Heritage Commission Duties
17.76.070: Review And Permit Procedure
17.76.080: Demolition Of Significant Historic Buildings Within The Historic
District Which Are Not Designated Landmark Sites
17.76.090: Administration
17.76.010: PURPOSE:
The city of Santa Clara recognizes the historical heritage of the Santa Clara
community as a valued and important asset. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-23 § 1:
Ord. 97-06 § 18-1)
17.76.020: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the meanings set out below for the purposes of
this chapter:
CITY        The city council of the city of Santa Clara.
COUNCIL:
HERITAGE    The heritage commission of the city of Santa Clara.
COMMISSION:
            A.   Any rehabilitation, reconstruction, painting of a building’s exterior, re-
EXTERIOR    roofing, or an addition to the exterior of a significant historic building.
DESIGN      B.   Any demolition or relocation of a significant historic building.
PROPOSAL:   C.   Any new construction within the historic district except for minor
            additions to non-historic buildings; or
            D.   Any sign proposed to be placed or modified within the historic district.
HISTORIC    The lands within the city's historic district overlay zone.
DISTRICT:
LANDMARK    A building, site, or structure designated as a landmark site by the city council
SITE:       after recommendation by the heritage commission.
MINOR       An addition to a non-historic building of six hundred (600) square feet or less.
ADDITION:
NON-        A building within the historic district that is not a "significant historic
HISTORIC    building" as defined in this section.
BUILDING:
PLANNING    The planning commission of the city of Santa Clara.
COMMISSION:
            A building, site or structure that is:
            A.   A designated landmark site.
SIGNIFICANT B.   A building within the historic district built as a residence during the
HISTORIC    late 19th century to mid-20th century (see Historic District Design Guidelines);
BUILDING:   or
            C.   Within the historic district determined by the heritage commission to be
            historically important due to its age or architecture. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-
            23 § 1: Ord. 2009-17 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 18-6)
 
17.76.030: OVERLAY ZONE AND BOUNDARIES:
The Santa Clara historic district zone is established which shall be an overlay
zone over the existing districts shown on the official Santa Clara City zoning
map. In cases of conflict between this chapter and other provisions of this
title, this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-23 § 1: Ord. 97-06 §
18-2)
17.76.040: BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the Santa Clara historic district overlay zone are set forth
as those areas indicated on the zoning map included as a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-23 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 18-3)
17.76.050: HERITAGE COMMISSION:
The city of Santa Clara hereby establishes a heritage commission with the
following provisions:
   A.   The heritage commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed by
the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council for a five (5) year
term, except that in making the initial appointment, the mayor and council
shall appoint two (2) members for a term of three (3) years; and three (3)
members for a term of five (5) years. Members shall not serve more than two (2)
consecutive five (5) year terms. Each member shall have demonstrated interest,
competence, or knowledge in historic preservation. An architect with expertise
in historic preservation may be involved in the process on a case-by-case basis
as determined by city staff. Additionally, the planning manager or designee
shall be responsible for providing staff support to the heritage commission.
   B.   The city council may appoint from time to time one of its members to
serve as a non-voting liaison to the heritage commission.
   C.   The heritage commission shall meet at least four (4) times each year
except that the heritage commission may assemble as required to fulfill the
duties of the heritage commission and conduct meetings in accordance with the
open public meeting laws of Utah. Upon appointment of the initial heritage
commission by mayor and city council, the heritage commission shall meet and
elect one of its members as chairperson. The heritage commission shall then
provide for the rules and procedures for the holding of regular and special
meetings of the heritage commission as deemed advisable and necessary.
   D.   The heritage commission shall elect a chair and vice-chair from among
its members yearly. The election of the chair and vice-chair will occur during
the first regularly scheduled heritage commission meeting each year.
   E.   Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose
term is vacant. Any member may be removed for cause by the appointing
authority.
   F.   The members of the heritage commission shall serve without
compensation; however, they shall be entitled to be reimbursed for any actual
expenses by them in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-
23 § 1: Ord. 2009-17 § 1: Ord. 2009-13 § 1: Ord. 2000-03 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 18-
4)
17.76.060: HERITAGE COMMISSION DUTIES:
The heritage commission shall have the following duties:
   A.   Survey And Inventory Community Historic Resources: The heritage
commission shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, a survey of the historic,
architectural, and archaeological resources within the city. The survey shall
be compatible with the Utah Inventory of Historic Archaeological Sites. Survey
and inventory documents shall be maintained and shall be open to the public.
The survey shall be updated every ten (10) years.
   B.   Review Proposed Nominations to The National Register of Historic
Places: The heritage commission shall review and comment to the state historic
preservation officer on all proposed national registry nominations for
properties within the city's boundaries. When the heritage commission considers
a national register nomination which is normally evaluated by professionals in
a specific discipline and that discipline is not represented on the heritage
commission, the heritage commission shall seek expertise in that area before
commenting on the nomination.
   C.   Provide Advice and Information: The heritage commission shall:
      1.   Act in an advisory role to other officials and departments of
government regarding the identification and protection of local historic and
archaeological resources; and
      2.   Work toward the continuing education of citizens regarding historic
preservation and community history.
   D.   Enforcement Of State Historic Preservation Laws: The heritage
commission shall support the enforcement of all state laws relating to historic
preservation. These include but are not limited to: Utah Code Annotated 17A-3-
1301, the historic district antiquities, and Utah Code Annotated 9-8-4-
4 regarding the notification of the state historic preservation officer of any
known proposed action that will destroy, or affect, a site, building, or
object, owned by the state of Utah and included on, or eligible for, the state
of national registers.
   E.   Act As Design Review Committee: Act as the historic district design
review committee with respect to new construction (excluding minor additions),
exterior design proposals, demolition, or relocation, of a significant historic
building, or any construction or modification of a sign within the historic
district. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-23 § 1: Ord. 2009-17 § 1: Ord. 2000-03 § 1:
Ord. 97-06 § 18-5)
17.76.070: REVIEW AND PERMIT PROCEDURE:
   A.   Upon submission to the planning commission of a concept plan for
development located within the historic district, the planning commission or
designee shall inform the developer and/or owner of the heritage commission's
required submittals and review procedures. The heritage commission shall review
all development proposals submitted to the planning commission within the
historic district and report to the planning commission on the proposals.
   B.   When a request for a building permit is made to the city based upon an
exterior design proposal, the heritage commission shall review, at a minimum,
the exterior design of buildings, architectural treatment, landscaping, design
of signs and other items related to design objectives, to determine whether
proposed construction substantially complies with historic district design
guidelines and make a report to the planning commission prior to the issuance
of a building permit.
   C.   All exterior design proposals shall be subject to planning commission
approval after recommendation from the heritage commission. No building permit
shall be issued in the historic district without this approval.
   D.   The heritage commission and city staff shall exercise continuing review
of a project as it progresses from conceptual stage through construction and
completion to ensure compliance with historic district design guidelines and
planning commission approvals.
   E.   After the denial of a permit by the planning commission, an applicant
may request an exemption as provided in subsection F of this section or may
appeal to the city council for approval. On appeal to the city council, its
decision shall be final.
   F.   A property owner may be exempted from the restrictions imposed by this
chapter on significant historic buildings by applying for an exemption. The
application shall state the reasons why: 1) the building is no longer suitable
for present purposes; and 2) why the applicant cannot earn a reasonable return
from use or rental of the building if altered, reconstructed, or demolished
within the limitations and guidelines adopted under this chapter. Determination
of whether a building is appropriate for exclusion from the application of this
chapter shall be made by the planning commission upon recommendation by the
heritage commission. If an applicant desires to appeal the denial of an
exemption or the heritage commission desires to appeal the granting of an
exemption, the applicant or heritage commission may request consideration by
the city council, and its decision, after a public hearing, shall be final.
(Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-23 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 18-7)
17.76.080: DEMOLITION OF SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC BUILDINGS WITHIN THE HISTORIC
DISTRICT WHICH ARE NOT DESIGNATED LANDMARK SITES:
   A.   When an application is made for a demolition permit affecting a
significant historic building which is not a designated landmark site, the
heritage commission and planning commission shall:
      1.   Review the condition of the building to determine the impact of the
demolition on the neighborhood and the technical feasibility for preserving the
structure.
      2.   If new construction is proposed for the site, it should be reviewed
in conjunction with review of the demolition permit application.
      3.   The application shall also describe the reason for the demolition
and any development proposed for the demolition site including renderings of
the proposed new construction.
   B.   Demolition permits for significant historic buildings not designated a
landmark site, shall not be recommended by the heritage commission and approved
by the planning commission until both commissions have had reasonable time, not
to exceed ninety (90) days from receipt of completed application, to review the
proposed new construction, and make recommendations regarding compliance with
the historic district design guidelines. Granting of the permit shall be
determined after review by the heritage commission prior to planning commission
recommendations. The building official may allow for an exception on a case-by-
case basis for fire and/or water damage. (Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-23 § 1: Ord.
97-06 § 18-8)
17.76.090: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   The planning commission may, upon written recommendation of the
heritage commission, recommend to the city council, rules, regulations, and
guidelines to implement and administer the purposes and intent of this chapter.
   B.   Until at least three (3) members of the heritage commission are
appointed, the planning commission shall serve as the heritage commission.
(Ord. 2024-12: Ord. 2022-23 § 1: Ord. 97-06 § 18-9)
CHAPTER 17.80
HP HILLSIDE PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
17.80.010: Purpose And Intent
17.80.020: Applicability
17.80.030: Application Procedure
17.80.040: Development Standards
17.80.050: Hillside Review Board
17.80.060: Definitions
17.80.010: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   Purpose: The city finds that the health, safety, and general public
welfare of the current and future residents of the city and the fiscal health
of the city will be promoted by establishing standards for the development and
grading on hillsides and slope areas wherever development is proposed to be
located in the city. The purpose of the HP hillside protection overlay zone is
to minimize soil and slope instability and erosion, to minimize the adverse
effects of grading, to minimize surface and subsurface water problems, preserve
the character and aesthetics of the city's developed and undeveloped hillsides
and to otherwise supplement and amplify the city subdivision and zoning
ordinances while protecting and preserving significant scenic resources for the
long term benefit of Santa Clara City as a whole. This is facilitated by
establishing a hillside review board (HRB) as a recommending body to staff, the
planning commission and the city council. The HRB will review proposed projects
in the HP zone based on this chapter. Additionally, the purpose of this HP zone
is to further the goals and policies of the general plan in relation to land
use, densities, open space and community image.
   B.   Intent: The standards set forth herein are intended to achieve the
following objectives:
      1.   Minimize adverse soil and slope instability; decrease the potential
for erosion; prohibit activities and uses which would result in the degradation
of fragile soils and steep slopes.
      2.   Protect and preserve the visual resources which are of significant
value to the community. Such resources include, but are not limited to, major
hillsides, hilltops, ridges and ridgelines, knolls, mesas, cuestas and
escarpments, boulder outcroppings and large boulders, canyons and natural
drainage areas, and other areas of historical or visual significance. Retain
the integrity of significant on site and off site views to or from these
resources.
      3.   Minimize the adverse effects of grading and cut and fill operations;
avoid highly visible scarring of hillsides and protect natural vegetation,
sensitive hydrologic features including both surface and subsurface water, and
visually prominent landforms.
      4.   Discourage mass grading and terracing of large pads but permit
flexibility for reasonable development practices as appropriate.
      5.   Establish a hillside development process that requires applicants to
select suitable development sites on their property through the use of slope
calculations, maximum land holding capacity, or development agreements to
determine the appropriate density, intensity, design and location of structures
and improvements.
      6.   Provide hillside development standards and guidelines that maximize
the positive impacts of site sensitive design, grading, landscape architecture
and building architecture that will protect the inherent scenic value in the
proposed projects subject to this chapter.
      7.   Permit the flexibility to modify or remove relatively small
topographic features which have slopes distinctly different from surrounding
property in order to facilitate reasonably efficient development in a
particular area. The exclusion of such features or areas shall not be contrary
to the overall purpose of this chapter.
      8.   Encourage the appropriate location, design and development of
proposed projects which provide enhanced human enjoyment, while protecting
people and property from hazardous conditions including rockfalls, rolling
boulders, unstable slopes, landslides, mudslides, and erosion.
      9.   Minimize the impacts of development to the surrounding natural
environment by controlling the location, intensity, pattern, design,
construction techniques, and materials of development.
      10.   Provide for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of all projects
approved within the hillside protection overlay zone.
      11.   Prohibit development of uses which would likely result in an
especially risky or hazardous situation (peril, jeopardy, or to expose to
danger) due to slope instability, rockfalls, excessive soil erosion, expansive
soils, surface water problems or subsurface water problems.
      12.   Prohibit building in areas in which geologic hazards cannot
reasonably be mitigated to a generally acceptable level.
      13.   Encourage the city and owners to work together on homesites in
existing subdivisions to allow building so long as it can be done safely.
      14.   Notwithstanding the above, the city council may grant a variance to
allow building in any situation where a reliable taking analysis performed by
the city attorney reveals that there is good cause for the property owner to
assert that the city is taking all, or substantially all, of the value of the
property being developed and that competent engineering, approved by the city
engineer, reveals that the property will be graded and built upon safely. In
the event that the affected landowner shall not be satisfied with the taking
analysis, the landowner may seek the opinion of the state of Utah property
ombudsman, which the city council will then consider in making its decision on
the variance. (Ord. 2008-14)
17.80.020: APPLICABILITY:
The standards, guidelines and procedures established by this chapter shall
apply to all lands lying within the hillside protection overlay zone as
delineated in exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein or in rare
cases in other areas deemed to meet the intent of this chapter by the city
staff due to slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%). In addition, all
properties seeking annexation or preapproval of projects pending annexation to
the city will be evaluated according to the standards and procedures outlined
in this chapter.
   A.   HP Hillside Protection Overlay Zone: The HP zone is delineated in the
hillside protection overlay zone exhibit attached to the ordinance codified
herein. The HP zone established by this chapter shall overlay the existing
zoning classifications listed in this title. In cases of conflict between the
provisions of this chapter and other established regulations, the most
restrictive provisions shall apply. Lands located within the HP zone are
encouraged to apply for planned development (PD) zoning to discourage hillsides
from being disturbed and encourage clustering of development on land more
suitable for development.
   B.   Hillside Classification Standards: Each slope category range delineates
the relative suitability of land for development.
      1.   The slope categories are described as follows:
         a.   Zero percent (0%) to fifteen percent (15%); flat to gently
rolling land: Development with grading is permitted in this zone. These areas
are still subject to the requirements of the excavation and grading permit
requirements of the applicable building code.
         b.   15.01 percent to twenty five percent (25%); moderate hillside:
Special hillside architectural and design techniques that minimize grading and
harmonize the built and natural environments are required in this zone.
Architectural prototypes and infrastructure elements are expected to complement
the natural landform by using techniques required herein. Impact of streets and
trails is to be minimized by following natural contours where practicable.
         c.   25.01 percent to thirty percent (30%); hillside: Development
within this zone shall be restricted to slopes where it can be demonstrated
with sufficient evidence to the HRB that slopes are safe and that environmental
and aesthetic impacts can be minimized. The use of larger lots, variable
setbacks, and variable building structural techniques such as stepped or pole
foundations are expected. Structures shall blend with the natural environment
through their shape, materials, and colors. Impact of streets and trails is to
be minimized by following natural contours where practicable.
         d.   30.01 percent to forty percent (40%); steep hillside: This is a
sensitive slope condition and development is limited unless a specific
exception is allowed by the city council as outlined in this chapter.
         e.   Greater than forty percent (40%); mountainous: This is a severe
slope condition and development is prohibited unless a specific exception is
allowed by the city council as outlined in this chapter.
      2.   Restrictions on potential development apply to the hillside
protection overlay zone in order to preserve the character of the natural
terrain as much as possible. The following provisions shall be applied to
development within the HP zone:
   SLOPE AND REQUIRED OPEN SPACE
 
Slope Category          All Zones
(Percent Natural Slope) Required Open Space
0 - 15                  Underlying zoning applies
15.01 - 25              Underlying zoning applies
25.01 - 30              70 percent
30.01 - 40              90 percent
40.01 plus              100 percent
 
(Ord. 2008-14)
17.80.030: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Applicable Provisions: All underlying zoning restrictions shall apply.
   B.   Permits Required: No person shall grade or construct upon property
defined in the HP hillside protection overlay zone without first obtaining all
required permits issued by Santa Clara City. This includes a hillside
protection overlay zone permit, which shall be issued by the city's designee
after HP zone plan review by city staff, hillside review board and planning
commission and approval by city council. Development plans in the HP zone may
be approved subject to conditions. The hillside review board (HRB), and
planning commission shall evaluate each plan, and recommend comments,
corrections and conditions. Plans shall demonstrate compliance with adopted
building and grading codes in addition to this code.
   C.   Standards For Approval: The city council in approving, denying, or
approving with conditioned approval shall apply the standards imposed by the
ordinances of the city of Santa Clara, including this hillside protection
overlay zone. In addition thereto the city council may impose such conditions
on approval as may be necessary to ensure the safety of the proposed
development, as may be recommended by either the landowner's (or developer's)
engineer or the city engineer.
   D.   Application And Cost Recovery: Application shall be made for HP zone
plan review upon the forms provided by Santa Clara City. The application shall
be accompanied by the required reports described below. Costs for city staff
review and approval of required documents under this section shall be recovered
through a fee established by resolution of the city council.
   E.   Required Documents: The following documents are required to be
submitted to the city's designee. Conditions of approval may be established
based on the findings of such documents. These conditions shall become a part
of the record and be considered binding upon the applicant as part of the
approved plan. The HRB and planning commission shall review the submittal and
provide a recommendation of denial, approval or conditional approval to the
city council.
      1.   Slope Analysis Exhibit: All parcels containing areas determined to
be within the HP zone as defined herein shall prepare a detailed slope analysis
exhibit.
         a.   For the slope analysis, the applicant shall use a base
topographical map of the subject site, prepared and signed by a Utah licensed
civil engineer or land surveyor. This base topographical map shall include all
adjoining properties within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the site
boundaries to portray the site's context.
         b.   The slope analysis calculations shall be prepared by a Utah
licensed professional who is proficient in creating the exhibits with the use
of computer software designed for preparing said exhibits. This slope analysis
shall be prepared using CAD based or GIS based software specifically designed
for such purpose. Contours on the exhibits shall be prepared using no greater
than two foot (2') contour intervals with ten foot (10') contours being clearly
labeled and at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" =
100'). The slope analysis exhibit shall delineate slope bands, with contrasting
colors, for the following slope ranges: zero percent (0%) to fifteen percent
(15%), 15.01 percent to twenty five percent (25%), 25.01 percent to thirty
percent (30%), 30.01 percent to forty percent (40%), and 40.01 percent or
greater.
         c.   Also included in the slope analysis exhibit shall be a tabulation
chart indicating the land area in acres within each slope category as
identified herein.
         d.   Also included in the slope analysis exhibit shall be a sufficient
number of slope cross sections to clearly illustrate the extent of the proposed
grading. The slope cross sections shall:
            (1)   All be drawn at the same scale and indexed, or keyed, to the
existing topography, grading plan, and project site map. Both vertical and
horizontal scales shall be indicated and be of the same scale. The slope cross
section shall extend at least one hundred fifty feet (150') outside the project
site boundary to clearly show impact on adjacent property. Slopes shall be
calculated in intervals no greater than forty feet (40') along the cross
sections.
            (2)   At a minimum, sections shall be drawn along those locations
of the project site where:
               (A)   The greatest alteration of existing topography is
proposed;
               (B)   The most intense or massive development is proposed;
               (C)   The site is most visible from surrounding land uses;
               (D)   Where grading will impact natural drainage conditions.
            (3)   At least two (2) of the slope profiles shall be roughly
parallel to each other and roughly perpendicular to existing contour lines.
            (4)   The slope cross sections shall be stamped and signed by a
Utah licensed professional proficient in creating such cross sections
indicating the datum, source, and scale of topographic data used in the slope
profiles. The signer shall attest to the fact that the slope profiles have been
accurately calculated and identified.
            (5)   The slope cross sections shall show existing and proposed
topography, structures, and roadways. Proposed topography and features shall be
drawn with a solid line. Existing topography and features shall be drawn with a
dashed line.
      2.   Concept Plan: The conceptual plan shall be reviewed by city staff,
HRB, planning commission, and city council. Any application for a use in the HP
zone shall include a conceptual plan of the proposed development which includes
the following:
         a.   General Information: All information shall be submitted in both
hard copy (paper) format as well as digital (pdf) format.
            (1)   Name, address and telephone number of applicant;
            (2)   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the persons
responsible for the preparation of any required reports;
            (3)   Date of application;
            (4)   Notarized signatures of the owners of the site or of an
authorized representative;
         b.   Vicinity Map: A vicinity map showing the location of the site in
relationship to the surrounding area watercourses, hillsides, prominent
geographic features, roads and other significant structures;
         c.   Plan Scale: A plan of the proposed development at a scale of not
less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') illustrating:
            (1)   Boundary Lines: Boundary lines of the site and development to
be made thereon;
            (2)   Preservation Areas: Any identified preservation areas within
which development shall be prohibited;
            (3)   Improvements: All existing and proposed improvements;
            (4)   Zone Limits: The limits of the HP zone if only a portion of
the property is within the HP zone;
         d.   Development Type: The type and nature of the development;
         e.   Goals And Objectives: The goals and objectives of the developer,
including a proposed plan for the long term maintenance and ownership of
improvements within the project;
         f.   General Plan Relationship: The development's relationship to and
compatibility with the general plan and other city master plans;
         g.   Existing Conditions Photographs: Digital photographs of the site
as it exists at time of application. The photographs shall include the number
of views adequate to depict the visual character of the entire site and any
special features especially prominent ridgelines or landforms and any
topographical areas with steep slopes and/or unique topographical features
planned for disturbance. A minimum of three (3) views of the area of the
proposed development as seen from surrounding properties shall be included.
      3.   Technical Reports:
         a.   Grading Plan: A grading plan, at a scale of not less than one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), shall show the existing and proposed
contours and cross sections, and proposed areas of cut and fill. A legend with
appropriate symbols which shall include, but is not limited to, the following
items: top of wall, top of curb, high point, low point, elevation of
significant trees, spot elevations, and pad and finished floor elevations.
Accurate contours, at no greater than two foot (2') contour intervals, showing
the topography of the existing ground extending at least one hundred fifty feet
(150') outside all boundary lines of the site, or more if needed to
sufficiently show on and off site drainage, shall also be included. The grading
plan shall include a description of the import or export methods to be employed
in acquisition or disposal of soil and other material removed, including the
location of the disposal site. A schedule shall be included showing when each
stage of the project will be completed, including the estimated starting and
completion dates.
         b.   Drainage Report And Plan: A drainage control plan and report
shall be prepared by a Utah licensed professional civil engineer, and must be
consistent with all other reports required in this section or other reports
required in applicable sections of the building code.
            (1)   Information To Be Shown: The drainage plan and report shall
show all surface and subsurface natural drainage systems and facilities, walls,
curbing or other erosion protection devices to be constructed in connection
with, or as part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage
area and estimated runoff of the area to be served by any drainage systems or
facilities.
            (2)   Design Of Lot To Address Drainage: Each lot or parcel shall
be designed in such a manner that stormwater or nuisance water shall not
adversely impact other properties in the area. Property development shall not
unnecessarily cause a natural drainage channel to be filled in, obstructed or
diverted. When modification to a natural drainage channel is proposed within
the development, such changes will be addressed in the drainage study and shown
on the improvement plans, and the developer may be required to dedicate rights
of way or record drainage easements for structures and/or improvements needed
to carry storm runoff in the event approval is given for the proposed
modifications.
            (3)   Drainage Systems Separate From Sanitary Sewer System: All
drainage systems shall be separate and independent from the sanitary sewer
system.
            (4)   Drainage And Flood Control Design: Drainage and flood control
shall be designed in conformance with applicable city and state drainage, flood
control and engineering standards, and shall comply with the city's stormwater
master plan. Detention or retention features, if required, shall be designed on
site or at suitable regional detention sites to limit conveyance of the
stormwater from a 100-year frequency storm event onto streets or stormwater
drainage easements without creating flood hazards to dwellings.
            (5)   Underground Pipe System: If an underground pipe system is
required, it shall be designed to meet Santa Clara City standards and generally
accepted engineering criteria. Major hydraulic structures shall be designed to
carry a 100-year storm minimum. The minimum storm drain size shall be twelve
inches (12").
            (6)   Detention: Detention shall be considered where it is suitable
as confirmed by all required reports. Detention basins shall be used for the
purpose of eliminating the effects of the peak runoff of storms and releasing
water flow at the preproject, or approved, rate.
            (7)   Protection To Lower Lots: Water from precipitation and/or
irrigation must be contained within the lot boundaries, or piped to appropriate
drainage systems designed to safely transmit it to safe disposal. Water stored
on the lot must not create unsafe slope conditions from soil saturation or
erosion. A conceptual plan for all drainage shall be provided.
         c.   Improvement Plans: These plans shall show any existing and
proposed buildings or structures and cross sections of the areas where they are
or will be located, and all proposed roads, utilities, easements and drainage
channels on the property where the work is to be performed. Also, the location
of any buildings or structures on adjacent property which may be affected by
grading operations shall be shown. All retaining structures shall be shown with
location, height, construction type and any other details needed.
         d.   Geotechnical Report: "The Geologic Hazard And Adverse Conditions,
St. George - Hurricane Metropolitan Area" document and maps prepared by the
Utah geological survey (current edition) shall be reviewed when considering a
site for development. A Utah licensed professional engineering geologist or a
Utah licensed professional engineer who is trained and experienced in the
practice of geotechnical engineering shall prepare the geotechnical report. The
geotechnical report shall include the following:
            (1)   Conditions And Features: A general description of the
topography, drainage conditions and surface vegetation. The report shall
include surface features such as rock outcroppings, existing structures,
debris, and unstable or wet conditions.
            (2)   Location Map: A location map showing the footprints of the
planned improvements and the exploration locations with elevations.
            (3)   Subsurface Condition Evaluation: An evaluation of the
subsurface conditions, including a complete record of the explorations,
laboratory test results, and the elevation of the water table, if encountered.
            (4)   Potential Geotechnical Constraints: Identification of
potential geotechnical constraints on the project site (such as expansive rock
and soil, collapsible soil, shallow bedrock and caliche, gypsiferous rock and
soil, potentially unstable rock or soil units, shallow ground water, and
windblown sand), and recommendations for their mitigation.
            (5)   Springs And Seeps: The locations of any springs and seeps on
the project site, and recommendations concerning the effects of the springs and
seeps on the proposed development.
            (6)   Geotechnical Recommendations: Specific geotechnical
recommendations for the design and construction of the proposed project, which
shall include the following:
               (A)   A general assessment of the requirements needing to be met
to develop the proposed site.
               (B)   Site preparation and grading, and the suitability of the
on site soils for use as structural fill.
               (C)   Stable cut and fill slopes, including recommendations
concerning the effects of material removal and the introduction of water, both
on and off site.
               (D)   Recommendations for foundation type and design criteria,
including, but not limited to, bearing capacity of natural or compacted soils,
provisions to mitigate the effects of expansive, compressible or collapsible
soils, differential settlement and varying soil strength, and the effects of
adjacent loads.
               (E)   Anticipated total and differential settlement.
               (F)   Special design and construction considerations, as
necessary, such as the excavation and replacement of unsuitable materials,
excavation difficulties, stabilization, or special foundation provisions for
problem soil conditions.
               (G)   Design criteria for restrained and unrestrained retaining
walls.
               (H)   Soil corrosion.
               (I)   Moisture protection and surface drainage.
            (7)   Design Recommendations For Walls And Fill Slopes: Detailed
design recommendations for any planned rockery walls, mechanically stabilized
earth (MSE) walls, and/or reinforced fill slopes.
            (8)   Slope Stability Analysis: A detailed slope stability analysis
may be required if potentially unstable rock or soil units or slope creep has
been identified on the site. The analysis should include, but not be limited
to, a determination of shear strength and in some instances residual shear
strength, soil saturation, and treatment methods required to provide a minimum
safety factor of 1.5 for any slope within the project boundary.
            (9)   Risk Factors: The HRB shall use their best judgment when
requested by city staff in determining risk factors for all proposals under the
jurisdiction of the hillside protection overlay zone. Risk factors will be
assessed using a scale of from 1 (very low risk) to 10 (extreme risk).
Development where risk factors (see below) are rated 9 (very high risk) or 10
(extreme risk) and where grading is proposed shall apply geotechnical solution
to increase ground stability by at least fifty percent (50%) above existing
conditions. Furthermore any property proposed for development with a risk
factor of 9 (very high risk) or 10 (extreme risk) shall provide the city with
an extended warranty bond for a period of two (2) years for all public
improvements.
The HRB will make a recommendation when requested by city staff for assigning
risk factors to each proposal as circumstances warrant in order to ensure the
present and future health, welfare, and safety of residents of Santa Clara. In
the absence of other compelling risk factors the following criteria should be
used within the hillside protection overlay zone to assess risk:
Low (risk factor 1-5): No risk factors present other than slope.
Moderate (risk factor 6-7): Fat (blue) clay present at the surface or under the
surface.
High (risk factor 8): Fat (blue) clay together with surface or subsurface water
present.
Very high (risk factor 9): Fat (blue) clay and water present together with the
observation of slope instability in similar geologic conditions.
Extreme (risk factor 10): The above conditions, together with a stream or other
significant erosion potential near the toe of the slope.
            (10)   Inspection And Certification: It is strongly recommended
that the geotechnical firm for the project also provide inspection, testing,
and verification services for all grading, foundations, pavement sections,
retaining structures, utility line placement, and backfill and any other
construction relating to geotechnical aspects of the development. For real
property for which development has proceeded on the basis of a geologic or
geotechnical report which has been accepted by the city, no final inspection of
a subdivision or other improvements shall be completed or certificate of
occupancy issued or performance bond released until the engineering geologist
or geotechnical engineering firm who prepared and approved the report provides
a letter of compliance, in writing, that the completed improvements and
structures conform to the descriptions and requirements contained in said
report including any approved revisions.
            (11)   Geotechnical Mitigation Measures: Geotechnical mitigation
measures must be reasonable and practical to implement, especially if such
measures require ongoing maintenance by property owners.
            (12)   Infrastructure Maintenance: Infrastructure maintenance shall
be addressed in the engineering studies. Most generally Santa Clara City
maintains public improvements such as sanitary sewer, water, storm drains,
power, pavement, curb, gutter and sidewalks within the public road right of
way. Generally it is the property owners and homeowners' associations that
maintain subsurface or surface drain lines, irrigation, drains for intercepting
ground water, sewer laterals, water lines to homes, and other utilities and
improvements that are located on private property.
               (A)   For all projects located within the HP zone, the
engineering studies shall propose a plan for providing long term maintenance
for all improvements to the property, including those improvements listed as
being normally maintained by the city. Any exception to this requirement must
be made by specific city council approval.
         e.   Geology Report: "The Geologic Hazard And Adverse Conditions, St.
George - Hurricane Metropolitan Area" document and maps prepared by the Utah
geological survey (current edition) shall be reviewed when considering a site
for development. A Utah licensed professional engineering geologist or a Utah
licensed professional engineer who is trained and experienced in the practice
of geotechnical engineering shall prepare the geology report. The geology
report may be included in the geotechnical report, and shall include the
following:
            (1)   The location and boundaries of the project site and its
general geologic setting.
            (2)   A description of the specific geologic conditions at the
site.
            (3)   Identification of potential geologic hazards (such as faults,
landslides, rockfall, flooding and liquefaction).
            (4)   Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effects of the
geologic conditions and any potential hazards on the proposed development, and
recommendations to minimize any hazard to life or property, or any adverse
impact on the natural environment.
         f.   Landscape Plan: A landscape plan and report shall be prepared by
a professional landscape architect licensed in the state of Utah. The report
shall describe how the landscape plan meets the requirements of the HP zone and
shall include a description of existing vegetation, a plan of any proposed
vegetation of the site or modifications to existing vegetation, and a plan for
the preservation of existing vegetation during construction activities. Erosion
protection of existing and proposed slopes shall be included in the plan.
         g.   Other Reports: Other reports deemed necessary by the HRB,
planning commission, and/or city council to assure the health, safety and
welfare of the project residents or general public may be requested from the
applicant by written specification. These may include phase I or phase II
environmental hazardous materials studies, biological resources reports, or
other reports. Such reports shall be submitted with other application
materials.
         h.   Grading Limit Monuments: Permanent monuments shall be installed
to permit monitoring and enforcement of the grading limits during and after
construction activities. The monuments shall be installed at locations
determined by the city in accordance with survey standards for monumentation of
property corners in the state of Utah. A tee post or other approved device
shall be set near all corners to clearly show the extents of the grading limit
lines. Monuments shall be installed and preserved during construction at the
sole expense of the applicant.
      4.   Additional Exhibits Or Reports: The HRB, planning commission and/or
the city council may require additional visual analysis exhibits or other
reports to adequately address unique circumstances and comprehend the full
impact of any proposed development in the HP zone.
         a.   The hillside review board (HRB) may at its discretion require
more detailed grading exhibits showing mitigation or grading details. The HRB
shall determine the number of additional exhibits required and their locations
and perspectives by visiting the site with the developer's representative;
         b.   Furthermore, in some cases the HRB may require the preparation of
computer generated three-dimensional imaging or photo imbedded visual
simulations to adequately depict the postdevelopment conditions and their
impact on the visual character of the site. Included shall be depictions of any
topographical areas with steep slopes and/or unique topographical features
planned for disturbance illustrated at a distance and perspective that will
adequately illustrate postdevelopment conditions along with the proposed
mitigation for development. In tandem with these exhibits, shall be included
predevelopment digital photographs of the site showing identical views utilized
in the postdevelopment computer generated three-dimensional imaging exhibits
for comparison. The HRB shall determine the number of computer generated
exhibits and their locations and perspective by visiting the site with the
developer's representative.
   F.   Approval Required Before Excavation: It shall be unlawful to excavate
or grade any area within the HP hillside protection overlay zone prior to final
approval of the site plan for permitted uses and conditional uses and the
preliminary plat or minor subdivision plat for subdivisions by the city
council, and prior to final approval of the required construction drawings for
said site plans and subdivisions by city staff, and prior to the installation
of the grading limit monuments as required.
   G.   Bonding: The city shall require the applicant to post a bond to ensure
completion of revegetation projects, the stabilization of a grading site, cuts
and fills, the construction of stormwater drainage facilities, and other hazard
mitigation measures required in the approval of an application. Such bonds
shall comply with the provisions of the Santa Clara subdivision ordinance and
any other applicable city codes.
   H.   Appeals: In the event of a disagreement with the requirements imposed
by the city in connection with this chapter, or the determined lack of
completeness of the required submittals of this chapter, an applicant may
appeal the matter as per chapter 17.16 of this title. The city shall then hear
and make the final determination of the issue, subject in any event to an
appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-704.
   I.   Previously Approved Grading Permits: The requirements of this chapter
shall not apply to developments or subdivisions or individual lots which had an
approved grading permit or approved grading and drainage construction drawings
prior to the enactment of this chapter. Projects approved prior to adoption of
this chapter shall be governed by the statutes under the previous hillside
development standards ordinance applicable at the time of their approval.
   J.   Plan Compliance: The city staff shall check compliance of the concept
plan and issue a hillside development permit following approval by the city
council. The following technical reports and plans shall be accepted as
described prior to final plat approval, acceptance of the site plan and/or
issuance of a building permit for structures:
      1.   Grading Plan Record Drawings And Letter Of Compliance: Upon
completion of rough grading work and prior to any excavation for foundations or
structures, an as graded plan prepared by and a letter of compliance provided
by the Utah licensed civil engineer who prepared the approved grading plans
shall be submitted to the building department and public works department for
review and approval. The as graded plans shall include original ground surface
elevations, as graded surface elevations and all other features that were a
part of the approved grading plan. The engineer shall provide a letter of
compliance on the as graded plan that the work was done in accordance with the
approved grading plan and the city's grading requirements, including any
approved revisions to the plans or requirements.
      2.   Landscape Plan Letter Of Compliance: Landscape and irrigation plans
shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect and shall be submitted to
and approved by the building department. A Utah licensed landscape architect
shall provide a letter of compliance to the city stating that the plans comply
with the requirements of this chapter and recommendations contained in the
geotechnical report.
      3.   Drainage Plan Letter Of Compliance: The drainage plan shall be
approved by the city engineer. The plan shall be prepared in conformance with
guidelines available in the city engineer's office. The point of location where
the natural drainage channel enters and leaves the property may not be changed
without approval of the city engineer. A Utah licensed engineer shall provide a
letter of compliance stating that the plans comply with the requirements of
this chapter as well as the city's drainage requirements.
      4.   Construction Drawings And Improvements Plan Letter Of Compliance:
The construction drawings and improvements plan shall be reviewed and approved
by the city engineer. A Utah licensed engineer shall provide a letter of
compliance stating that the plans comply with the city's construction drawing
requirements. The city engineer shall verify that any existing buildings or
structures, and all roads, easements and drainage channels on the property
where the work is to be performed or on adjacent properties is accurately
illustrated and described.
      5.   Other Requirements: Other reports, such as geotechnical construction
observation and testing compliance reports deemed necessary by the individual
or body designated to grant approval may require letters of compliance. If
necessary, any requirements for approval will be described at the time of the
initial request for additional technical reports, and letters of compliance
will depend on the procedure, conditions, or terms described therein.
   K.   Verification Of Compliance: For developments on a development parcel
applicable to this code, a letter of compliance by a Utah licensed engineer
that the development has been completed in compliance with the approved
hillside development permit, including satisfaction of any conditions contained
in the permit, shall be required. Restoration bonds shall not be released, and
certificates of occupancy shall be withheld for such a development, until such
certification has been received and approved by the city engineer.
   L.   Penalties: In addition to any other penalties, a city officer from the
building department or public works department shall have the right to order a
halt to construction of any improvements within an HP zone where, in the
officer's discretion, there exists a condition which violates, or threatens to
violate, any provisions of this chapter. Such suspension of construction
activities shall continue until the city officer is satisfied that measures
have been implemented for substantial compliance with this chapter. The
developer may appeal to the city council. The city may enter legal proceedings
to require any person who violates this section to fund and return a site to
the condition found prior to any disturbance, with a city official to determine
when this natural state has been achieved, or to set specific requirements
necessary to achieve the natural and restored state. Legal proceedings may also
seek to impose and collect a fine in order to recover staff costs incurred
through addressing any violation of this section. (Ord. 2008-14)
17.80.040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
All proposed development and improvements within the HP zone are subject to the
following required development standards. These standards are intended to
provide a framework for development that is sensitive to the unique
characteristics of hillside properties. Their purpose is not to discourage
proposals for innovative or alternative methods of design in a hillside area;
innovation is encouraged as long as the end result is one which respects
significant landform features and is consistent with the purposes expressed in
this chapter and in the goals and objectives of the Santa Clara City general
plan.
   A.   Disturbance Limitations: The following criteria shall be applied in
establishing the limits of disturbance for a site:
      1.   Adverse visual impacts from within and without the development shall
be minimized unless doing so precludes another objective of the HP zone. The
screening of cuts and fills, and the visual protection of prominent ridgelines,
rock outcroppings, scenic views, and the natural terrain is required unless
doing so precludes another objective of the HP zone.
      2.   Disturbed slopes should be treated to minimize erosion, and natural
drainageways shall be protected unless doing so precludes another objective of
the HP zone.
      3.   The clearing of trees, shrubs and other native vegetation should be
limited to: the approved locations for streets, driveways and easements; the
approved locations for building pads for structures, other main buildings and
accessory structures; the minimum distance between structures and surrounding
vegetation for established fire prevention and safety standards or
recommendations.
      4.   Significant trees, shrubs and other native vegetation should be
preserved in the design of the development. Significant vegetation is to be
identified on a map with the application submittals and the HRB will review the
submittals and visit the site to determine the significance of existing
vegetation.
      5.   All topsoil from any disturbed portion of the site should be
preserved and utilized in revegetation areas. The soil in the upper portion of
fill areas shall be of a sufficient quality to support native plant growth.
      6.   The maximum limits of disturbance shall be identified on each lot or
parcel of the approved site plans and subdivision plats and shall include all
graded, excavated, and filled areas, the areas occupied by main and accessory
structures, hard surface areas that include driveways, walkways, patios and
parking areas, and all other areas of disturbance or nonnative vegetation.
      7.   All lots and building pads shall be graded during construction of
the development, including all retaining walls, roadways, utilities, and all
other improvements needed to complete the site work. No building permits for
structures will be issued or recordation of any subdivision plats prior to
completion of all site work unless specifically approved by the city council.
   B.   Grading Design: Grading for all developments shall be designed to blend
with the contours of the adjacent natural terrain.
      1.   Limits Of Grading: No grading, cutting, filling, excavating,
benching or terracing of any proposed lot or parcel shall go beyond the maximum
limits of disturbance for each lot or parcel as provided herein.
      2.   Cuts And Fills: All cuts and fills shall be minimized and shall be
included within the maximum limits of disturbance for each lot or parcel. All
cut and fill areas shall be recontoured to the natural, varied contours of the
surrounding terrain with a maximum slope transition back to the natural grade
no greater than two to one (2:1). Slope ratios greater than two to one (2:1)
are prohibited except for approved cuts into solid rock only. Any such proposed
cut into rock shall be reviewed by the HRB for appropriateness, suitability,
and visual impact in order to grant approval if warranted. For approved cuts
into solid rock, the slope may be as steep as one-half to one (1/2:1) if
recommended by a Utah licensed professional engineer who is trained and
experienced in the practice of geotechnical engineering, and if the visual
impact of the cut can be adequately mitigated. All areas of cut and fill shall
be protected from erosion during the period of construction and shall be
permanently planted or otherwise protected from erosion within twenty (20) days
of the completion of grading and excavation as identified by the approved
landscape plan.
Where cut or fill conditions are created, slopes shall be varied and rounded
where feasible rather than left at a constant angle which may be unstable or
create an unnatural, rigid, engineered appearance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-70.png]
 
      3.   Cuts And Fills Visual Mitigation: The visual impact of cuts and
fills shall be mitigated by methods approved by the city council. Mitigation
shall predominantly be contour grading along with plantings as identified on
the approved landscape plan that will stabilize the cut or fill slope and blend
with the surrounding vegetation. Other mitigation may include, but is not
limited to, the placement of buildings so as to screen the cuts and/or the
placement of retaining walls designed to blend with the surrounding terrain to
stabilize the cut and blend with the surrounding terrain. The use of retaining
walls is to be as limited in scope and height as feasible to ensure the visual
predominance of vegetation. Contour grading techniques shall be used to provide
a natural appearing variety of slope transitions, slope percentage and slope
direction in a three-dimensional undulating pattern similar to existing
terrain.
         a.   Cut and fill operations shall be given a rounded appearance that
closely resembles the natural contours of the land.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-72.png]
 
         b.   Graded slopes adjacent to roadways shall be softened by
sufficient berms, contour grading, and/or landscaping to create natural, varied
and pleasing streetscapes.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-74.png]
 
      4.   Street And Driveway Alignment: Street alignments shall run generally
parallel along the contours of the natural terrain. Short sections of streets
that run perpendicular to natural contours and serve the purpose of connecting
main parallel sections of streets are permitted and shall follow the natural
curves of drainageways where practicable. Streets shall not greatly alter the
physical and visual character of a hillside by creating large notches in
ridgelines or by defining wide straight alignments. Contour grading techniques
shall be employed on all streets and associated cut and fill areas to minimize
any adverse impacts. Reduced width road sections, split road sections, and
split parking bays are potentially acceptable techniques to employ in the
layout of hillside streets to reduce grading.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-76.png]
 
The portions of driveways that run perpendicular to natural contours and serve
the purpose of accessing building lots and parcels shall be as short as
practicable. Driveways that serve more than one parcel are permitted as a
method of reducing unnecessary grading, paving and site disturbance. If lots
and parcels will be sharing driveways, cross use easements shall be recorded
with the subdivision.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-78.png]
 
Shared driveways can reduce grading.
      5.   Open Space Trails: Trails through open space shall be located such
that cuts and fills are minimized and visual character is preserved.
      6.   Building Site Grading: Building site grading shall be minimized so
as to preserve natural features. Careful consideration shall be given to the
general orientation of the slope when locating structures.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-80.png]
 
      7.   Cut And Fill Conditions: On each building site, careful
consideration shall be given to the cut and fill conditions such that a balance
is achieved where feasible and consistent with the intent of this chapter to
minimize the visual impact of grading. Different terrain conditions call for
corresponding different cut and fill solutions such that the structure fits
well into the topography as illustrated below. Impact to natural drainageways
shall be avoided.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-82.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-84.png]
 
   C.   Prominent Ridgeline And Mesa Edge Visual Preservation: To minimize the
adverse visual impacts that new development can have on prominent ridgelines
and their associated viewsheds, the following setbacks shall apply:
      1.   For new developments the minimum setback from a prominent ridgeline,
as shown on the hillside protection overlay zone map, is fifty feet (50') for
one-story structures and sight obscuring privacy fences and walls unless a
greater setback is recommended in the geotechnical report. The setback is one
hundred feet (100') for 11/2- and two-story structures unless a greater setback
is recommended in the geotechnical report. On individual lots previously
platted, any setback; front, rear, or side may be modified by the city council
as determined in the best interest of the city unless a greater setback is
recommended in the geotechnical report or a greater setback is recommended by
the HRB for safety and stability.
   D.   Architectural Standards: The purpose of establishing architectural
design standards in the HP zone is to ensure quality development that blends
with the hillside environment and to create neighborhoods that display
harmonious and complementary architectural styles. To achieve hillside
compatible development, the city recognizes the importance of having
architectural design that incorporates low profile rooflines and other building
elements which reflect the naturally occurring ridgeline silhouettes and
topographical variations.
      1.   Building Setbacks: A variety of building and lot orientations shall
be provided in order to encourage development suitable with the hillside
character of the site.
         a.   Rear Setback: Unless a greater setback is recommended in the
geotechnical report or the structure is located on a prominent ridgeline where
a greater setback applies as detailed herein, a minimum building setback of
fifteen feet (15') from top of slope and/or an average setback of fifteen feet
(15') shall be provided from the edge of the pad.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-86.png]
 
         b.   Viewshed Protection:
            (1)   Structures shall be designed so the slope angle of the roof
pitch is generally at or below the angle of the natural hillside or graded
slope.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-88.png]
 
            (2)   Site planning shall emphasize the preservation of views to
prominent visual features such as ridgelines, as viewed from within and outside
the hillside development. This includes building orientation to allow view
opportunities and locating buildings on the least sensitive portions of the
site so as to preserve landforms, vegetation and topographical features.
            (3)   Hillside buildings shall be stepped to follow the contours of
the slope. For aesthetic reasons, exterior structural supports and undersides
of floors and decks not enclosed by walls are discouraged but may be permitted
with fire safety and architectural considerations adequately addressed to the
satisfaction of the city.
      2.   Building Style: Architectural styles shall be compatible with the
hillside character, topography, and theme of the community. Hillside adaptive
architecture, as described below, shall be used within the HP zone:
         a.   Buildings shall be stepped as necessary to minimize grading.
         b.   A variety of roof orientations and types which emphasize roof
pitches reflecting the overall slope of the hillside shall be incorporated into
the design of the buildings.
         c.   Enhanced architectural elevations are required where the front,
rear or side of units face public view. Units shall avoid massive walls and
monotonous patterns of building silhouettes to the satisfaction of the city
council.
         d.   The dimensions of a building, measured in the direction of the
slope shall be minimized in order to limit the amount of cut and fill and to
better incorporate the structure to the natural terrain.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-90.png]
 
         e.   Buildings may be clustered to respect and adapt to the existing
topography. Flexible siting techniques including varying the position of the
structures and varying the sizes of lots shall be used as necessary to preserve
the character of the hillside setting.
      3.   Architectural Treatments: Publicly visible exterior walls of any
building shall be designed to avoid monotonous or continuous facades. A single,
continuous vertical or horizontal plane on the front and rear facade of any
building is not permitted. Architectural features and details shall be
incorporated in all exterior walls of the building, including the rear and
sides of the building. Buildings may utilize wall articulation (i.e., insets,
pop outs, etc.) and roof orientation as a means to break up the massing.
         a.   The form, mass and profile of the individual buildings and
architectural features shall be designed to blend with the natural terrain and
preserve the character of the natural slope. Avoid the use of large gable ends
on downhill elevations. The predominant roof slope shall be oriented in the
same general direction as the natural slope.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-92.png]
 
         b.   Avoid large roof overhangs and cantilevers on downhill elevations
to reduce the massive appearance from below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-94.png]
 
      4.   Finish Materials, Color, And Reflectivity: Building materials and
colors shall blend with the natural setting. The color, material and texture
palette shall be reinforced with compatible landscaping consistent with the
landscaping requirements of this chapter. The light reflective value (LRV) of
materials used on all exterior walls and roof areas shall be similar to the LRV
of the surrounding terrain. The building material colors and their LRVs shall
be submitted with the final application.
      5.   Fencing And Privacy Walls: All fences and privacy walls adjacent to
or clearly visible from public roads or parks shall be either virtually
transparent (such as wrought iron fencing) or constructed of materials which
have a natural appearance and color that blends with the surrounding
environment and is complementary to the landscape. The applicant shall present
illustrations, sample materials, and descriptions of fencing and wall materials
to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this subsection.
All walls and fences adjacent to or visible from public roads shall be set back
from the road right of way by a minimum of six feet (6') (or greater where
cited elsewhere in this code) landscaped area on the street side of the wall or
fence. Additionally, walls and fences not exceeding six feet (6') in height are
permitted adjacent to structures in order to provide a private outdoor area. A
minimum flat area from top or toe of slope of three feet (3') or more as
required by the adopted building codes of the city shall be maintained to face
of wall on slopes with slope heights of thirty feet (30') or greater as per the
following diagrams:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-96.png]
 
   E.   Landscape Design Standards:
      1.   Landscaping shall be designed to stabilize graded slopes, prevent
erosion and be compatible with surrounding natural vegetation.
         a.   Cut Or Fill Slopes: All plant material used on cut or fill slopes
shall be as nearly compatible with plant material found on adjacent undisturbed
hillsides as possible. Such slopes shall use Xeriscaping landscape methods with
no irrigation systems allowed on or adjacent to the slope itself.
         b.   Pad Sites Or Flat Areas: All plant materials on pad sites or
relatively flat areas shall be of a desert type requiring little or no
irrigation. Hand watered fired pots or other similar watertight containers may
be used to hold additional landscape materials. Any lawn area shall consist of
artificial grass. Rocks and colored or natural stones make desirable landscape
materials for pad areas. Any other proposed landscaping shall be specifically
approved by the city council and should consist of low water plantings with
minimal irrigation requirements.
         c.   Terraced Areas: On terraced areas between retaining walls,
minimal desert type landscaping may be considered using the same methods as
used for pad sites.
         d.   Slope And Landscape Maintenance: Homeowners' associations (HOAs)
and assessment districts or other acceptable legal entities are required in the
HP zone to maintain common open space. All landscaped slopes not included
within a landscape maintenance district (LMD) shall be maintained by an HOA or
a property owners' association (POA) for the permanent maintenance of
landscaped slopes and other areas. An HOA or POA shall be required to establish
a maintenance district with responsibility for maintenance. Should the HOA
disband or neglect their duties to maintain the slopes and landscaping, the
city may contract with a landscape maintenance contractor for ongoing
maintenance and place a lien against any and all private or common areas in the
project to ensure repayment to the city of any incurred expense.
      2.   Prior to an occupancy permit being issued, landscaping plans for
individual homes within any development must be reviewed and approved by the
city to assure compliance with this chapter and any conditions imposed during
the hillside development permit process.
   F.   Retaining Walls: The purpose and intent of establishing development
standards for retaining walls is to ensure that the retaining walls are
structurally sound and are not visually intrusive. The location of all
retaining walls, privacy walls, and fences along with their proposed heights,
materials and colors, shall be shown on the grading plan and concept plan. All
retaining walls, privacy walls and fences shall be located within the maximum
limits of disturbance for each lot or parcel.
      1.   General Standards:
         a.   The maximum length of any continuous retaining wall shall not be
more than two hundred (200) linear feet.
         b.   Retaining walls shall be used for the purpose of containing fill
material or for minimizing cut or fill slopes. The retaining wall may only
extend six inches (6") above the material it is retaining.
         c.   A retaining wall shall not block or restrict vehicular access to
a dedicated or implied dedicated alley, accessway, pedestrian access, trail,
sidewalk, easement, or right of way.
         d.   All retaining walls, privacy walls and fences surrounding a
development's perimeter shall be faced with stone or earth colored materials
that blend with the color and texture of the surrounding natural landscape.
         e.   Curved retaining walls that follow the natural contours are
strongly recommended, but not required.
         f.   All retaining walls as well as all freestanding walls and fences
shall comply with the adopted building codes of the city.
      2.   Height Standards:
         a.   No portion of a retaining wall shall exceed nine feet (9') in
height as measured from the immediately adjacent lowest natural or finished
grade to the top of wall unless it can be demonstrated in the overall
mitigation plan for cuts and fills that taller walls will not detract from the
surrounding terrain. Retaining walls shall not be stacked or terraced in any
manner that increases their combined height beyond nine feet (9'). If desired,
two (2) subwalls may be stacked or terraced to a maximum combined height of
nine feet (9'). A minimum separation of six feet (6') is required between
subwalls as measured from face of wall. The separation area between the sets of
subwalls shall be planted with low water use/low maintenance shrubs or other
vegetation as approved in the landscape plan. This vegetation will help reduce
the apparent visual height of the walls. Tree planting in the zone between
subwalls requires a separation of at least twenty feet (20').
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-98.png]
 
         b.   For purposes of this subsection, retaining walls are not
considered stacked or terraced if there is a minimum horizontal separation of
ten feet (10') between sets of retaining walls. With the minimum ten foot (10')
separation, each retaining wall set may be constructed to the maximum allowed
height; either the nine foot (9') height or the taller height demonstrated that
would not detract from the surrounding terrain. The separation area between the
sets of retaining walls shall be planted with low water use/low maintenance
shrubs or other vegetation as approved in the landscape plan. No more than
three (3) adjacent retaining walls (or 27 feet in total height) will be
allowed, unless specifically approved by the city council.
         c.   Retaining walls may be constructed to varying heights throughout
a development.
            (1)   Retaining walls constructed in the side yard area between two
(2) homes shall not exceed a height of four feet (4'); provided that such wall
does not extend into a required front yard setback adjacent to a street.
            (2)   Retaining walls constructed in the rear yard area of a lot
shall not exceed a height of eight feet (8').
            (3)   All planting areas between and adjacent to retaining walls
shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system suitable for low water
use vegetation. Such irrigation system shall be approved and inspected prior to
the construction of any wall.
            (4)   Where a retaining wall contains fill above the natural grade
and is located within a required setback yard, the height of the retaining wall
shall be considered as contributing to the permissible height of a fence or
wall at that location. A nonview obscuring fence up to three and one-half feet
(3.5') in height may be erected at the top of the retaining wall for safety.
         d.   Retaining walls not exceeding six feet (6') in height are
permitted adjacent to structures in order to provide a private outdoor area.
   G.   Corrective Work: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from
authorizing grading deemed necessary to correct previously disturbed natural
areas or existing hazardous conditions that are on site but not a part of the
proposed development area that are brought to the city's attention, in which
case the applicant will investigate possible alternatives with subsequent
review by city staff, city engineer, hillside review board, planning commission
and/or city council. (Ord. 2008-14)
17.80.050: HILLSIDE REVIEW BOARD:
   A.   Established: There is hereby established a hillside review board for
the city.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The hillside review board shall have the following
responsibilities:
      1.   As requested by city staff, review developments proposed within the
hillside protection overlay (HP) zone as defined in subsection
17.80.020A of this chapter and make a recommendation for approval, conditional
approval, or denial to the planning commission and city council. When requested
by city staff, recommend designation of applicable risk factors.
      2.   Provide advice and support as needed to the city staff, planning
commission and city council in connection with reviewing requests for zoning
changes or other development applications within the HP zone.
   C.   Membership, Appointment: The hillside review board shall consist of
five (5) members as follows:
      1.   Three (3) persons who are experts in any of the following fields:
geotechnical engineering, civil engineering, geology, architecture, landscape
architecture, land planning, or similar applicable areas of expertise; and two
(2) citizens of the city representing the public at large. If it is determined
to be not feasible to fill the member positions of those with the identified
fields of expertise, these positions shall be assumed by citizens at large. In
addition to the five (5) members mentioned above, two (2) alternate members may
be appointed to serve when a quorum is not otherwise present. The alternate
members may be any citizen of Santa Clara City. The experts need not be
residents of Santa Clara City.
      2.   All members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
city council. The board shall select a chair and vice chair and determine the
dates and times to schedule meetings as the need arises when applications are
submitted for proposed developments within the HP zone.
   D.   Membership, Terms, And Vacancies: The members of the hillside review
board, appointed as provided above, shall serve for four (4) years on
overlapping terms. Any midterm vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the
mayor and approval of the city council for the balance of the unexpired portion
of the term. Members may be reappointed to successive terms.
   E.   Quorum; Vote Required: A quorum of the hillside review board shall be
three (3) members, and a majority vote of a quorum shall be required for a
decision of any matter before the board, but the minimum number of yes votes
required for a decision shall never be less than three (3). If a quorum is not
present, no meeting shall be held, and any items of business shall be continued
to the next meeting of the board. (Ord. 2008-14)
17.80.060: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this HP zone chapter, the following words and phrases
defined in this section shall apply:
AS GRADED: The surface configuration upon completion of grading.
   BENCH: Relatively level step excavated into earth materials on which fill is
to be placed for intermediate drainage area.
   BERM: A low mound of earth graded in a linear or undulating form; often used
as a noise or visual barrier.
   BUILDING: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
   BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the ground level grade
to the top of the building.
   CANYON: A deep, narrow valley having high, steep slopes.
   CLUSTERING: Land planning technique appropriate for large subdivisions in
which some areas are reserved as open space. Clustering allows the permitted
units in an area to be grouped more densely in the most developable parts of a
site.
   CONTOUR: A line drawn on a plan which connects all points of equal
elevation.
   CONTOUR GRADING: A grading concept designed to result in earth forms which
resemble natural terrain characteristics. Horizontal and vertical curve
variations are often used for slope banks. Contour grading is not necessarily
minimal grading.
   CUESTA: A landform that has a steep ascent in one direction and a gentle
descent in the opposite direction. The steep slope is the cuesta face, and
erosion escarpment, and the gentle face is the back slope of the cuesta. The
crest of the cuesta forms a ridgeline.
   CUT: The mechanical removal of soil, rock or other earth material.
   CUT AND FILL: The excavating of earth material in one place as cut and
depositing of it as fill in an adjacent place.
   DEVELOPMENT: The carrying out of any building activity or clearing of land
as an adjunct of construction. "Major development" shall be considered to be
subdivision platting, including various land uses and/or housing types.
   DEVELOPMENT PARCEL: Any quantity of land capable of being described with
such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established, which is
designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit
or which has been used or developed as a unit.
   ELEVATION: Height or distance above sea level.
   EROSION: The process by which the soil and rock components of the earth's
crust are worn away and moved from one place to another by natural forces such
as weathering, solution and transportation.
   ESCARPMENT: A long cliff or steep slope separating two (2) comparatively
level or more gently sloping surfaces and resulting from erosion or faulting.
   EXCAVATION: Any disturbance to the ground, including, but not limited to,
clearing, grubbing, rock removal, cutting, tunneling, drilling or any other
activity which alters the natural ground. "Minor" excavation shall mean a
vertical cut of three feet (3') or less, or a disturbance of less than one acre
of surface area. "Major" excavation shall mean a vertical cut of more than
three feet (3'), or disturbance of more than one acre of surface area.
   EXISTING GRADE: The grade of land prior to grading.
   EXPORT: Excess cut that is removed from a grading project and deposited off
site.
   FILL: A deposit of rock, soil or other earth material placed by artificial
means.
   FINISH GRADE: The final elevation of the ground surface after development,
which conforms to the approved plan.
   FLOODPLAIN: The land area adjacent to a watercourse which is subject to the
overflow of floodwaters.
   GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER: A person with a four (4) year degree in civil
engineering or engineering geology from an accredited university who, through
training and experience, is able to assure that geological factors affecting
engineering works are recognized, adequately interpreted and presented for use
in engineering practice and for the protection of the public.
   GRADE: The vertical location of the ground surface.
   GRADE SEPARATION: The separation at different levels of two (2) intersecting
roads, by bridge, tunnel, or underpass, so as to permit the roads to cross
without obstructing free traffic movement on either road.
   GRADING: To bring an existing surface to a designed form by excavating,
filling or smoothing operations.
   HILL: A small area of land that is higher than the land around it.
   HILLSIDE: A parcel of land or a definable portion thereof with an average
rise or fall of more than one and one-half feet (1.5') vertically for every ten
feet (10') horizontally (15 percent slope).
   IMPORT: Fill material obtained off site to balance a grading project.
   IMPROVEMENT: An object, facility or structure generally constructed as a
part of development.
   KNOLL: A small, round hill or mound.
   LAND: The portion of the earth's surface above the level of the sea or
ocean.
   MASS GRADING: The movement of large quantities of earth over large areas.
Disruption of the majority of the on site surface terrain is common and often
results in a successive pad/terrace configuration. Modification or elimination
of natural landforms may result.
   MESA: A typically flat topped landform with generally steep sides.
   MINIMAL GRADING: A grading concept designed to minimize excavation and
filling. Allows the movement of earth for projects such as individual building
foundations, driveways, local roads, and utility excavation. Concept often
associated with roads conforming closely to natural contours with the
structures being built on natural terrain.
   NATIVE VEGETATION: The natural vegetation commonly found in an area.
   NATURAL AREAS: Undeveloped sites which have not been graded.
   NATURAL OPEN SPACE: The landform as created by nature or subsequently
modified by either agricultural activities or to meet fuel modification fire
standards of the plan. Within natural open spaces, vegetation introduced for
agricultural purposes may be removed and the area revegetated to a natural
condition. Existing trees, riparian vegetation and native plant communities
within natural open spaces shall be preserved and protected. Manmade water
bodies and trails through natural open spaces may be considered as natural open
space.
   NATURAL SLOPE: A slope which is not manmade. A natural slope may retain the
natural vegetation during adjacent grading operations, or it may be partially
or completely removed and replanted.
   OPEN SPACE: Land not covered by buildings, roads or vehicular accessways and
including such areas as private yards, landscaped areas, slopes, natural areas,
common areas, greenbelts or parks, etc.
   OUTCROPPING: The part of a rock formation that appears above the surface of
the surrounding land.
   PAD: A generally flat or stepped area created by grading to accommodate
development.
   PLATEAU: A flat or predominantly flat area of land which is raised sharply
above adjacent land on at least one side.
   PROMINENT RIDGE: A ridge or hilltop identified on the hillside protection
overlay zone map (exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein).
   RIDGE: A long, narrow, or sharply defined conspicuous elevation of land.
   RIDGELINE: The junction of a rising steep slope on one side and a mildly
ascending or a descending slope that may either be gentle or steep on the other
side. See sketch below for the intended location of ridgeline as being the same
as top of slope.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b34fb0dcfdb0a7fef806a1c3d7d54ea1b1c91e63/
IMAGES/0-0-0-100.png]
 
   SCAR: A highly visible cut in a hillside or ridge in which all topsoil has
been removed and vegetation will be unable to establish itself within a
significant period of time (5 years).
   SETBACK: The area between the building line and the property line, or when
abutting a street, the ultimate right of way line. No structure or building is
allowed in this area.
   SINGLE LOADED STREET: A street with lots fronting on one side only.
   SITE: Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the
same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.
   SLOPE: An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as
a ratio of the vertical distance (rise), or change in elevation, divided by the
horizontal distance (run), and expressed as a percentage. The average slope
calculation formula is provided in subsection
17.80.030E1 of this chapter.
   SLOPE, MANUFACTURED: A manmade slope consisting wholly or partly of either
cut or filled material.
   SLOPE TRANSITION: The area where a slope bank meets the natural terrain or a
level graded area either vertically or horizontally.
   TOE OF SLOPE: The lowest elevation of a slope which transitions to a flatter
area or pad.
   TOP OF SLOPE: The highest elevation of a slope which transitions to a
flatter area or pad.
   TOPOGRAPHY: General term to include characteristics of the ground surface
such as plains, hills, mountains, degree of relief, steepness of slope, and
other physiographic features.
   UTAH LICENSED PROFESSIONAL: A Utah registered or licensed civil engineer,
land surveyor, architect or landscape architect.
   VEGETATION: Growing native or nonnative plants.
   VIEWSHED: Areas which can be viewed from arterial roads, major collector
roads or public gathering places which visually dominate an individual's cone
of vision. (Ord. 2008-14)
CHAPTER 17.90
LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
SECTION:
17.90.010: Definitions
17.90.020: Purpose And Intent
17.90.030: Minimum Landscaping Standards For Proposed City Maintained Property
17.90.040: General Landscaping Standards
17.90.010: DEFINITIONS:
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: A required assembly that prevents the flow of
water from the water distribution system back to the municipal water source.
Compliance with applicable health and water regulations is required.
   DEVELOPMENT: The construction, erection or emplacement of one or more
buildings, structures, or surface improvements on land in order to establish or
expand a principal residential or nonresidential use.
   DISTRIBUTION UNIFORMITY: The measure of uniformity of irrigation water over
an area.
   HARDSCAPE: Elements of the landscape constructed from nonliving materials
such as concrete, asphalt, and lumber. Includes patios, decks and paths but
does not include driveways and sidewalks.
   HYDROZONE: The grouping of plants with similar water requirements so each
zone can be watered with a separate irrigation valve.
   IRRIGATION CONTRACTOR: A person trained to install irrigation systems who
meets state and local license, insurance, and bonding requirements, and is able
to show proof on demand.
   IRRIGATION DESIGNER: A landscape architect or person who is certified by the
Irrigation Association (IA) to prepare irrigation design.
   IRRIGATION PLAN: A plan that shows the components of the irrigation system
with water source and size, backflow prevention for culinary source water
systems, precipitation rates, flow rate and operating pressure for each
irrigation circuit, together with identification of irrigation equipment.
   IRRIGATION VALVE: A device to control the flow of water in an irrigation
system.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A person who is licensed to practice landscape
architecture by the state of Utah.
   LANDSCAPE AREA: An entire parcel of real property less building footprints,
driveways, nonirrigated portions of parking lots, hardscapes (such as decks and
patios), and other nonporous areas. Water features are included in the
calculation of landscape areas.
   LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR: A person who is licensed to practice landscape
installation by the state of Utah. The license allows grading and preparing
plots and areas of land for architectural, horticulture, and decorative
treatment, arrangement, and plantings of gardens, lawns, shrubs, vines, bushes
and other decorative vegetation.
   LANDSCAPE OR LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE: Maintaining or keeping any landscaping
or any area required to be landscaped:
   A.   In a live and thriving condition, with consideration for normal growth
and water needs;
   B.   Fertilized, mowed, trimmed, edged, irrigated, mulched and free from
weeds, dead plants, litter, refuse, or debris in compliance with regionally
accepted horticulture practices.
   LANDSCAPE OR LANDSCAPING: Any combination of living plants, such as trees,
shrubs, vines, ground covers, succulents, flowers, grass and other plant life
that are generally not to be considered to be invasive or noxious plants;
natural feature such as rocks, stone, bark chips; nonvegetative permeable
ground cover; and structural features, including, but not limited to,
fountains, reflective pools, outdoor artwork, screen walls, fences or benches
that is planted or placed for the purpose of creating an attractive and
pleasing environment. These may be further complemented by earth berms, walls
and fences, irrigated pots and planters, all harmoniously combined to produce
an aesthetic effect appropriate for its intended use. Landscaping may be
designed to enhance and preserve natural features of the site, to make land
more attractive for residential or other uses, and to screen unattractive uses,
or to act as buffers to visually separate different types of uses.
   LANDSCAPE PLAN: A plan that clearly and accurately identifies the location
and species of new and existing trees, shrubs, ground covers, and other plants
on site, and includes the irrigation plan.
   OWNER BUILDER: Any person, agent, or firm having a legal or equitable
interest in the property.
   PARK STRIP: A ten foot (10') wide area measured horizontally from the back
of the street curb opposite of the street within an improved or city approved
lot plan less driveway or other approved hardscapes. A city maintained
pedestrian sidewalk that parallels within ten feet (10') of the right of way is
included in the park strip width.
   STREET TREES: Includes all trees located within the public right of way of
all streets within the city.
   TURF: A surface area of mowed grass. (Ord. 2012-08)
17.90.020: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter shall be to enhance, conserve, and stabilize
property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings in all
zones of the city, thus creating the necessary atmosphere for the orderly
development of a uniformly pleasant community. Landscaping also minimizes
summer heat zones, reduces noise, and removes pollutants. (Ord. 2012-08)
17.90.030: MINIMUM LANDSCAPING STANDARDS FOR PROPOSED CITY MAINTAINED PROPERTY:
Minimum landscaping standards for city maintained property in the following
zones: PD, RA, R-1-10/RA mixed lot size, HD, and OS.
   A.   Application: The requirements of this section shall apply to all new
developments, and remodeling of existing developments where the city will
maintain any property. Any landscape improvements that will be maintained by
the city shall meet the city landscape specifications to include water
efficiency requirements, soils amendments, testing, tree plantings, and
warranties.
   B.   Design:
      1.   All landscape and irrigation designers and installers shall have all
required state and local licenses, insurance, and bonding requirements.
      2.   Landscape plans shall make provisions for erosion control on all
graded sites.
      3.   A landscape and irrigation plan shall be submitted to the city for
review at the same time the drawings and plans are submitted for the
development of the site.
      4.   Plants well adapted for the Santa Clara climate with cold hardiness
to fifteen degrees Fahrenheit (15°F) shall be used. Street trees shall be
selected from the Santa Clara approved tree list.
      5.   Plants with similar water needs shall be grouped together in "hydro
zones". Spray heads, tree watering systems and plant emitters shall not be
connected to the same valve.
      6.   All landscape that will be maintained by the city shall comply with
Santa Clara landscape specifications to include soils testing, irrigation
efficiency, and warranty requirements.
      7.   Drought tolerant plants with low fuel volume or moisture content
that will blend with native vegetation shall be used for projects located at
the interface between urban areas and natural (nonirrigated) open space.
      8.   Stormwater retention and detention basins shall meet the
requirements of the stormwater ordinance in title 13 of this code.
      9.   Landscape plans for projects developed in multiple phases shall
clearly specify the landscape improvements required in conjunction with each
phase.
      10.   Plans for ongoing maintenance of right of way areas shall be
included when landscape and irrigation plans are submitted.
      11.   Plants with thorns, spikes, or other hazardous protrusions shall
not be planted within three feet (3') of sidewalks, trails, or public walking
areas and no portion of said plants shall encroach within two feet (2') of any
public walkways.
   C.   Installation:
      1.   No permits or construction plan approvals shall be issued for any
development until the landscaping plan is approved and the appropriate cash
deposit, or bond, is provided to the city guaranteeing the installation of all
landscaping shown on the approved landscape plan.
      2.   Landscape and irrigation installers shall follow the plans that have
been signed and approved by the city.
      3.   The city may inspect landscaping improvements, and may require
corrective measures regarding the installation of site landscaping and
irrigation system improvements found not to comply with the approved plan.
      4.   Soil preparation shall be provided to assure healthy growing
conditions for plants. All improvements to be maintained by the city shall meet
requirements of the Santa Clara landscape specification to include soils
testing and specified warranty.
      5.   The landscape contractor shall provide the city with a letter
certifying that all improvements have been installed in accordance with the
city approved plan and specifications prior to the bond release.
   D.   Irrigation:
      1.   A backflow prevention assembly shall be properly installed and
tested to meet city, county, and the state of Utah requirements.
   E.   Trees:
      1.   Required trees and plantings shall comply with the Santa Clara
street tree and tree planting ordinance, tree species requirements, and
applicable Santa Clara landscape and irrigation specifications. (Ord. 2012-08)
17.90.040: GENERAL LANDSCAPING STANDARDS:
The following standards shall apply to all districts:
   A.   Preservation Of Natural Features: The preservation of natural features
that enhance the development, and will benefit the community including trees,
scenic points, view corridors, historic buildings or locations, unique
geological formations, and other community assets shall be preserved and
incorporated into the overall landscape plan.
   B.   Park Strip Hard Surface And Streetscape Materials: Park strip hard
surface material includes material that is not plant material, does not need
watering, and is a permanent surface. Examples would include colored concrete,
stamped concrete (e.g., Bomanite), concrete pavers. In general, it is
preferable to have no more than fifty percent (50%) of the parking strip area
covered in hard surface material. Hard surface sections should alternate with
planted sections and be complementary to the surrounding landscape. All hard
surface material must be installed according to the specifications within the
Santa Clara standard construction specifications and details for municipal
construction. Landscaped sections used in conjunction with hard surface
sections should not include trees if the park strip is less than six feet (6')
wide by eight feet (8') long. If park strip is six feet (6') wide, planting may
include trees planted equal distant from the sidewalk and curb and gutter in a
planter bed no smaller than six feet (6') wide by eight feet (8') long, sod,
ground cover, drought tolerant shrubs, bark, or colored mulch not to exceed
three feet (3') in height. Planting near the driveway entrance shall comply
with the zoning ordinance.
   C.   Street Trees: Street tree species selection shall be listed in Santa
Clara tree species specification. On required landscape strips Santa Clara tree
species specification street trees shall be planted in the front park strip
area centered between the sidewalk and the curb to minimize tree conflicts and
to maximize tree root zone. All park strips and landscaped street islands shall
have root barrier a minimum of eighteen inches (18") in depth around the entire
perimeter of the planting area. Where the park strip is less than six feet (6')
in width or the sidewalk has been placed against the curb, street trees shall
be planted four feet (4') behind the sidewalk. Trees rated with low or medium
root damage potential are recommended. (Ord. 2012-08)
CHAPTER 17.92
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING AND CONSERVATION STANDARDS
SECTION:
17.92.010: Applicability
17.92.020: Definitions
17.92.030: Single Family And Multiple Family Residential Water Efficiency
Standards
17.92.040: Nonresidential Water Efficiency Standards
17.92.050: Landscape And Irrigation Design And Operation Standards
17.92.060: Restrictive Covenants In Conflict With Water Efficiency Standards
17.92.010: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The provisions of this title are applicable to all new construction,
development (including redevelopment), and landscape improvements in the city,
except for (a) permitted uses in the Open Space zone; (b) permitted
agricultural, horticultural, and gardening uses (including fruit trees) in any
zone; (c) public parks or playgrounds, or public or school-owned active
recreation areas, in any zone; however, all new uses which fall under (c) must
be required to be served by secondary and not culinary municipal water. The
provisions of this chapter are severable and if any provision, clause,
sentence, word, or part thereof is held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or
inapplicable to any person or circumstances, such illegality, invalidity,
unconstitutionality, or inapplicability must not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions, clauses, sentences, sections, words, or parts of this
chapter or their applicability to other persons or circumstances.
   B.   The Washington County Water Conservancy District has adopted Ultra
Water Efficient Landscape Standards which may be more restrictive than this
Chapter in many ways, but which also may allow an applicant to secure more or
additional impact fee credits from WCWCD. An applicant to the City under this
chapter may voluntarily elect to comply with the WCWCD Ultra Water Efficient
Landscape Standards. In the event that the applicant obtains approval or
certification from WCWCD of landscape plans meeting the Ultra Water Efficient
Standards, then the applicant may present documentation evidencing WCWCD’s
approval of landscape plans under the Ultra Water Efficient Landscape Standards
and the City will accept said approval in lieu of the City’s review and
approval of the same plans under this chapter. (Ord. 2025-11: Ord. 2024-02:
Ord. 2022-05)
17.92.020: DEFINITIONS:
              Dedicated active play areas where irrigated lawn is used as the playing surface,
              such as a sports field designed for public use. Active recreation areas shall
              be:
              1.   A minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) contiguous square feet of
              lawn area.
ACTIVE        2.   Not less than thirty (30) feet in dimension.
RECREATION    3.   Not less than ten (10) feet from areas dedicated to vehicular use, such as
AREA:         a street or parking lot.
              4.   Designed and located to be accessible to large populations, such as at a
              school, daycare, recreation center, senior center, public park, private park,
              water park or religious institution.
              5.   Co-located with amenities, including but not limited to trash bins,
              benches, tables, walking paths, drinking water, playground equipment and/or
              other recreational amenities.
CONTROLLER:   A device used in irrigation systems to automatically control when and how long
              sprinklers or drip irrigation systems operate.
              An irrigation system that delivers water by adding water at the plant’s base and
DRIP          root zone, usually measured in gallons per hour. Drip irrigation exhibits a
IRRIGATION:   droplet, trickle, umbrella or short stream pattern, to reduce evaporation,
              overspray, and water use, and improving water conservation.
DRIP EMITTER: A drip irrigation fitting that delivers water slowly at the root zone of the
              plant, usually measured in gallons per hour.
GRADING PLAN: The grading plan shows all finish grades, spot elevations, drainage as
              necessary, and new and existing contours with the developed landscaped area.
GROUND COVER: Material planted in such a way as to form a continuous cover over ground that
              can be maintained at a height no more than twelve inches (12").
              Elements of landscape constructed from non-living materials such as concrete,
HARDSCAPE:    boulders, brick, blacktop, and lumber. Includes patios, decks, and paths, but
              does not include driveways and sidewalks.
HYDROZONE:    Portion of landscape area having plants with similar water needs and rooting
              depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.
IRRIGATION    A plan that shows the components of the irrigation system with water meter size,
PLAN:         backflow prevention, precipitation rates, flow rate, and operating pressure for
              each irrigation circuit, and identification of all irrigation equipment.
IRRIGATION    Irrigation water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape area to which it
RUNOFF:       is applied, and that flows onto other areas.
              A person who holds a professional license to practice landscape architecture in
LANDSCAPE     the state of Utah. Pursuant to Utah Code, licensed landscape architects,
ARCHITECT:    licensed architects, licensed land surveyors, and licensed engineers can
              professionally stamp plans that fall under the practice of landscape
              architecture. This includes commercial landscape and irrigation plans.
LANDSCAPE     Area of a Lot not including any building footprints, driveways, sidewalks, and
AREA:         patios; also not including areas of agricultural, horticultural, or gardening
              uses which are permitted by applicable zoning.
              A person who may or may not hold professional certificates for landscape design/
              architecture, and who generally focuses on residential design and horticultural
LANDSCAPE     needs of home landscapes. Landscape designers may assist developers and property
DESIGNER:     owners with landscape design but may not submit landscape plans for multifamily
              residential or nonresidential properties and projects under this chapter unless
              certified by a landscape architect.
              The documentation of graphic and written criteria, specifications, and detailed
LANDSCAPE     plans to arrange and modify the effects of natural features to comply with the
DOCUMENTATION provisions of this chapter. The Landscape Documentation Package must include a
PACKAGE:      project data sheet, a site plan, a planting plan, an irrigation plan,
              construction details, and a grading plan.
              Any combination of berms; living plants, such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground
LANDSCAPE OR  cover, annuals, perennials, ornamental grass, or seeding; natural features such
LANDSCAPING:  as rock, stone, or bark chips; and structural features, including but not
              limited to, fountains, reflecting pools, outdoor artwork, screen walls, fences,
              or benches that create an attractive and pleasing environment.
              Maintaining or keeping any landscaping, or any area required to be landscaped:
LANDSCAPE OR  A.   In a live and thriving condition, with consideration for normal growth and
LANDSCAPING   water needs; and
MAINTENANCE:  B.   Fertilized, mowed, trimmed, edged, mulched and free from weeds, dead
              plants, litter, refuse, or debris in compliance with regionally accepted
              horticultural practice and city ordinances.
LANDSCAPE     A plan that clearly and accurately identifies the location and species of new
PLAN:         and existing trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other plants on a site, and any
              other landscape element, and includes an irrigation plan.
LAWN:         Irrigated nonagricultural land planted in closely mowed, managed grasses.
              Material (such as, but not limited to, rock, bark, wood chips) uniformly applied
              upon the surface of the soil to reduce evaporation and weed growth. Mulches must
MULCH:        allow penetration of water and air. For purposes of these standards, ungrouted
              pavers, stepping stones and artificial turf manufactured to be permeable to air
              and water may be considered mulch.
              Any residential use comprised of a dwelling or dwellings designed for occupation
              by more than one family in any zone, but for purposes of this Chapter, excludes
MULTIFAMILY:  single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, dwellings containing an approved
              internal accessory dwelling unit, or dwellings which are an approved accessory
              dwelling unit to a primary dwelling.
PARK STRIP:   A typically narrow landscaped area located between the back-of-curb and
              sidewalk.
PLANTING BED: Areas of the landscape that consist of plants, such as trees, ornamental
              grasses, shrubs, perennials, and other regionally appropriate plants.
PLANTING      A planting plan that clearly and accurately identifies the type, size, and
PLAN:         locations for new and existing trees, shrubs, planting beds, ground cover, lawn
              areas, driveways, sidewalks, hardscape features, and fences.
PRECIPITATION The depth of water applied to a given area, usually measured in inches per hour.
RATE:
PRESSURE      A valve installed in an irrigation mainline that reduces a higher supply
REGULATING    pressure at the inlet down to a regulated lower pressure at the outlet.
VALVE:
REHABILITATED Landscape area in which over fifty percent (50%) of existing landscaping is
LANDSCAPE:    removed and replaced. Includes all landscaping funded in part, or completely, by
              Washington County Water Conservancy District’s landscape conversion program.
SECONDARY     Non-potable water that is untreated and used for irrigation of outdoor
IRRIGATION    landscaping.
WATER:
              Any residential use comprised of a dwelling designed for occupation by only one
SINGLE        family in any zone, and for purposes of this Chapter includes primary dwellings,
FAMILY:       dwellings containing an approved internal accessory dwelling unit, and approved
              accessory dwelling units.
SLOPE:        A vertical rise in feet measured over a horizontal distance, expressed as a
              percentage, measured generally at right angles to contour lines.
              Any residential use comprised of a dwelling designed for occupation by two
TWO-FAMILY:   families in any zone, but for purposes of this Chapter excludes dwellings
              containing an approved internal accessory dwelling unit, or dwellings which are
              an approved accessory dwelling unit to a primary dwelling.
WATER-        A plant that can generally survive with available rainfall once established,
CONSERVING    with possible supplemental irrigation needed or desirable during spring and
PLANT:        summer months or during drought periods. (Ord. 2024-02: Ord. 2022-05)
 
17.92.030: SINGLE FAMILY AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS:
The provisions of this section are applicable to all new single family or two-
family residential development or redevelopment in any zone.
   A.   Construction Standards:
      1.   New single family or two-family dwellings, including accessory
dwelling units, having at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of living
space must have installed a hot water recirculation system or systems, unless
hot water delivery can be demonstrated to occur without first displacing more
than 0.5 gallons of system water.
      2.   New single family or two-family residential dwellings, including
accessory dwelling units, must use WaterSense labeled fixtures, including but
not limited to faucets, showerheads, toilets, and urinals.
   B.   Landscape Standards: For all residential construction and development
which is subject to this section, landscaping must meet the following
requirements:
      1.   The total irrigated landscape area must not exceed eight percent
(8%) of the lot square footage, up to a maximum of two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet of lawn area. Lots less than seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) square feet are allowed up to six hundred (600) square feet of lawn.
      2.   Single-family homes with limited common areas designated for the
exclusive use of the adjacent dwelling shall have the same allowances as a
single- family home.
      3.   Lawn is prohibited in park strips, in all landscape areas less than
eight (8) feet wide, and on any slope that exceeds twenty percent (20%).
      4.   Any lot in any zone which is larger than one-half (½) acre must use
secondary irrigation to irrigate any agricultural, horticultural, or gardening
uses which are permitted in the applicable zone. (Ord. 2024-02: Ord. 2022-05)
17.92.040: MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL WATER EFFICIENCY
STANDARDS:
The provisions of this section are applicable to all new multifamily
residential and nonresidential development or redevelopment in any zone.
   A.   Construction Standards:
      1.   Hot water recirculation systems must be installed, unless hot water
delivery can be demonstrated to occur without first displacing more than 0.5
gallons of system water.
      2.   New and future installations of plumbing fixtures must meet or
exceed the water conservation requirements specified in the building code as
adopted by Santa Clara City.
       3.   All units located partially or completely on a ground floor, and
which are individually subdivided, must be separately metered, sub metered, or
equipped with alternative technology capable of tracking the water use of the
individual unit, and the information must be made available to the resident of
each unit. Individually platted condominium units are excepted if a condominium
owners’ association owns and maintains the water lines and meters. All
nonresidential projects require separate water meters for all outdoor water
usage, including landscaping.
      4.   All commercial car washes must utilize a wastewater recirculation
system and limit water use to a maximum amount of thirty-five (35) gallons per
vehicle washed.
      5.   Manmade ornamental water features are limited to twenty-five (25)
square feet per parcel and are limited to the parcel.
      6.   All golf courses using water district or municipal water supplies
shall have a separate meter and irrigate with secondary irrigation water.
Irrigation with potable water is prohibited. Each golf course development must
submit and follow a water budget with the Landscape Documentation Package and
identify water conservation measures for city approval.
      7.   Outdoor misting systems may only be operated during the May through
September time period where the daily high temperature is ninety degrees (90°)
Fahrenheit or greater.
   B.   Landscape Standards: For all multifamily residential and nonresidential
development subject to this section, landscaping must meet the following
requirements:
      1.   Lawn is prohibited in park strips, all landscape areas less than
eight (8) feet wide, and on any slope that exceeds twenty percent (20%).
      2.   Attached multi-family residential units may have up to one hundred
(100) square feet of lawn per dwelling unit. Properties with less than six (6)
dwelling units are allowed up to six hundred (600) square feet of lawn.
      3.   Lawn areas are prohibited for nonresidential uses except where an
active recreation area is appropriate, such as a childcare center or athletic
complex.
      4.   Landscape and irrigation installers must follow plans that have been
signed and approved by the city.
      5.   Each project must propose and comply with an approved planting plan
that has a minimum of forty percent (40%) vegetative cover of a landscaped area
with water-efficient shade trees and bushes adequate in number and
configuration to visually enhance the project, prevent heat islands, and
prevent soil erosion. The city has sole discretion to approve or require
adjustments to the configuration of vegetation in the planting plan.
      6.   If secondary irrigation water is available, each project shall
connect to the system for all outdoor water use. The city may make minor
exceptions, allowing use of treated water for outdoor plantings in small
beautification areas, in its sole discretion.
   C.   Required Documentation:
      1.   Landscape Documentation Package: A copy of a Landscape Documentation
Package must be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the issue of any
building permit. A copy of the approved Landscape Documentation Package must be
provided to the property owner or site manager. The Landscape Documentation
Package must be prepared by a professional landscape architect (PLA) and must
consist of the following items:
         a.   Project Data Sheet containing the following:
            (1)   Project name and address;
            (2)   Applicant or applicant agent’s name, address, phone number,
and email address;
            (3)   Landscape architect’s name, address, phone number, and email
address; and
            (4)   Landscape contractor’s name, address, phone number and email
address, if available currently.
         b.   Planting Plan. A detailed planting plan must be drawn at a scale
that clearly identifies the following:
            (1)   Location of all plant materials, a legend with common and
botanical names, and size of plant materials;
            (2)   Property lines and street names;
            (3)   Existing and proposed buildings, walls, fences, utilities,
paved areas and other site improvements;
            (4)   Existing trees and plant materials to be removed or retained;
            (5)   Scale: graphic and written;
            (6)   Date of design;
            (7)   Designation of hydrozones; and
            (8)   Details and specifications for tree staking, soil
preparation, and other planting work.
         c.   Irrigation Plan. A detailed irrigation plan must be drawn at the
same scale as the planting plan and contain the following information:
            (1)   Layout of the irrigation system and a legend summarizing the
type and size of all components of the system, including manufacturer name and
model numbers;
            (2)   Static water pressure in pounds per square inch (psi) at the
point of connection to the public water supply;
            (3)   Flow rate in gallons per minute and design operating pressure
in psi for each valve and precipitation rate in inches per hour for each valve
with irrigation equipment (i.e., sprinklers, drip emitters, bubblers, etc.);
and
            (4)   Installation details for irrigation components.
         d.   Grading Plan. A grading plan must be drawn at the same scale as
the planting plan and must contain the following information:
            (1)   Property lines and street names, existing and proposed
buildings, walls, fences, utilities, paved areas, and other site improvements;
and
            (2)   Existing and finished contour lines and spot elevations as
necessary for the proposed site improvements, as well as drainage.
      2.   Plan Review, Construction Inspection, and Post-Construction
Monitoring:
         a.   As part of the building permit approval process, a copy of the
Landscape Documentation Package must be submitted with a city provided pre-
submittal checklist completed for the city to initiate a review and approval
process before construction begins.
         b.   All installers and designers must meet state and local license,
insurance, and bonding requirements, and be able to show proof of such.
         c.   During construction, site inspection of the landscaping may be
performed by the Building Department or other city official tasked with such
inspections.
         d.   Following construction and prior to issuing an occupancy permit,
an inspection must be scheduled with the Building Department or other city
official tasked with such inspections to verify compliance with the approved
landscape plans. The Certificate of Substantial Completion must be completed by
the property owner, developer, contractor, or landscape architect and submitted
to the city. The Certificate of Substantial Completion must be accompanied by a
certification from the landscape architect that the landscaping, irrigation,
and related improvements have been installed consistent with the approved
Landscape Documentation Package.
         e.   The Building Department or other city official tasked with such
inspections reserves the right to perform site inspections at any time before,
during, or after the irrigation system and landscape installation, and to
require corrective measures if requirements of this chapter are not satisfied.
(Ord. 2024-02: Ord. 2022-05)
17.92.050: LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION DESIGN AND OPERATION STANDARDS:
The provisions of this section shall apply to all new landscaping and
irrigation in the City.
   A.   Plants must be well-suited to the microclimate and soil conditions at
the project site. Native, locally adaptable, and environmentally sustainable
plants are acceptable. See the Washington County Water Conservancy District’s
recommended plant list on https://wcwcd.org. Plants with similar water needs
must be grouped together as much as possible into hydrozones for efficient
irrigation. Invasive plant species as identified by Washington County must not
be planted.
      1.   Areas with slopes greater than twenty percent (20%) slope must be
landscaped with deep-rooting, water-conserving plants that do not include lawn.
      2.   Park strips and other landscaped areas less than eight feet (8')
wide must be landscaped with water-conserving plants and/or mulch that do not
include lawn.
   B.   Tree species must be selected based on growth characteristics and site
conditions, including available space, overhead clearance, soil conditions,
exposure, and desired color and appearance. Trees should be suited for water-
efficient landscapes; however, fruit trees are allowed where permitted by
zoning. Trees must be selected and planted in accordance with the following
city guidance:
      1.   Broad canopy trees may be selected where shade or screening of tall
objects is desired.
      2.   Low-growing trees must be selected for spaces under utility wires.
      3.   Select trees from which lower branches will be trimmed to maintain a
healthy growth habit where visual clearance and natural surveillance is a
concern.
      4.   Narrow or columnar trees are recommended for small spaces, or where
awnings or other building features limit growth, or where greater visibility is
desired between buildings and the street for natural surveillance.
      5.   Tree placement must provide canopy cover (shade) and avoid conflicts
with existing trees, retaining walls, above and below ground utilities,
lighting, and other obstructions.
   C.   Irrigation Design Standards:
      1.   Pressure Regulation. A pressure regulating valve must be installed
by the builder or developer, and maintained by the owner, if the static service
pressure exceeds ninety (90) pounds per square inch (psi). The pressure
regulating valve must be located between the meter and the first point of water
use, or first point of division in the pipe, and must be set at the
manufacturer’s recommended pressure for the sprinklers.
      2.   Irrigation Controller. It is required that landscaped areas use a
WaterSense labeled smart irrigation controller, which automatically adjusts the
frequency and/or duration of irrigation events in response to changing weather
conditions. All controllers must be equipped with automatic rain delay or rain
shut-off capabilities. All controllers must have memory retention capability to
retain pre-programmed irrigation schedules. Sites are not exempt from water
waste prohibitions.
      3.   Low-volume irrigation equipment (i.e., drip emitters, bubblers) must
be provided for each tree.
      4.   Drip irrigation must be used to irrigate plants in non-lawn areas.
      5.   High conservation efficiency spray nozzles are required for
sprinkler applications.
      6.   Sprinkler heads must have matched precipitation rates with each
control valve circuit.
      7.   Filters and end-flush valves must be provided for drip irrigation
lines.
   D.   Irrigation Operation Standards:
      1.   Landscape watering with potable (treated) water is prohibited from
ten o’clock (10:00) a.m. to eight o’clock (8:00) p.m., from June 1 to October
1, to maximize irrigation efficiency.
      2.   Water waste is prohibited. Waste includes overwatering, irrigating
during a precipitation event, water that sprays or flows off your property,
failure to comply with drought restrictions and/or a failure to repair
irrigation system leaks and/or malfunctions in a timely manner.
      3.   Overwatering can be avoided by following the water district’s
recommended irrigation schedule and practices as noted on wcwcd.org. The
generally recommended schedule is:
         a.   Winter (Nov - Feb) - sprinkler and drip irrigation up to one (1)
day a week. Irrigation is typically not needed in December and January.
         b.   Spring (Mar - April) - sprinkler irrigation up to three (3) days
a week and drip irrigation up to two (2) days a week.
         c.   Summer (May - Aug) - sprinkler irrigation up to four (4) days a
week and drip irrigation up to three (3) days a week.
         d.   Fall (Sept - Oct) - sprinkler irrigation up to three (3) days a
week and drip irrigation up to two (2) days a week.
      4.   Program valves for multiple repeat cycles are required to reduce
runoff on slopes and for soils with slow infiltration rates. (Ord. 2024-02:
Ord. 2022-05)
17.92.060: RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS IN CONFLICT WITH WATER EFFICIENCY STANDARDS:
Any homeowners’, condominium owners’, or property owners’ association governing
documents, such as bylaws, operating rules, covenants, conditions, and
restrictions that govern the operation of a common interest development,
recorded after passage of this chapter, are void and unenforceable if they
conflict with the water efficiency standards in this chapter, or if they have
the effect of prohibiting or restricting compliance with this chapter. (Ord.
2024-02: Ord. 2022-05)
