SEVIER COUNTY, UTAH
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 2025-11-1, passed - -
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 2024-11-1
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR SEVIER COUNTY, REVISING,
AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF SEVIER COUNTY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of Sevier County are
inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance
for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general
welfare of Sevier County and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Utah empower and authorize
Sevier County to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing
ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to
incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of Sevier County has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of Sevier County of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form.
NOW, THEREFORE, THE LEGISLATIVE BODY OF SEVIER COUNTY ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1.
   The general ordinances of Sevier County as revised, amended, restated,
codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute
the “Code of Ordinances of Sevier County, Utah.”
Section 2.
   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section I shall consist of the
following Titles:
SEVIER COUNTY, UTAH
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      10.   Rules of Construction; General Penalty
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      30.   Administration and Personnel
      31.   Departments, Boards, Councils, and the Like
      32.   Public Safety
      33.   Finance and Revenue
      34.   County Policies and Procedures
      35.   Fee Schedules
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      50.   Garbage and Refuse
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      70.   Parking Regulations
      71.   Recreational Vehicles
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      90.   Animals
      91.   Health and Safety; Nuisances
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      110.   Business Licensing Generally
      111.   Solicitors, Itinerant Merchants and Peddlers
      112.   Alcohol
      113.   Food Services
      114.   Lodging and Care Facilities
      115.   Adult-Oriented Businesses
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      130.   Offenses Involving Minors
TITLE XV: LAND USAGES
      150.   Buildings and Construction
      151.   Flood Damage Prevention
      152.   Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
      153.   Subdivision
      154.   Zoning
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
         I.   Vacations
         II.   Franchises
         III.   Plans
         IV.   Funds
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Utah Code Annotated
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
INDEX
Section 3.
   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in
such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.
   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption and
approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of Sevier County is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the Office
of the Clerk.
Section 5.
   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section 6, and
such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of Sevier County on this 25 day
of November 2024.
         AYE   NAY   ABSENT   ABSTAIN
Greg Jensen       x                                           
Ralph Brown       x                                           
Scott Johnson    x                                           
Presiding Officer
                                                  
Scott T. Johnson, Commission Chair
 
Attest:
                                                  
Steven C Wall, County Clerk/Auditor
Legal as to form:
                                                  
Casey W. Jewkes, County Attorney
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Construction of code
   
10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions
   
10.06   Severability
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Reference to offices; name designations
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Reasonable time
   
10.11   Repeal or modification of code section
   
10.12   Limitation periods
   
10.13   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.15   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the county, as revised,
codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles,
chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Sevier County
Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or
“code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not
constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.
   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws, amendments
thereto and newly enacted laws.
      (1)   Any previously existing law or amendment thereto reenacted by this
code shall continue in operation and effect as if it had not been repealed by
this code.
      (2)   All rules and regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this code
shall remain in full force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent to
the enactment of this code.
   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is continued
only for the period designated in the original enactment of that appropriation.
   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does not
resolve a conflict between two or more sections.
   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved by
reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The section
most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.
   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.
   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings assigned to
the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this code, as
originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law and may be altered by
the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any official
publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive headings
are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning, application
or construction of the law they precede.
      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for reference
purposes only and is not a part of the section.
   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all subsequent
amendments to that section unless otherwise provided.
§ 10.05 RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the legislative intent or
context of the provision.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in
law shall be understood according to their technical import.
      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons shall be
construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons unless otherwise
declared in the section giving the authority.
      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent
or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the performance of the act
by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.
      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural and
words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the
present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOARD. The Sevier County Board of Commissioners.
      CLERK/AUDITOR. The Clerk/Auditor of Sevier County.
      COUNTY. Sevier County, Utah.
      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
      MONTH. One calendar month.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as
applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions in this
code, refers to the sections or divisions next following or next preceding that
in which the words occur, unless some other section is designated.
      STATE. The State of Utah.
      WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, lithographing or other modes of
representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a person is
required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person or the person’s
mark.
      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.06 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently amended, or
its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other sections that can be given effect without the invalid
section or application.
   (B)   (1)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code
containing a nonseverability provision, each division or part of every section
is severable.
      (2)   If any portion or application of a section is held invalid, the
invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:
         (a)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably connected with
and so dependent upon the invalid provision or application that it cannot be
presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without the invalid
provision or application; or
         (b)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being executed in
accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid provision or
application.
   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless of
whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.
   (D)   The repeal of a section or amendment stating that the provisions of a
chapter, subchapter or section are severable as provided in division (B) above
does not affect the operation of division (B) above with respect to that
chapter, subchapter or section.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
Cross-reference:
   Repeal or modification of code sections, see §
10.11
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer shall be
deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the municipality
exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of
the functionary.
   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the Board
refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department, officer, agency,
authority or instrumentality of any government, and that name designation is
incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that ordinance or following the
effective date, the rights, powers, duties or liabilities placed with that
entity are or were transferred to a different entity; then the named board,
bureau, commission, department, division, officer, agency, authority or
instrumentality, whether correctly named in the ordinance at its effective date
or not, means that correctly named entity, or the entity to which the duties,
liabilities, powers and rights were transferred.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.10 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.11 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.
   (A)   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former
section or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section
or law is not revived unless it so expressly provides.
   (B)   The repeal of any section shall not extinguish or release any penalty,
forfeiture or liability incurred under the section unless the repealing section
so expressly provides.
   (C)   The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the
purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of
the penalty, forfeiture or liability.
§ 10.12 LIMITATION PERIODS.
   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or to
the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures,
contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code shall not be affected by
the repeal and reenactment, but all suits, proceedings and prosecutions for
causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date of this code may
be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an indication
thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title
shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.15 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(U.C.A. §           )
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see U.C.A. §            
§ 10.16 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   (A)   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
   (B)   In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway and the election of corporate officers
shall remain valid in all respects as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who violates any provision of this code for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be subject
to the fines, imprisonment or other penalties that apply to a conviction of a
Class B misdemeanor pursuant to U.C.A. § 76-3-301(1)(d) or, if the violation
would constitute a Class C misdemeanor, then the lesser Class C fines pursuant
to U.C.A. § 76-3-301(1)(e), imprisonment or other penalties. If the violation
would constitute an infraction, then the person shall be subject to the lesser
fines or other penalties for such an infraction pursuant to U.C.A. § 76-3-205.
      (2)   Any firm or corporation which violates any provision of this code
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction,
be subject to the fines, imprisonment or other penalties which apply to a
conviction of a Class B misdemeanor pursuant to U.C.A. § 76-3-302(3) or, if the
violation would constitute a Class C misdemeanor, then the lesser Class C fines
pursuant to U.C.A. § 76-3-302(4) or other penalties. If the violation would
constitute an infraction, then the firm or corporation shall be subject to the
fines or other penalties for such an infraction pursuant to U.C.A. § 76-3-302
(4).
   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   If a penalty for a violation of an ordinance includes any possibility
of imprisonment, the county shall, under U.C.A. § 78B-22-301, provide for
indigent defense services, as that term is defined in U.C.A. § 78B-22-102.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
      
31.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COUNCILS AND THE LIKE
      
32.   PUBLIC SAFETY
      
33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
34.   COUNTY POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
      
35.   FEE SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 30: ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.001   Double employment of county employees prohibited
Board of County Commissioners
   
30.015   Meetings
   
30.016   Electronic meetings
   
30.017   Opening ceremony for meetings
County Officers Generally
   
30.030   Auditor and Clerk/Auditor offices consolidated
   
30.031   Officer bond and insurance requirements
Justices of the Peace
   
30.045   Compensation
   
30.046   Compliance
Insurance for Officers and Employees
   
30.060   Amounts required
   
30.061   Procedure
   
30.062   Blanket theft or crime insurance coverage
   
30.063   Payment of premiums
 
   
30.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Administrative departments, councils and the like, see
Chapter 31
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.001 DOUBLE EMPLOYMENT OF COUNTY EMPLOYEES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   County employees can hold only one employee position classification at
a time, either exempt or non-exempt, but not both at the same time.
   (B)   A non-exempt employee may not hold any elective political office of
the county during his or her employment.
   (C)   No county elected official may hold another employee position with the
county during the term of the elected office.
(Ord. 2017-7-2, passed 7-10-2017)
BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
§ 30.015 MEETINGS.
   The Board of County Commissioners of this county shall hold two regular
public meetings each month. Such meetings shall be held on the fifth day of
each month and again on the third Monday.
   (A)   When, however, the fifth day of the month falls on a Saturday or on a
Sunday, the meeting shall be held on the following Monday.
   (B)   In the event that either of the above-mentioned Mondays falls on a
legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the following day (Tuesday).
(Prior Code, § 2.04.010)
§ 30.016 ELECTRONIC MEETINGS.
   (A)   Any public body of the county may conduct electronic meetings where
one or more of its members participate by means of a telephonic or
telecommunications conference pursuant to state law.
   (B)   Members so participating shall be considered present at the meeting
for all purposes, and shall be afforded every opportunity to participate in the
discussion of the items on the agenda and cast their vote on issues coming for
a vote.
   (C)   The anchor location as described in state law shall be the County
Administration Building, Commission Chambers, located at 250 North Main Street,
Richfield, UT 84701.
   (D)   Public notice of the electronic meeting shall be given pursuant to the
Utah Code Annotated for regular meetings with the additional requirement of
posting written notice of the electronic meeting at the anchor location.
   (E)   In addition to giving public notice as described above, the body shall
provide notice of the electronic meeting to the members at least 24 hours
before the meeting so that they may participate in the meeting and be counted
as present for all purposes, including the determination that a quorum is
present. All notices shall include a statement that one or more members will be
participating electronically, a description of how the member(s) so
participating will be connected to the electronic meeting and the regularly
published agenda for that meeting.
   (F)   No meeting may be held electronically unless at least one member is
present at the anchor location.
   (G)   Immediately prior to opening the meeting, the anchor member shall
communicate with the person who is participating electronically and ensure that
he or she is prepared to go forward. From that time forward until the
adjournment of the meeting, the communication line shall be kept open, unless
the member participating electronically wishes to withdraw from the meeting.
   (H)   If a member who participates electronically withdraws from the
meeting, the rest of the meeting agenda may be completed, provided there is
still a quorum present at the anchor location or there are sufficient other
members participating electronically to comprise a quorum with those at the
anchor location.
   (I)   The public may attend and monitor the open portions of the meeting at
the anchor location, and may participate in all public hearings to the same
extent normally allowed.
   (J)   Prior to taking a vote on any issue, the anchor member shall inquire
of the member participating electronically if he or she has been able to
adequately monitor the discussion, including comments from the public, and
shall allow that member the opportunity to make any comments he or she desires.
   (K)   The minutes of the meeting shall designate the name of each member who
participated electronically, the nature of the electronic communication and the
duration of the member’s participation.
(Res. 2010-12-1, passed 12-8-2010)
§ 30.017 OPENING CEREMONY FOR MEETINGS.
   (A)   (1)   The County Board of Commissioners has traditionally invited the
presentation of thoughts, readings and invocations as an opening ceremony
before certain of its meetings.
      (2)   This opening to the county’s legislative process is for a purpose,
among other reasons, to:
         (a)   Provide a moment during which Commission members and the
audience can reflect on the importance of the business before the Commission;
         (b)   Promote an atmosphere of civility;
         (c)   Encourage lofty thoughts and high-mindedness;
         (d)   Recognize cultural diversity; and
         (e)   Foster sensitivity for and recognize the uniqueness of all
segments of our community.
      (3)   The presentations shall be done on a volunteer basis and without
cost to the county. The county will not dictate the form or content of any such
presentation.
   (B)   It is the policy of the County Board of Commissioners to afford any
and all residents of the county the opportunity to be involved in such activity
and, therefore, the following procedure will be instituted.
      (1)   Every fifth year through public notices in the media and at civic
functions, county residents will be notified that applications are continuously
accepted for the opportunity to designate the invocation for specific meetings
to be held during the future.
      (2)   Each county resident of adult age is entitled to submit one
application.
      (3)   In the event the number of applications exceeds the number of
meetings scheduled, random drawings will be held and the successful applicants
will be notified of the meeting for which they are in charge of the invocation.
      (4)   The successful applicant may appear and personally present the
invocation or specify an agent or organization to participate on such
applicant’s behalf.
(Res. 2004-4-1, passed - -)
COUNTY OFFICERS GENERALLY
§ 30.030 AUDITOR AND CLERK/AUDITOR OFFICES CONSOLIDATED.
   The duties, functions and responsibilities of the offices of Auditor and of
Clerk/Auditor shall, effective on the first Monday of January, 1987, be
consolidated, and one person shall be elected to such office.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.060) (Ord. passed 11-18-1985)
§ 30.031 OFFICER BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   No fidelity bonds are required under this chapter unless an individual bond
is required under a contract entered into by the county or by state law. All
other officers shall be covered by theft or crime insurance secured by the
county.
(Ord. 2019-2-1, passed 2-25-2019)
JUSTICES OF THE PEACE
§ 30.045 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Pursuant to U.C.A. § 78A-7-206, Justices of the Peace within the
county shall receive as compensation for all services which they render a fixed
salary, to be determined by the Board of County Commissioners. Such salary
shall take into consideration the civil as well as the criminal case load of
each respective Justice of the Peace, his or her availability to the public,
his or her training and background and such other factors as the Board shall
deem relevant.
   (B)   (1)   The method of compensation shall not provide for the retention
of fines, forfeitures, filing fees or other moneys which may come into the hand
of the Justice of the Peace from time to time in the discharge of his or her
duties.
      (2)   All fines, bail, filing fees or other moneys from whatever source
or for whatever purpose which are received by the Justice Court Judge in his or
her official capacity and growing out of the discharge of his or her official
duties shall be tendered by him or her to the appropriate official in
conformity with state law.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.010) (Ord. 1994-9-2, passed - -) Penalty, see §
30.999
§ 30.046 COMPLIANCE.
   Compliance with the terms of §
30.045 of this chapter may be further secured by securing from the District
Court within the county a writ of mandamus compelling any Justice of the Peace
to account to the proper county official for any moneys not properly tendered
within the time allowed.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.020)
INSURANCE FOR OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 30.060 AMOUNTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before entering upon the discharge of their respective offices, the
following officers shall be covered by theft or crime insurance with a per
occurrence limit of not less than the following amounts or as required by state
law.
Office Penalty/Coverage
Office              Penalty/Coverage
Assessor            $20,000
Attorney            $5,000
Clerk/Auditor       $5,000
Commissioners       $5,000
Constable           $5,000
Deputies/Assistants $2,500
Justice Court Judge $5,000
Recorder            $5,000
Sheriff             $20,000
Surveyor            $5,000
Treasurer           As set by the State Money Management Council
 
   (B)   If any of the offices listed in division (A) above are combined in
accordance with U.C.A. § 17-16-3, the combined office shall not require
multiple policies of insurance and the coverage limit for theft or crime
insurance for the combined office shall not be less than the highest
requirement of the offices so combined.
   (C)   If any of the offices listed in division (A) above are held by an
appointed officer under contract with the county, the limit of coverage for
theft or crime insurance required shall be as agreed to under such contract.
(Ord. 2019-2-1, passed 2-25-2019)
§ 30.061 PROCEDURE.
   Theft or crime insurance covering county officials under this subchapter
shall be provided by an admitted or surplus lines insurance carrier or an
interlocal cooperative agency acting as a public agency insurance mutual or
joint reserve fund. Any bonds required under contract shall be approved by the
county’s legislative body, recorded by the County Recorder, and filed and kept
in the office of the County Clerk/Auditor. Any theft or crime insurance secured
for the purpose of complying with this subchapter shall be approved by the
county’s legislative body.
(Ord. 2019-2-1, passed 2-25-2019)
§ 30.062 BLANKET THEFT OR CRIME INSURANCE COVERAGE.
   County officials and personnel of this county, except any officials who may
be required by state statutes to give an individual bond or be covered by theft
or crime insurance to qualify for office, may be covered by blanket theft or
crime insurance coverage rather than separate individual policies or coverage.
Said theft or crime insurance shall provide a minimum coverage limit of the
maximum coverage required by state statute or county ordinance of any person
covered by such blanket theft or crime insurance.
(Ord. 2019-2-1, passed 2-25-2019)
§ 30.063 PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS.
   As required by U.C.A. § 17-16-11, the premium of any bond or theft or crime
insurance referred to herein shall be paid from county funds.
(Ord. 2019-2-1, passed 2-25-2019)
§ 30.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Failure of a Justice of the Peace to account as set forth in §
30.045 of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
not more than $299 and/or confinement in the County Jail for not more than six
months in duration. A complaint for a violation hereof may be lodged directly
in the District Court within the county.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.030)
CHAPTER 31: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COUNCILS AND THE LIKE
Section
County Department of Emergency Medical Services
   
31.01   Establishment
   
31.02   Administration
   
31.03   Fees
   
31.04   Exclusive franchise
Library Board of Directors
   
31.15   Membership; appointment
   
31.16   Officers; duties
   
31.17   Library Director; duties and responsibilities
   
31.18   Meetings
   
31.19   Board authority; powers and responsibilities
County Council on Aging
   
31.30   Establishment
   
31.31   Purposes, duties and responsibilities
   
31.32   Organization
   
31.33   Budget
County Reinvestment Agency
   
31.45   Establishment; official name
   
31.46   Boundaries
   
31.47   Powers
   
31.48   Governing body the Agency Board
COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
§ 31.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Department of County Emergency Medical Services is established, and such
department shall have responsibility for the maintenance and control of the
equipment heretofore and hereafter utilized in the provision of emergency
medical services.
(Prior Code, § 2.16.010) (Ord. 7-89-1, passed - -)
§ 31.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Department shall be managed by an Administrator, who shall be nominated
pursuant to the bylaws of the Department; provided, the Board of Commissioners
must consent to the person so nominated and, upon failure to obtain such
consent within 45 days of the nomination, the nomination shall be deemed to
have failed and the nomination process shall be reinitiated.
(Prior Code, § 2.16.020) (Ord 7-89-1, passed - -)
§ 31.03 FEES.
   (A)   The Department shall charge fees for services at a rate determined by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   Revenues shall be utilized only for expenses and obligations of the
Department and shall not be deposited into the General Fund of the county.
(Prior Code, § 2.16.030) (Ord. 7-89-1, passed - -)
Cross-reference:
   Hazardous materials emergency cost recovery procedure, See
Chapter 32
§ 31.04 EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.
   The county shall, during the period that any revenue bonds relating to the
revenues of the Department remain outstanding, grant no franchises, permits,
licenses or business authorization to any other agency or to any other entity
to provide services which are currently being provided by the Department.
(Prior Code, § 2.16.040) (Ord. 7-89-1, passed - -)
LIBRARY BOARD OF DIRECTORS
§ 31.15 MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provision of U.C.A. § 9-7-502, as amended, the County
Library Board of Directors shall consist of not less than five and not more
than nine Directors chosen from the citizens of the county and based upon their
fitness for the office.
   (B)   Only one Director of the Board may be a member of the county
legislative body at any one time.
   (C)   All Directors shall be appointed by the county executive with the
advice and consent of the County Commission. Appointments to the Board shall be
made before the first day of July of each year in which an appointment is
necessary.
   (D)   (1)   Directors shall be appointed to serve for four-year terms, or
until their successors are appointed, and shall not serve more than two
consecutive terms.
      (2)   The terms of Directors shall be staggered so that approximately
one-fourth of the Board is selected each year.
   (E)   Any appointed Board Director may resign from such position by
providing written notification to the Chairperson of such resignation. The
Chairperson shall thereupon notify the County Commissioners of such
resignation.
   (F)   Vacancies created by resignation, death, removal or otherwise shall be
filled for the duration of the unexpired term in the same manner as the
original appointment.
(Ord. 2004-6-1, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 31.16 OFFICERS; DUTIES.
   (A)   Officers. The officers of the Board shall be the Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and Secretary. They shall be elected by the Board at its December
meeting, and their term of office shall be for one year beginning January 1.
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   The Chairperson of the Board shall preside at all Board meetings,
authorize calls for any special meetings and generally perform the duties of a
presiding officer.
      (2)   The Vice-Chairperson shall preside in the Chairperson’s absence and
perform such other duties as requested by the Chairperson.
      (3)   The Chairperson of the Board shall sign or countersign all official
Board documents and, where appropriate, recommend approval by the County
Commission. The Chairperson shall arrange staff to act as Clerk of the Board
for the purpose of actual minute taking and maintaining official records of
Board actions.
(Ord. 2004-6-1, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 31.17 LIBRARY DIRECTOR; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Library Director shall:
   (A)   Serve as executive officer for the Board;
   (B)   Be responsible for the administration of the county library system
under the policies adopted by the Board and the county;
   (C)   Recommend such policies and procedures to the Board that will promote
the efficiency of the library and improve services to its patrons;
   (D)   Be accountable to the county executive in complying with library
policy, county-wide policy, county ordinances and state and federal laws;
   (E)   Be responsible for the maintenance and operation of properties
belonging to the county for its library system;
   (F)   Submit regularly and timely reports to the Board on the progress,
activities and finances of the library;
   (G)   Ensure the appropriate receipt of non-tax income collection and
expenditure of all county library funds; and
   (H)   Perform other duties as established in the Director’s official job
description.
(Ord. 2004-6-1, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 31.18 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Board shall have not less than four regular meetings during a
calendar year with the quorum present, whether corporal or by means of
electronic equipment, for the purpose of discussing or acting upon a matter or
matters. For this purpose, a quorum consists of that number of Board Directors
that represents 51% or more of the total number of Board Directors appointed at
the time.
   (B)   The Board shall have at least one annual meeting held in the last
quarter of each year.
   (C)   Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairperson,
providing notice thereof is given to the public and all Directors at least 24
hours in advance.
   (D)   (1)   If the Board Director who is a member of the County Commission
is unable to attend any Board meeting, then the Director may designate an
alternate to act in that Director’s place.
      (2)   If the member of the County Commission who is a director of the
Board has designated an alternate to act in that Director’s stead at any or all
Board meetings, then that alternate’s presence shall count as a Board Director
for the purposes of meeting a quorum or voting.
   (E)   Meetings shall comply with all requirement of state law, including,
but not limited to, the State Open and Public Meetings Act, being U.C.A. Title
52, Chapter 4 (U.C.A. §§ 52-4-1 et seq.).
   (F)   Records of all Board meetings shall be kept, managed, classified and
disclosed as required by county ordinance and state law, including, but not
limited to, the Government Records Access and Management Act, being U.C.A.
Title 63G, Chapter 2 (U.C.A. §§ 63G-2-101 et seq.).
(Ord. 2004-6-1, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 31.19 BOARD AUTHORITY; POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Subject to compliance with federal laws, state laws and county ordinances
and policies:
   (A)   The Board is hereby granted the authority to:
      (1)   Cooperate with Wayne County, Juab County and the State Library
Division pursuant to the provisions of U.C.A. § 9-7-509, as amended, in
providing county library service;
      (2)   Establish policies for the operation, maintenance and care of the
library;
      (3)   Purchase, lease, exchange or sell land; purchase, lease, exchange,
sell or construct buildings for the benefit of the library; and purchase,
lease, exchange or sell personal property for the benefit of the library;
      (4)   Establish policies for collections and information resources; and
      (5)   Establish rules to exclude from the use of the library any person
who willfully violates library rules or state laws or county ordinances.
   (B)   The Board shall:
      (1)   Recommend to the County Commission and the Director of the State
Library Division a competent person to act as Library Director (“librarian”),
to have immediate charge of the county library system with those duties
specified in a job description approved by the Board and county executive;
      (2)   Establish and revise library policies in cooperation with the
Library Director, subject to consistency with state and federal law and county
ordinance and policies, and review by the County Attorney’s Office;
      (3)   Work cooperatively with the County Commission, Library Director,
library staff, other county staff and others in the community to provide
excellent library service;
      (4)   Encourage citizen involvement in the development of long-range
plans for the improvement of library services and facilities;
      (5)   Hear and resolve relevant library issues brought to the Board;
      (6)   Make an annual report to the county executive on the condition and
operation of the library, including a financial statement;
      (7)   Submit an annual report to the state’s Library Board;
      (8)   Recommend to the county executive the removal of any Director of
the Board for misconduct or neglect of duty; and
      (9)   Furnish to the County Commission, in writing, and prior to the time
required by law to levy county taxes, an estimate of the amount of moneys
necessary to establish, equip and maintain the library and to provide library
services during the next ensuing fiscal year.
(Ord. 2004-6-1, passed 6-7-2004)
COUNTY COUNCIL ON AGING
§ 31.30 ESTABLISHMENT.
   On petition of certain senior citizens and due to the interest in the county
in improving, developing, coordinating and strengthening all programs concerned
with a rapidly increasing aged and aging population, and to more fully utilize
the potential of our older citizens, their skills, their wisdom and their
experience, the Board of Commissioners creates a County Council on Aging,
hereafter referred to as the Council on Aging.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.010)
§ 31.31 PURPOSES, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   To serve as the successor to all functions of diverse groups left
without authorization at the formation of the Council on Aging;
   (B)   To promote and develop programs to interest and provide for the
welfare of senior citizens;
   (C)   To cooperate with the State Division of Aging and also both public and
private companion agencies on the state and national levels to more effectively
meet the needs of and provide opportunities for older persons;
   (D)   To integrate the activities of such other groups with the kindred aims
of providing opportunities for senior adults of volunteer or paid services to
the community and to their fellow humans, and for opportunities in educational,
recreational and social pursuits;
   (E)   To be aware of and interested in the aspects and needs of the aging,
to promote appropriate public relations endeavors and to coordinate activities
and fiscal management; and
   (F)   To seek out resources at the local, state and national levels to
provide services to the aging adult.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.020)
§ 31.32 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Council on Aging shall consist of from three to six regular voting
members representing different areas of the county or groups or agencies
(public or private) associated with services to older people, such as family
services (welfare), health, education, community action, community services
council, churches, extension services and the like, with at least two members
being lay citizens passed age 64. Such ex officio members may be appointed from
time to time as the Commission shall deem advisable.
   (B)   Voting members shall be appointed by the County Commission by
resolution (or minute entry) who may follow the recommendations of the Council
on Aging. Appointments shall be made to be effective June 1 of each year.
Vacancy appointments will be for the balance of the term for which the
appointment was made.
   (C)   (1)   Appointments are to be staggered as follows:
         (a)   Members appointed for one year;
         (b)   Members appointed for two years; and
         (c)   Members appointed for three years.
      (2)   Thereafter, all replacement terms are for three years.
   (D)   (1)   Officers to serve as the executive committee, to be selected
from among the Council on Aging, consist of the following:
         (a)   Chairperson;
         (b)   Vice-Chairperson; and
         (c)   Secretary.
      (2)   The term of office shall be one year.
      (3)   The initial Chairperson shall be appointed by the County
Commission, and thereafter, officers shall be elected from within the Council.
   (E)   Members of the Council on Aging shall meet regularly or in special
session, as called by the Chairperson, and are to be uncompensated, except that
they may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred on behalf of the Council on
Aging.
   (F)   Any member of the Council on Aging may be removed by the Commission
for cause. Recommendation for removal may come from the Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.030)
§ 31.33 BUDGET.
   The Council on Aging shall outline such budget as to it seems appropriate
and shall pursue any legitimate fundraising project or make application to
whomever it designs for assistance, it being the desire of all concerned that
this be independent and self-sufficient and subject to a minimum of control or
supervision of the County Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.040)
COUNTY REINVESTMENT AGENCY
§ 31.45 ESTABLISHMENT; OFFICIAL NAME.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of U.C.A. § 17C-1-201.5(1) of the Limited
Purpose Local Government Entities–Community Development and Renewal Agencies
Act (the “Act”), the County Commission creates a community development and
renewal agency (the “Agency”), contingent upon the issuance by the State
Lieutenant Governor of a certificate of creation under U.C.A. § 67-1a-6.5.
   (B)   The official name of the Agency is the “Sevier County Reinvestment
Agency.”
(Ord. 2016-3-1, passed 3-28-2016)
§ 31.46 BOUNDARIES.
   The geographic boundaries of the Agency are and will be coterminous with the
geographic boundaries of the unincorporated area of the county.
(Ord. 2016-3-1, passed 3-28-2016)
§ 31.47 POWERS.
   Upon creation, the Agency will be vested with all the powers set forth in
the Act and as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 2016-3-1, passed 3-28-2016)
§ 31.48 GOVERNING BODY THE AGENCY BOARD.
   The governing body of the Agency will be a Board consisting of the members
of the Commission as may serve from time to time on the Commission (the “Agency
Board”). Any change in the composition of the Commission will automatically and
without any further action required constitute a similar change in the
composition of the Agency Board.
(Ord. 2016-3-1, passed 3-28-2016)
CHAPTER 32: PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
Hazardous Materials Emergency Cost Recovery Procedure
   
32.01   Purpose
   
32.02   Definitions
   
32.03   Recovery authorization and procedure
   
32.04   No admission of liability
   
32.05   Action to recover expense
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY COST RECOVERY PROCEDURE
§ 32.01 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter shall provide procedures for recovering costs incurred by
the county or other local governmental agencies for assistance rendered in
responding to hazardous materials emergencies, aggravated fire emergencies and
aggravated emergency medical responses.
(Ord. 2008-4-1, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 32.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRAVATED FIRE EMERGENCY. A fire proximately caused by the owner or
occupier of property or a structure which presents a direct and immediate
threat to public safety and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat,
and the fire:
      (1)   Is caused or contributed to by the failure to comply with an order
from any state, county or local agency, department or official;
      (2)   Occurs as a direct result of a deliberate act in violation of state
law or the ordinances or regulations of the county or other local agency;
      (3)   A fire that constitutes arson or reckless burning as defined by the
State Code; or
      (4)   An alarm that results in a county or local fire unit being
dispatched, and the person transmitting or causing the transmission of the
alarm knows at the time of said transmission that no fire or fire-related
emergency exists.
   AGGRAVATED MEDICAL EMERGENCY. An alarm that results in a county or local
fire unit or a county emergency medical unit being dispatched, and the person
transmitting or causing the transmission of the alarm knows at the time of said
transmission that there are no reasonable grounds for believing that a medical
emergency exists.
   EXPENSES.
      (1)   The actual costs of county or other local government and volunteer
personnel, including worker’s compensation benefits, fringe benefits,
administrative overhead, cost of equipment, cost of equipment operation, cost
of materials, cost of disposal and the cost of any contract labor and
materials.
      (2)   The following is a representative list of equipment and materials
the cost of which may be recovered under this subchapter. The list is neither
exclusive nor exhaustive, and the county may seek recovery of any EXPENSE
reasonably related to the response to the emergency situation.
         (a)   Personnel expenses are as follows.
 
Fire Chief
Fire Captain
Firefighter
HAZMAT tech
 
         (b)   Vehicle expenses are as follows.
 
Command post
Decontamination trailer—support trailer (24 box with supplies)
Fire Department pumper truck
HAZMAT response truck
Miscellaneous emergency vehicles (patrol vehicle, ambulance)
 
         (c)   Equipment expenses are as follows.
Absorbent (20 lb bags)
Absorbent pads (18 in. x l6 in. P) (100 per pack)
Bata HAZMAT boots
Blue decontaminant tarpaulins
Cascade system—Level A (replacement)
Haz Cat Kit test or tests
Latex gloves (we open a box and you buy a box)
Nitrile gloves
Photographs (35 mm or digital) (20 prints)
Portable light plant (diesel)
Tychem Level A suits
Tychem Level B coveralls
Tyvek coveralls
 
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY. A sudden or unexpected release of any
substance that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics, presents a direct and immediate threat to public
safety or the environment and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat.
(Ord. 2008-4-1, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 32.03 RECOVERY AUTHORIZATION AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The county is hereby empowered to recover expenses incurred by virtue
of the county’s or other local governmental agencies’ response to a hazardous
materials emergency, aggravated fire emergency or an aggravated medical
emergency from any person, corporation, partnership or other individual or
entity who caused such an emergency, pursuant to the following procedure.
      (1)   The County Sheriff’s Emergency Management Department shall
determine responsibility for the emergency or response as defined above and
notify the responsible party by mail of the department’s determination of
responsibility and the expenses to be recovered.
      (2)   The notice shall specify that the determined responsible party may
appeal the department’s decision before a hearing officer designated by the
County Commission and establish a date by which the notice of appeal shall be
filed. The appeal date shall be not less than 15 days from the date of the
notice.
   (B)   (1)   In the event the determined responsible party appeals the
determination, the hearing officer shall hold a hearing to consider any issues
raised by the appeal, at which hearing the appealing party and the Sheriff’s
Department and/or other local government shall be entitled to present evidence
in support of their respective positions.
      (2)   After the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a recommendation
to the County Commission, which shall issue a decision determining
responsibility and assessing expenses. The Commission may adopt, modify or
remand the recommendation of the hearing examiner for further proceedings. The
Commission may, in its sole discretion, hear additional evidence prior to
issuing its decision.
(Ord. 2008-4-1, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 32.04 NO ADMISSION OF LIABILITY.
   The payment of expenses determined owing under this subchapter does not
constitute:
   (A)   An admission of liability or negligence in any legal action for
damages; or
   (B)   A criminal fine.
(Ord. 2008-4-1, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 32.05 ACTION TO RECOVER EXPENSE.
   In the event the party or parties determined to be responsible for the
repayment of expenses incurred due to the county’s or other local agencies’
response to such an emergency fail to make payment to the county within 30 days
after a final administrative determination of any appeal to the county, or 30
days from the deadline for appeal in the event no appeal is filed, the county
may initiate legal action to recover from the determined responsible party the
expenses determined to be owing, including the county’s reasonable attorney
fees.
(Ord. 2008-4-1, passed 4-21-2008)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Sales and Use Tax
   
33.001   Title
   
33.002   Purpose
   
33.003   Administration
   
33.004   Sales and use tax
Optional County Sales and Use Tax
   
33.015   Title
   
33.016   Statutory authority
   
33.017   Purpose
   
33.018   Imposition; amount
   
33.019   Statutes adopted by reference
   
33.020   Administration collection and distribution by state
   
33.021   Exemptions
Residential Property Tax Exemptions
   
33.035   Authority and purpose
   
33.036   Procedure
   
33.037   Criteria
   
33.038   Grandfather provision
   
33.039   Conflict
   
33.040   Incorporation provision
Transient Room Tax
   
33.055   Title
   
33.056   Purpose
   
33.057   Statutes adopted by reference
   
33.058   “Transient” defined
   
33.059   Tax imposed amount
   
33.060   Exclusions
   
33.061   Convention Bureau Special Reserve Fund
   
33.062   Contributions and donations permitted
   
33.063   Audits
   
33.064   Remittance of tax
   
33.065   Appeals
   
33.066   Violations; interest
Tourism, Recreation, Cultural and Convention Facilities Tax
   
33.080   Provisions
   
33.081   Statutory authority
   
33.082   Definitions
   
33.083   Imposition; amount
   
33.084   Use of revenue
   
33.085   Collection
   
33.086   Effective date
Annual Tax Sale
   
33.100   Purpose
   
33.101   Redemption rights
   
33.102   Bidder registration procedures
   
33.103   Prohibition of collusive bidding
   
33.104   Conflict of interest
   
33.105   Criteria for accepting or rejecting bids
   
33.106   Criteria for granting bidder preference
   
33.107   Criteria for striking properties to the county
   
33.108   Payment methods and procedures
   
33.109   Contesting bids
   
33.110   Sale rectification
   
33.111   Disclaimers with respect to sale procedures, actions
   
33.112   Miscellaneous procedures
Fiscal Regulations Generally
   
33.125   Central Utah District Health Department financial officer designated
 
   
33.999   Penalty
SALES AND USE TAX
§ 33.001 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the
County of Sevier.”
(Prior Code, § 3.04.010) (Ord. 1990-1, passed - -)
§ 33.002 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The forty-eighth session of the State Legislature has authorized the
counties and municipalities of the state to enact sales and use tax ordinances
imposing a 1% tax.
   (B)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to conform the sales and use tax
of the municipality to the requirements of the Sales and Use Tax Act, U.C.A.
Title 59, Chapter 12, as currently amended.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.020) (Ord. 1990-1, passed - -)
§ 33.003 ADMINISTRATION.
   The county shall contract with the State Tax Commission to perform all
functions incident to the administration or operation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.030) (Ord. 1990-1, passed - -; Ord. 1994-9-2, passed - -)
§ 33.004 SALES AND USE TAX.
   (A)   (1)   From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this subchapter, there is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax
upon every retail sale of tangible personal property, services and meals made
within the county at the rate of 1%.
      (2)   An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption
in the county of tangible personal property from any retailer on or after the
operative date of the ordinance codified in this subchapter at the rate of 1%
of the sales price of the property.
      (3)   (a)   For the purpose of this subchapter, all retail sales shall be
presumed to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the
retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common
carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. In the event a retailer
has no permanent place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be as determined under the rules and regulations
prescribed by and adopted by the State Tax Commission.
         (b)   Public utilities as defined by U.C.A. Title 54 shall not be
obligated to determine the place or places within any county or municipality
where public utilities services are rendered, but the place of sale or the
sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to the county shall be as
determined by the State Tax Commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and
other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
   (B)   (1)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Act, all of the
provisions of U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, as amended, are in force and effect
on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subchapter insofar as
they relate to sales taxes, excepting U.C.A. §§ 59-12-101 et al are adopted and
made a part of the chapter as though fully set forth herein.
      (2)   Wherever, and to the extent that in U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12,
the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the county
shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this division (B)(2) shall be deemed
to require substitution of the name of the county for the word “state” when
that word is used as part of the title of the state’s Tax Commission, or of the
State Constitution, nor shall the name of the county be substituted for that of
the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require
action to be taken by or against the county or any agency thereof rather than
by or against the state’s Tax Commission in performing the functions incident
to the administration or operation of this subchapter.
      (3)   If a license has been issued, an additional license shall not be
required by reason of this section.
      (4)   There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by
which the tax is measured the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the
state upon a retailer or consumer; and the gross receipts from the sale of or
the cost of storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property
upon which a sales or use tax has become due by reason of the sale transaction
to any other municipality or other county in the state under the sales or use
tax ordinance enacted by that county or municipality in accordance with the
Sales and Use Tax Act.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.040) (Ord. 1990-1, passed - -) Penalty, see §
33.999
OPTIONAL COUNTY SALES AND USE TAX
§ 33.015 TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this subchapter shall be known as the “Optional
County Sales and Use Tax.”
(Ord. 97-6-1, passed 6-16-1997)
§ 33.016 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The authority for imposing this tax is derived from U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter
12, Part 11.
(Ord. 97-6-1, passed 6-16-1997)
Editor’s note:
   U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, former Part 9, Sales Tax Refund for Qualified
Emergency Food
    Agencies (U.C.A. §§ 59-12-901 and 59-12-902) has been repealed.
§ 33.017 PURPOSE.
   The ordinance codified in this subchapter is enacted to provide the county
with a source of revenue to allow the county to more effectively carry out its
role as a political and legal subdivision of the state. The Board of County
Commissioners hereby directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted and
construed to accomplish this stated purpose.
(Ord. 97-6-1, passed 6-16-1997)
§ 33.018 IMPOSITION; AMOUNT.
   (A)   In addition to all other taxes imposed, the county does hereby impose
and levy for collection a sales and use tax of one-fourth of 1% upon the sales
and uses described in U.C.A. § 59-12-103(1), as amended, subject to the
exemptions provided for in U.C.A. § 59-12-104, as amended. This tax is imposed
upon all sales and uses made in the county, including sales and uses made
within the corporate limits of the cities and towns of the county.
   (B)   Provisions of this subchapter shall be subject to the provisions of
the sales and use tax laws of the state, to which reference is hereinafter made
in this subchapter and which are hereby enacted and made a part of this
subchapter as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 97-6-1, passed 6-16-1997)
§ 33.019 STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the County Option Sales and Use Tax Act,
all the provisions of U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 1, as amended, in force
and effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subchapter
insofar as they relate to the tax imposed by this subchapter, except U.C.A. §§
59-12-101 and Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 11 thereof, are adopted and made a
part of this subchapter as though fully set forth herein.
   (B)   Wherever, and to the extent that in U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, Part
1, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this
county shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this division (B) shall be
deemed to require substitution of the name of the county for the word “state”
when that word is used as part of the title of the State Tax Commission or the
State Constitution, nor shall the name of the county be substituted for that of
the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require
action to be taken by or against the county or any agency thereof rather than
by or against the State Tax Commission in performing the functions incident to
the administration or operation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 97-6-1, passed 6-16-1997)
§ 33.020 ADMINISTRATION COLLECTION AND DISTRIBUTION BY STATE.
   (A)   (1)   Taxes imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall be levied at the
same time and collected in the same manner as provided for in U.C.A. §§ 59-12-
201 et seq., as amended, except that the revenue derived from the tax is not
subject to the collection and distribution procedures established pursuant to
the provisions of U.C.A. § 59-12-205(2), as amended.
      (2)   Revenues collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be distributed
in accordance with U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 11 and the rules adopted
by the State Tax Commission pursuant to U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 11.
All revenues so collected shall be revenues of either the county or of any
other county entitled to distribution of the same pursuant to the statute.
   (B)   Any records, tax returns or other information of any person,
corporation, company or other group or organization subject to the taxes
imposed by this subchapter which relate to the calculation, collection or
remittance to the State Tax Commission of such taxes shall be subject to
review, inspection and auditing by the county.
   (C)   The fee charged to the county by the State Tax Commission under U.C.A.
§ 59-12-206, as amended, shall be based on the distribution amount resulting
after all the applicable distribution calculations under U.C.A. § 59-12-1102
have been made.
(Ord. 97-6-1, passed 6-16-1997)
§ 33.021 EXEMPTIONS.
   The sale, storage use or other consumption of tangible personal property
which is exempt from sales or use taxation pursuant to U.C.A. § 59-12-104 is
exempt from the application of the Optional County Sales and Use Tax.
(Ord. 97-6-1, passed 6-16-1997)
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
§ 33.035 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   Utah Constitution Article XIII § 3(2)(a)(iv) and U.C.A. §§ 59-2-102(34) and
59-2-103(3) provide that a residential exemption from property tax of up to 45%
is available for residences, and the State Legislature enacted U.C.A. § 59-2-
103.5, establishing procedures to obtain an exemption for residential property
and authorizing the county legislative body to adopt an ordinance for the
allowance of a residential exemption for residential property.
(Ord. 2003-3-1, passed 3-3-2002)
§ 33.036 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   (1)   All owners of residential property as defined in U.C.A. § 59-2-
102(34) shall submit an application to the County Board of Equalization for
exemption from property taxes for residential property used as a primary
residence not later than March 1 of the current tax year.
      (2)   The application shall include the following information:
         (a)   Property parcel number and location address;
         (b)   Name of the applicant;
         (c)   Basis of the applicant’s knowledge of the use of the property;
         (d)   Description of the use of the property;
         (e)   Evidence of domicile of the inhabitant(s) of the property; and
         (f)   Signature of all owners of the property and a certification that
the property is residential property.
   (B)   In the event that an application is not timely filed, an exemption may
be granted by the Board of Equalization on an individual appeal basis for the
current tax year only. Applications for exemption shall be accepted for the
current year only.
   (C)   The County Board of Equalization may require an owner of the
residential property to file the application described in division (A) above
if:
      (1)   The residential property was ineligible for the residential
exemption authorized under U.C.A. § 59-2-103 during the calendar year
immediately preceding the calendar year for which the owner is seeking to claim
the residential exemption for that residential property;
      (2)   The ownership interest in the property changes; or
      (3)   The County Board of Equalization determines that there is reason to
believe that the property no longer qualifies for the residential exemption in
accordance with U.C.A. § 59-2-103.
   (D)   The County Board of Equalization or Assessor may request or collect
information sufficient to verify the primary residence status and make the
determination if the property is entitled to the residential exemption.
   (E)   If an applicant requests a property be designated as a primary
residence, the residential exemption shall not be granted without clear and
convincing evidence that the property serves as the primary residence. The
burden of proof shall remain at all times with the applicant.
(Ord. 2003-3-1, passed 3-3-2002)
§ 33.037 CRITERIA.
   (A)   (1)   A PRIMARY RESIDENCE means the location where domicile has been
established. DOMICILE means the place where an individual has a true, fixed,
permanent home and principal establishment, and to which place he or she has
(whenever he or she is absent) the intention of returning. It is the place in
which a person has voluntarily fixed the habitation of himself or herself and
family, not for a mere special or temporary purpose but with the present
intention of making a permanent home.
      (2)   After domicile has been established, two things are necessary to
create a new domicile: first, an abandonment of the old domicile, and second,
the intention and establishment of a new domicile. The mere intention to
abandon a domicile once established is not of itself sufficient to create a new
domicile, for before a person can be said to have changed his or her domicile,
a new domicile must be shown. Factors or objective evidence determinative of
domicile are set forth in State Code Administrative Rule R884-24P-52(5).
   (B)   To qualify for the residential exemption, a property need not be owner
occupied. Apartments and other rental housing used as a primary residence of
the occupant(s) qualify for the residential exemption upon accepted application
in accordance with §
33.036(A) of this chapter. A PRIMARY RESIDENCE does not include property used
for transient residential use or condominiums used in rental pools. In addition
to other evidence of domicile, only the primary residence which is occupied
more than six months out of the year qualifies for the residential exemption.
The residential exemption is limited to up to one acre of land per residential
dwelling unit on a single property description.
   (C)   A partial exemption may be applied against the property taxes of mixed
commercial and residential property but it is presumed that the entire property
is commercial. This presumption may be rebutted by the filing of the
application in §
33.036(A) of this chapter, which includes evidence of domicile of each
qualifying resident. The Assessor may require additional information as
necessary to make a determination of the percentage of the property qualifying
for the residential exemption.
   (D)   A partial exemption may be applied against the property taxes of
qualifying nursing homes. In addition to the information required in §
33.036(A) of this chapter, the affidavit shall include the number of residents
living at the facility and the number that have established their primary
residence at the facility; the total square footage of the facility and the
total nonresidential square footage. The Assessor may require additional
information as necessary in order to determine the percentage of eligibility of
the property for the exemption.
(Ord. 2003-3-1, passed 3-3-2002)
§ 33.038 GRANDFATHER PROVISION.
   As of the effective date of this subchapter, owner-occupied residential
property, apartments and other rental property being used as the primary
residence of the occupants, and where the property is currently listed by the
County Assessor as having a residential exemption, shall not be required to
file an application to continue its status. Owner-occupied residential
property, apartments and other rental property being used as the primary
residence of the occupants where the property is subsequently listed by the
County Assessor as having a residential exemption constructed after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this subchapter shall not be
required to file the application required by §
33.036(A) of this chapter. However, should use change from primary residence,
the property shall no longer be considered exempt and an application and
affidavit under the provision of this subchapter shall apply.
(Ord. 2003-3-1, passed 3-3-2002)
§ 33.039 CONFLICT.
   In the event of any conflict between this subchapter and state or federal
law, the provisions of the latter shall be controlling.
(Ord. 2003-3-1, passed 3-3-2002)
§ 33.040 INCORPORATION PROVISION.
   This subchapter shall incorporate the provisions of State Code
Administrative Rule 884-24P-52; criteria for determining primary residence
pursuant to U.C.A. §§ 59-2-102 and 59-2-103; and Property Tax Standard 2.10,
Primary Residential Exemption.
(Ord. 2003-3-1, passed 3-3-2002)
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
§ 33.055 TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this subchapter shall be known as the “Transient
Room Tax Ordinance of the County of Sevier.”
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.056 PURPOSE.
   The Board of Commissioners declares that the ordinance codified in this
subchapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and
directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish these
purposes:
   (A)   To adopt a transient room tax ordinance that complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 31, and
U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 3, as amended;
   (B)   To adopt a transient room tax ordinance that incorporates provisions
identical to those of U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 31, and U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter
12, Part 3, as amended;
   (C)   To adopt a transient room tax ordinance that imposes a tax of not to
exceed 4.25% and provide a measure therefor that can be administered and
collected by the county in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to
the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Tax
Commission in administering and collecting the sale and use taxes of the state;
and
   (D)   To adopt a transient room tax ordinance that can be administered in a
manner that will provide funds for the purposes of establishing, financing and
promoting tourism, recreation and convention bureaus and such other purposes as
have been authorized by law for the expenditure of transient room taxes, and
for that purpose create, at the discretion of the county, a reserve fund
comprised of any funds collected but not expended during any financial year.
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2010-9-1, passed 9-8-2010)
§ 33.057 STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   All applicable provision of U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 31, as amended, and
U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 3, are hereby incorporated herein and made a
part of this subchapter by this reference thereto.
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.058 “TRANSIENT” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TRANSIENT. Any individual who occupies any suite, room or rooms in a motel,
hotel, motor court, inn or similar public accommodation for fewer than 30
consecutive days.
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.059 TAX IMPOSED AMOUNT.
   (A)   Pursuant to U.C.A. § 59-12-301(1)(a)(ii), the county hereby imposes a
transient room tax at the rate of 4.57% on charges for accommodations and
services described in U.C.A. § 59-12-103(1)(i), including short-term rentals of
tourist homes, hotels, motels, trailer courts and similar accommodations.
   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 31, and U.C.A.
Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 3, as amended from time to time, all of the
provisions of U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 1, as amended, known as the
Sales and Use Tax Act, and all of the provisions of U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter
12, Part 2, as amended, known as the Local Sales and Use Tax Act of the state,
are hereby adopted and made a part of this subchapter as though fully set forth
herein to the extent the said provisions are relevant and pertinent to the
administration and the collection of taxes by the county.
   (C)   Wherever and to the extent that in U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, Part
1, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the
county shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this division (C) shall be
deemed to require substitution of the name of the county for the word “state”
when that word is used as part of the title of the State Tax Commission or of
the State Constitution.
   (D)   If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under U.C.A. § 59-
12-106, an additional license shall not be required by reason of this section,
but a copy of such license shall be provided to the county within 30 days after
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subchapter.
   (E)   (1)   Revenue collected from this tax shall be used exclusively for
the purposes authorized in U.C.A. § 17-31-2(3), including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Establishing and promoting tourism, recreation, film production
and conventions;
         (b)   Acquiring, constructing or maintaining tourism- or recreation-
related facilities and infrastructure;
         (c)   Mitigating impacts of recreation, tourism, and conventions
through support for emergency services, law enforcement, road repair and solid
waste management; and
         (d)   Making payments for bonds issued for such purposes.
      (2)   The portion of the tax authorized under U.C.A. § 59-12-301(1)(a)
(ii) and enacted by this section shall remain with the county and is not
subject to the expenditure limitations or required distributions set forth in
U.C.A. § 59-28-103.
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2010-9-1, passed 9-8-2010; Ord. 2025-6-
1, passed 6-23-2025)
§ 33.060 EXCLUSIONS.
   There shall be excluded from the rent paid or charged by which the tax is
measured:
   (A)   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state or by any
other governmental agency upon a retailer or consumer; and
   (B)   Receipts from the sale or service charge for any food or beverage or
room service charges in conjunction with the occupancy of the suite, room or
rooms.
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.061 CONVENTION BUREAU SPECIAL RESERVE FUND.
   For the purposes authorized by this subchapter, there is hereby created a
reserve fund, to be known as the Convention Bureau Special Reserve Fund, which
shall be maintained separate and apart from general and other special funds of
the county, and in which shall be deposited any and all funds collected by
virtue of the tax imposed hereby but not expended during the fiscal year.
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.062 CONTRIBUTIONS AND DONATIONS PERMITTED.
   The county executive is authorized to accept, on behalf of the county, funds
which are contributed, donated or supplied by any person, corporation or other
governmental agency, or from any other source whatever, for the purposes
outlined in §
33.056 of this chapter, and when such funds are received, they shall be
deposited and used in the same manner as though they were derived from the tax
imposed hereby.
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.063 AUDITS.
   (A)   Any records or other information of any person, corporation, company
or other group or organization subject to the taxes imposed by this subchapter
which relate to occupancy and occupancy revenues or to the calculation,
collection or remittance to the county of said taxes shall be subject to review
and inspection by the county. Audits of such records and information or the
supporting records therefor shall be the responsibility of the State Tax
Commission.
   (B)   (1)   The records of the State Tax Commission relating to the
collection of sales and use taxes, or tourism, recreation and convention center
taxes on the same transactions which are the subject of this tax, shall be
subject to review and audit as provided in the county’s contract with the State
Tax Commission for the collection of the local sales and use tax and as
provided by law.
      (2)   The taxpayer shall also be subject to such audits and reviews by
the State Tax Commission as are provided by law.
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.064 REMITTANCE OF TAX.
   (A)   The tax shall be remitted as directed by the county and a tax return
filed on forms provided or approved by the county at such times and with such
frequency as are provided for by state law.
   (B)   All returns filed pursuant hereto shall accurately identify the
locations where the transactions occurred and the gross sales upon which the
tax for each location is computed.
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.065 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any party aggrieved by any action of the county relating to the
assessment, calculation or collection of the tax, including any notice of
deficiency issued by the county, may request a hearing by filing a written
request for hearing with the County Clerk not later than 30 days after the
effective date of the county’s action or the date of issuance of the notice of
deficiency.
   (B)   The decision of the county shall be referred by the county to the
State Tax Commission for adjudication upon receipt of a written request
received within 30 days of the county’s decision.
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 33.066 VIOLATIONS; INTEREST.
   Any person who fails to file any tax return or information required by this
subchapter, who fails to pay any tax due hereunder or who fails to timely pay
such tax shall be subject to the imposition of penalties and interest by the
county in accordance with U.C.A. §§ 59-1-401 and 59-1-402 or any successor
provision thereto.
(Ord. 2004-5-1, passed 5-17-2004)
TOURISM, RECREATION, CULTURAL AND CONVENTION FACILITIES TAX
§ 33.080 PROVISIONS.
   The ordinance codified in this subchapter shall be known as the “Tourism,
Recreation, Cultural and Convention Tax of Sevier County.”
(Ord. 03-7-7, passed 7-7-2003)
§ 33.081 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The authority for imposing the tax is derived from U.C.A. §§ 59-12-601 et
seq.
(Ord. 03-7-7, passed 7-7-2003)
§ 33.082 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONVENTION FACILITY. Any publicly owned or operated convention center,
sports arena or other facility at which conventions, conferences and other
gatherings are held and whose primary business or function is to host such
conventions, conferences and other gatherings.
   CULTURAL FACILITY. Any publicly owned or operated museum, theater, art
center, music hall or other cultural or arts facility.
   RECREATION FACILITY or TOURIST FACILITY. Any publicly owned or operated
park, campground, marina, dock, golf course, water park, historic park,
monument, planetarium, zoo, bicycle trail and other recreation- or tourist-
related facility.
   RESTAURANT. Includes any coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, soda fountain
or fast food service where food is prepared for immediate consumption.
RESTAURANT does not include any retail establishment whose primary business or
function is the sale of fuel or food items for off-premises, but not immediate,
consumption.
   SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES. Any lease or rental of a motor
vehicle not exceeding 30 days in length. A lease or rental of a motor vehicle
when made for the purpose of temporarily replacing a person’s motor vehicle
that is being repaired pursuant to a repair or insurance agreement and which is
supported by a written agreement shall not be a SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL OF A
MOTOR VEHICLE subject to taxation under this subchapter.
(Ord. 03-7-7, passed 7-7-2003)
§ 33.083 IMPOSITION; AMOUNT.
   There is levied for collection a tourism, recreation, cultural and
convention tax on the following activities at the rates set forth below:
   (A)   A tax of 1% of all sales of prepared foods and beverages that are sold
by restaurants; and
   (B)   A tax of 7% of the lease or rental amount on all short-term leases and
rentals of motor vehicles as defined herein which are made within the county.
(Ord. 03-7-7, passed 7-7-2003)
§ 33.084 USE OF REVENUE.
   The revenue from the imposition of the tax provided for in this subchapter
shall be imposed for the purpose of financing, tourism promotion and the
development, operation and maintenance of tourist, recreation, cultural and
convention facilities as defined herein.
(Ord. 03-7-7, passed 7-7-2003)
§ 33.085 COLLECTION.
   (A)   The tax imposed hereunder shall be levied at the same time and
collected in the same manner as provided for in the Local Sales and Use Tax
Act, U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 2, as amended, except that the
collection and distribution of the tax revenue is not subject to the provisions
of U.C.A. § 59-12-205(2).
   (B)   The provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Act, Part 1, as contained in
U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 1, are adopted in this subchapter as
required, except that an additional license is not required for the collection
of the tax if one has been or is issued under U.C.A. § 59-12-106, as amended.
(Ord. 03-7-7, passed 7-7-2003)
§ 33.086 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective September 1, 2003.
(Ord. 03-7-7, passed 7-7-2003)
ANNUAL TAX SALE
§ 33.100 PURPOSE.
   In order to facilitate the sale of the properties certified for the annual
real property tax sale and to provide for a consistency of procedure, when,
pursuant to U.C.A. Title 59, the County Clerk/Auditor conducts the annual real
property tax sale, the sale shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of state law and this subchapter.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.101 REDEMPTION RIGHTS.
   Property may be redeemed on behalf of the record owner by any person at any
time prior to the beginning of the tax sale. Only cash or certified funds will
be accepted in payment. Paying the delinquent amount does not grant ownership
to the individual(s) or party(s) paying all delinquent taxes, interest,
penalties and administrative costs. This only removes the property from the tax
sale.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.102 BIDDER REGISTRATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The county’s tax sale auction will be conducted via an internet
website only. Each bidder shall pre-register with the online company. The name
of the auction company will be indicated on the county’s website. Bid deposits
may be necessary to register as a bidder. This process must be completed not
later than the date and time indicated.
   (B)   Neither the county nor the online auction company can or will be held
responsible for late or misdirected bid deposits, proxy bids or any other
transmission, mailing, email or other correspondence necessary to participate
in the bid.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.103 PROHIBITION OF COLLUSIVE BIDDING.
   (A)   Collusive bidding is prohibited. COLLUSIVE BIDDING is defined as any
agreement or understanding reached by two or more parties that changes the bids
the parties would otherwise offer absent the agreement or understanding.
   (B)   The County Clerk/Auditor and/or the Board of County Commissioners have
the right to reject any bid deemed collusive.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.104 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (A)   Every county official or employee who purchases or has a substantial
interest in any business entity which purchases property at the tax sale must
disclose said interest in a sworn statement filed with the County Commission,
and a copy of which provided to the County Attorney’s Office and his or her
immediate supervisor. These disclosures are public information and shall be
available to the public for inspection.
   (B)   No official or employee may have a personal investment in a business
entity which will create a substantial conflict between his or her private
interests and his or her public duties related to the tax sale.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.105 CRITERIA FOR ACCEPTING OR REJECTING BIDS.
   (A)   All bidding shall be conducted through the online company conducting
the tax sale for the county. Bidding will advance in increments of a minimum of
$100 or as indicated on each parcel listed for sale, with the minimum
acceptable bid starting at the total amount of taxes, penalties, interest and
administrative fees owed on the parcel.
   (B)   All bids shall be considered conditional, whether or not the bid is
contested, until reviewed and accepted by the Board of County Commissioners
acting at a regularly scheduled Commission meeting. The county reserves the
right to reject any and/or all bids.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.106 CRITERIA FOR GRANTING BIDDER PREFERENCE.
   There shall be no preference given to any bidder. Bidders who make a bona
fide bid in the highest amount for a property become the successful bidder of
the property auction.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.107 CRITERIA FOR STRIKING PROPERTIES TO THE COUNTY.
   (A)   Once the County Clerk/Auditor has offered for sale all properties on
the tax sale list, all remaining properties that did not receive a minimum bid
shall be struck off and become property of the county.
   (B)   Upon any final bid being rejected, the parcel may be offered to a
bidder who offered the second highest bid in the amount of that bid. If the
second highest bidder rejects the offer, the property shall be struck off to
the county.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.108 PAYMENT METHODS AND PROCEDURES.
   All bids are an irrevocable offer to purchase the property in question. A
bidder is legally and financially responsible for all properties bid upon.
Payment in full by certified check/money order or wire transfer will be
required not later than five business days after the tax sale closes. No
personal checks shall be accepted. No financing is available. Other payment
methods may be accepted depending on the online auction company’s rules.
Premiums charged by the online auction company may be associated with the sale
of properties. This amount will be added to the winning bid and will be
included in the total purchase price paid by the buyer to the online auction
company. If the payment policy is not adhered to, the successful bidder will be
considered in default. Any bid deposits will be forfeited to the county and the
successful bidder will be banned from future sales. The county reserves the
right to pursue all available legal remedies against a non-paying bidder.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.109 CONTESTING BIDS.
   Any person wishing to contest any action taken in conjunction with the
annual real property tax sale must file a written protest with the Board of
County Commissioners within ten days after the date of the annual real property
tax sale. The Board of County Commissioners will not grant hearings for
purposes of contesting a bid or sale, but will instead render a decision based
upon all information following a review of submissions. The Board may award the
property to one of the bidders, reject all bids and order it re-offered for
sale or, upon a finding that it is in the best public interest, withdraw the
property from the sale.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.110 SALE RECTIFICATION.
   All bids accepted by the County Clerk/Auditor at the annual real property
tax sale shall be submitted to the Board of County Commissioners for
ratification. Any bid not ratified shall be deemed rejected and the bid amount
paid shall be refunded to the bidder. Upon ratification of the tax sale, the
County Clerk/Auditor shall prepare the tax deeds and deliver said deeds to the
County Recorder. The fee for recording shall be included in the administrative
costs of the sale. One deed, and only one deed, will be issued to the
successful bidder on each parcel sold.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.111 DISCLAIMERS WITH RESPECT TO SALE PROCEDURES, ACTIONS.
   Properties sold during the annual real property tax sale shall be conveyed
by tax deed. This form of deed is not a warranty deed. Any property sold
pursuant to the tax sale is without guarantee or warranty whatsoever as to
title conveyed, existence, correctness of ownership, size, boundaries,
location, condition, structures or lack of structures upon the land, liens,
titles, whether property is in compliance with zoning ordinances, mining and
reclamation regulations, building codes, buildable, developable or habitable,
or any other matter or thing whatsoever. The county also makes no warranties or
representations regarding the accuracy of the assessment of the property or the
accuracy of the description of the real estate or improvements thereon, the
availability, validity or existence of water rights associated with any of the
properties sold during the tax sale, nor as to the purchaser’s right of
possession of the property. It is the bidder’s responsibility to determine the
liabilities, including other liens and encumbrances, that exist on each
property before and after the sale. Properties are sold “as is,” and the county
is not liable in any way whatsoever for damages sustained to property purchased
from the time of the sale until the recordation of the tax deed to a purchaser.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 33.112 MISCELLANEOUS PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any property listed may be subject to a rollback tax under the
provisions of the Farmland Assessment Act, U.C.A. §§ 59-2-501 to 59-2-515.
   (B)   The County Clerk/Auditor shall have the right and authority to remove
any parcel of property from the annual real property tax sale for any reason at
any time before or during the sale. Disclosure will be made of all properties
withdrawn from the sale for reasons other than redemption during a regular
County Commission meeting.
   (C)   All individuals and entities participating in the annual real property
tax sale shall be subject to the county tax sale procedures enumerated herein,
together with all additional instructions of the online auction company.
(Ord. 2022-2-8, passed 2-28-2022)
FISCAL REGULATIONS GENERALLY
§ 33.125 CENTRAL UTAH DISTRICT HEALTH DEPARTMENT FINANCIAL OFFICER DESIGNATED.
   (A)   The executive director of the Six-County Commissioner’s Organization
is authorized to act as the Financial Officer for the Central Utah District
Health Department for the purpose of approving payroll checks, routine
expenditures and capital expenditures in conformance with U.C.A. § 17-36-43.
   (B)   Expenditures exceeding $200 shall not be made without approval of the
governing body.
   (C)   The Financial Officer shall be bonded in the sum of $20,000.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.010) (Ord. passed 10-21-1985)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
33.001 to 33.004 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not less
than $300 or imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.050)
(Ord. 1990-1, passed - -)
CHAPTER 34: COUNTY POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Appeal authority of County Recorder decisions
Review of Actions with Potential Constitutional Taking Issues
   
34.15   Policy considerations
   
34.16   Definition
   
34.17   Guidelines advisory
   
34.18   Review of decision
   
34.19   Reviewing guidelines
   
34.20   Results of review
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 APPEAL AUTHORITY OF COUNTY RECORDER DECISIONS.
   (A)   Appeal of County Recorder’s decision. Decisions of the County Recorder
may be appealed:
      (1)   By a person that is directly adversely affected as a result of the
County Recorder’s decision by alleging that the County Recorder’s decision did
not comply with rules made by the County Recorder State Standards Board under
U.C.A. Title 63C, Chapter 30; and
      (2)   Only if it is the final decision issued by the County Recorder, as
appeals of decisions made by supporting staff must be reviewed by the Recorder.
   (B)   Notice of appeal.
      (1)   An appeal must be commenced within ten business days of the adverse
order, requirement, decision or determination by filing a written notice of
appeal with the County Clerk/Auditor’s Office;
      (2)   Identify, with specificity, the decision being appealed; and
      (3)   Include the names of the appealing parties and the address, phone
number and email address of each appealing party.
   (C)   Burden of proof.
      (1)   The appellant has the burden of showing the evidence and proving
that the Recorder’s decision did not comply with rules made by the County
Recorder State Standards Board under U.C.A. Title 63C, Chapter 30.
      (2)   The County Recorder’s decision shall be upheld if supported by
substantial evidence. The hearing officer determines the correctness of a
decision of the Recorder in his or her interpretation and application rules
made by the County Recorder State Standards Board under U.C.A. Title 63C,
Chapter 30. Only those decisions in which the County Recorder has applied rules
made by the County Recorder State Standards Board under U.C.A. Title 63C,
Chapter 30 may be appealed.
   (D)   Hearing officer appointment and authority.
      (1)   The appeal authority shall be the Sevier County Commission or a
hearing officer appointed by the County Commission.
      (2)   When a notice of appeal is filed, the County Clerk/Auditor shall,
within ten business days, send the notice to the hearing officer. The hearing
officer will hold a scheduling conference with the appellant and the County
Recorder.
      (3)   The hearing officer may require written briefs or memorandum of the
parties as the hearing officer deems necessary. At the hearing, the appellant
must appear in person or by agent.
   (E)   Appeal process.
      (1)   The hearing officer must issue a decision in writing within 15
business days of the final hearing, which constitutes a final decision under
U.C.A. § 17-50-340, as amended.
      (2)   Any person adversely affected by a final decision of the hearing
officer may petition the Sixth District Court for review of the decision as
permitted by law.
      (3)   The hearing officer may order his or her decision stayed pending
District Court review if the hearing officer finds it to be in the best
interest of the county.
(Ord. 2023-11-1, passed 11-13-2023)
REVIEW OF ACTIONS WITH POTENTIAL CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING ISSUES
§ 34.15 POLICY CONSIDERATIONS.
   (A)   There is an underlying policy in the county strongly favoring the
careful consideration of matters involving constitutional taking claims in
fairness to the owner of private property bringing the claim and in view of the
uncertainty and expense involved in defending lawsuits alleging such issues. At
the same time, the legitimate role of government in lawfully regulating real
property must be preserved and the public’s right to require the dedication or
exaction of property consistent with the Constitution.
   (B)   Consistent with this policy, it is desired that a procedure be
established for the review of actions that may involve the issue of a
constitutional taking. These provisions are to assist governments in
considering decisions that may involve constitutional takings. It is intended
that a procedure for such a review be provided, as well as guidelines for such
considerations. This subchapter is further intended and shall be construed to
objectively and fairly review claims by citizens that a specific government
action should require payment of just compensation yet preserve the ability of
the county to lawfully regulate real property and fulfill its other duties and
functions.
(Ord. 1995-2-1, passed 2-21-1995)
§ 34.16 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING.
      (1)   Actions by the county involving the physical taking or exaction of
private real property that might require compensation to a private real
property owner because of:
         (a)   The Fifth or Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States;
         (b)   Utah Constitution Article I § 22; or
         (c)   Any court ruling governing the physical taking or exaction of
private real property by a government entity.
      (2)   Actions by the county involving the physical taking or exaction of
private real property is not a CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING if the physical taking or
exaction:
         (a)   Bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest;
and
         (b)   Is roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an
individualized property basis, both in nature and extent to the impact of the
proposed development on the legitimate government interest.
(Ord. 1995-2-1, passed 2-21-1995)
§ 34.17 GUIDELINES ADVISORY.
   The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of
this section are advisory and shall not be construed to expand or limit the
scope of the county’s liability for a constitutional taking. The reviewing body
or person shall not be required to make any determination under this subchapter
except pursuant to §
34.18 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1995-2-1, passed 2-21-1995)
§ 34.18 REVIEW OF DECISION.
   (A)   Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a
constitutional taking of his or her private real property shall request a
review of a final decision of any officer, employee, board, commission or
council.
   (B)   The following are specific procedures established for such a review.
      (1)   The person requesting a review must have obtained a final and
authoritative determination, internally within the county, relative to the
decision from which they are requesting review.
      (2)   Within 30 days from the date of the final decision that gave rise
to the concern that a constitutional taking has occurred, the person requesting
the review shall file in writing, in the office of the County Commission, a
request for review of that decision. A copy shall also be filed with the County
Attorney.
      (3)   The County Commission, or an individual or body designated by the
County Commission, shall immediately set a time to review the decision that
gave rise to the constitutional taking claim.
      (4)   In addition to the written request for review, the applicant must
submit, prior to the date of the review, the following:
         (a)   Name of the applicant requesting review;
         (b)   Name and business address of current owner of the property, form
of ownership, whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit
corporation, partnership, joint venture or other, and if owned by a
corporation, partnership, or joint venture, name and address of all principal
shareholders or partners;
         (c)   A detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there
has been a constitutional taking;
         (d)   A detailed description of the property taken;
         (e)   Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property
taken, including the date and cost at the date the property was acquired. This
should include any evidence of the value of that same property before and after
the alleged constitutional taking and the name of the party from whom
purchased, including the relationship, if any, between the person requesting a
review and the party from whom the property was acquired;
         (f)   Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such
as, but not limited to, fee simple ownership, leasehold interest;
         (g)   Terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of
a full or partial interest in the property in the three years prior to the date
of application;
         (h)   All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose,
including financing, offering for sale or ad valorem taxation, within the three
years prior to the date of application;
         (i)   The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the property for
the previous three years;
         (j)   All information concerning current mortgages or other loans
secured by the property, including name of the mortgagee or lender, current
interest rate, remaining loan balance and term of the loan and other
significant provisions, including, but not limited to, right of purchasers to
assume the loan;
         (k)   All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any, within the previous three years;
         (l)   All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the
petitioner within the previous three years concerning feasibility of
development or utilization of the property;
         (m)   For income-producing property, itemized income and expense
statements from the property for the previous three years;
         (n)   Information from a title policy or other source showing all
recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the property; and
         (o) The County Commission or its designee may request additional
information reasonably necessary, in its opinion, to arrive at a conclusion
concerning whether there has been a constitutional taking.
      (5)   An application shall not be deemed to be “complete” or “submitted”
until the reviewing body/official certifies to the applicant that all the
material and information required above has been received by the county. The
reviewing body/official shall promptly notify the applicant of any incomplete
application.
      (6)   The County Commission or an individual or body designated by them
shall hear all the evidence related to and submitted by the applicant, county
or any other interested party.
      (7)   A final decision on the review shall be rendered within 14 days
from the date the complete application for review has been received by the
County Commission. The decision of the Commission or designee regarding the
results of the review shall be given in writing to the applicant and the
officer, employee, board, commission or council that rendered the final
decision that gave rise to the constitutional taking claim.
      (8)   If the County Commission fails to hear and decide the review within
14 days, the decision appealed from shall be presumed to be approved.
(Ord. 1995-2-1, passed 2-21-1995)
§ 34.19 REVIEWING GUIDELINES.
   (A)   The County Commission shall review the facts and information presented
by the applicant to determine whether or not the action by the county
constitutes a constitutional taking as defined in this subchapter.
   (B)   In doing so, it shall consider:
      (1)   Whether the physical taking or exaction of the private real
property bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest;
      (2)   Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists for the action
taken by the county; and
      (3)   Is the property and exaction taken roughly proportionate and
reasonably related, on an individual property basis, both in nature and extent
to the impact caused by the activities that are the subject of the decision
being reviewed.
(Ord. 1995-2-1, passed 2-21-1995)
§ 34.20 RESULTS OF REVIEW.
   After completing the review, the reviewing person or body shall make a
determination regarding the above issues and, where determined to be necessary
and appropriate, shall make a recommendation to the officer, employee, board,
commission or council that made the decision that gave rise to the
constitutional taking claim.
(Ord. 1995-2-1, passed 2-21-1995)
CHAPTER 35: FEE SCHEDULES
Section
Fee Setting for County Services
   
35.01   Authorization
   
35.02   Schedule approval; public availability
   
35.03   Amendment
   
35.04   Basis of fees; exclusions
Editor’s note:
   The fees will be published separately.
FEE SETTING FOR COUNTY SERVICES
§ 35.01 AUTHORIZATION.
   Each department, agency and office of the county is authorized to assess and
collect reasonable fees for items or services provided to the general public.
(Ord. 2012-5-2, passed 5-14-2012)
§ 35.02 SCHEDULE APPROVAL; PUBLIC AVAILABILITY.
   (A)   Fee schedules shall be submitted to and approved by the County
Commission prior to imposing fee requirements.
   (B)   Fee schedules shall be posted and available for public viewing.
(Ord. 2012-5-2, passed 5-14-2012)
§ 35.03 AMENDMENT.
   Fee schedules may be amended by the County Commission from time to time as
circumstances require.
(Ord. 2012-5-2, passed 5-14-2012)
§ 35.04 BASIS OF FEES; EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   All fees shall be based on the actual cost of complying with the
request or service, which may include the cost of staff time and the value of
expended supplies and resources.
   (B)   These fees shall not include, and may be in addition to, any fees,
charges, costs, deposits or reimbursements which have been established by
statute or contract.
(Ord. 2012-5-2, passed 5-14-2012)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
Garbage Collection and Disposal Generally
   
50.01   Deposition of garbage and the like
   
50.02   Accumulation of garbage and the like
   
50.03   Hauling garbage
County Landfill
   
50.15   Residential waste
   
50.16   Covered vehicles
   
50.17   Out-of-county sources
   
50.18   Landfill fees
   
50.19   Water and washing facilities
   50.20   Rules and regulations
   
50.21   Business hours
   
50.22   Classification of waste
   
50.23   Special conditions
   
50.24   Municipal cleanup
   
50.25   Tires
   
50.26   Landfill fees
   
50.27   Contaminated items
Solid Waste Convenience Stations
   
50.40   Prohibited waste materials
   
50.41   Commercial and large vehicles
   
50.42   Unauthorized items to be deposited at landfill facility
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL GENERALLY
§ 50.01 DEPOSITION OF GARBAGE AND THE LIKE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or deposit in or
upon any of the public streets, alleys or public lands (except properly
maintained public garbage disposal sites) within the county any rubbish,
garbage, dead animals, ashes, debris, grass cuttings, leaves, tree limbs,
branches, sticks, stones, junk, cast-off clothing, papers, printed matter, dirt
or other discarded thing or matter incident to home or house cleaning or yard
cleaning.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.010) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.02 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND THE LIKE.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit garbage, swill,
rubbish, dead animals, ashes or similar waste to accumulate or remain on or
about the premises under the control of such person for such period of time as
to become objectionable or unsanitary; and every person, firm or corporation is
required to remove or provide for the removal of such garbage, swill, rubbish,
dead animals, ashes and similar wastes before the same become objectionable or
unsanitary.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.020) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 HAULING GARBAGE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, either as an individual or engaged in
the business of hauling garbage, rubbish, swill, ashes, manure or matter of any
kind, to permit or allow any of such matter to fall upon or remain in any
street, alley or on any public property within the county, or to deposit the
same at any place except properly maintained public garbage disposal sites.
   (B)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to convey, transport or haul
through or upon any of the state highways, county roads or other public
streets, or to transport from any place within the county to a properly
maintained public garbage disposal site, any garbage, rubbish, swill, slop,
market waste, manure, pulp or other similar refuse except and unless the
vehicle or truck in which the same is conveyed, transported or hauled is
covered sufficiently to prevent the contents of said vehicle from falling
therefrom.
      (2)   This provision shall not be construed to apply to the incidental
use of public roads by farm vehicles transporting manure for deposit on farm
grounds in close proximity to the source of such material.
   (C)   (1)   Provided that where, because of the type of material being
conveyed or transported, it is impractical or impossible to cover the same, the
County Clerk/Auditor may issue a permit authorizing the conveyance or
transportation of the specified material without a covering upon the condition
that a bond in the amount of $500 be provided to insure that no such material
shall remain upon or in any street, alley or any public property following the
completion of such conveyance or transportation.
      (2)   Such bond shall be returned ten days after the permittee files a
notice of completion of the activity and demonstrates compliance with this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.030) Penalty, see §
50.99
COUNTY LANDFILL
§ 50.15 RESIDENTIAL WASTE.
   (A)   A landfill garbage disposal fee shall be assessed to each resident of
the county.
   (B)   Residential landfill charges for home pickup shall be collected within
incorporated areas by the municipality and remitted to the county.
   (C)   Home pickup charges for residents within the county and outside of
municipal corporate boundaries shall be collected directly by the county.
   (D) Residents may deliver their own waste material to the landfill but may
be charged fees according to the current fee schedule.
(Ord. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.16 COVERED VEHICLES.
   All vehicles delivering garbage and waste to the landfill must be covered or
tied-on to avoid spilling and littering. Any vehicle not covered or secured by
ties may be charged a cover violation fine.
(Ord. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.17 OUT-OF-COUNTY SOURCES.
   No waste originating out of the county shall be accepted without special
contract arrangements and payment.
(Ord. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.18 LANDFILL FEES.
   (A)   All fees, charges and fines shall be set forth in a separate schedule
approved by the County Commission, which may be amended from time to time as
necessary.
   (B)   Late fees shall apply to any bill or account which is more than 31
days past due and shall include collection costs, including attorney fees.
   (C)   Any patron who incurs late fees or violates the rules of the landfill
may be subject to “Cash Only” services at the discretion of the Landfill
Supervisor.
(Ord. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.19 WATER AND WASHING FACILITIES.
   Landfill water and washing facilities shall be limited to county personnel
use and county-owned vehicles only. Private and individual landfill users are
prohibited from any use of water or washing facilities at the landfill without
prior authorization of the Landfill Supervisor.
(Ord. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.20 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The following shall constitute the policies and procedures, rules and
regulations governing the operation of the county landfill. They shall be
posted and published when necessary to advise the public, patrons and employees
of these requirements.
(Res. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014)
§ 50.21 BUSINESS HOURS.
   (A)   The county landfill will be open from 8:00 a.m to 5:30 p.m., Monday
through Saturday.
   (B)    The landfill will be closed on all legal holidays. Special scheduling
shall be made with commercial haulers when holidays create extensive delays
where waste can accumulate. During special scheduling, only commercial haulers
shall be allowed access to the landfill.
(Res. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.22 CLASSIFICATION OF WASTE.
   (A)   Landfill customers and haulers shall disclose the types and kinds of
waste material they are delivering to the landfill. Waste material shall be
classified by employees as either “clean” or “mixed” waste.
   (B)   Specialty items such as metal, concrete, tires, wire, large animals,
contaminated soils and the like shall be deposited in specific locations within
the landfill boundaries for purposes of proper disposal and/or recycling at the
direction of landfill employees. Additional fees may apply to specialty items.
   (C)   Clean waste is generally separated concrete, asphalt, soils, bricks,
walls, timbers, sheetrock, roofing shingles and similar waste.
   (D)   Mixed waste is generally normal household waste and material generated
by commercial operations, such as retail, restaurant and general merchandising
businesses. It may also include greases and septage from septic tanks.
(Res. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.23 SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Iron and white goods, including washers, dryers, refrigerators and the
like, shall not be dumped with the regular garbage and are required to be
segregated and deposited at a place of deposit designated by landfill
operators. No iron and white goods can be picked up with the regular garbage
truck pickup without segregation in order that the iron goods can be deposited
at the segregated location.
   (B)   No hazardous waste can be dumped at the landfill. Hazardous waste
shall be defined as set forth in U.C.A. § 19-6-102, as amended.
   (C)   Storage drums of ten to 50 gallons or more can only be dumped with the
lids off or, in the alternative, with several holes drilled into the drums.
   (D)   Tree trunks, timbers and pipe and metal shall not be accepted at the
landfill unless cut in lengths of eight feet or less.
(Res. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.24 MUNICIPAL CLEANUP.
   (A)   A period will be scheduled in April and/or May of each year and shall
be designated for municipal cleanup.
   (B)   Municipal cleanups for cities and towns will be encouraged. The waste
will all be weighed and billed to the originating city or town. Participation
by the county in the abatement of the billed fees must have prior approval of
the County Commission, specific amount of waste exempted and time period for
acceptance of waste.
   (C)   Municipal authorities will need to provide a procedure to identify
participating citizens and landfill employees shall have the discretion to
determine if haulers are a part of a community clean-up program or a private
commercial hauler.
(Res. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014)
§ 50.25 TIRES.
   Tires shall be subject to separate fees according to size. Tires larger than
22:50:24 shall not be accepted at the landfill with the exception of
agricultural vehicle tires which shall be allowed. An additional fee will be
assessed for tires which are not dismounted from the wheel.
(Res. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.26 LANDFILL FEES.
   (A)   Container charges.
      (1)   Large roll-off containers (15, 20 or 30 yards): The county shall
charge the hauler for any waste material coming into the landfill utilizing
roll-off containers.
      (2)   Small containers (three to five yards): Commercial haulers shall
submit monthly or quarterly reports showing the number of containers serviced.
   (B)   Mixed loads. Waste loads that are not separated shall be charged a
penalty fee according to the current fee schedule. Determination of mixed loads
shall be at the sole discretion of landfill personnel.
(Res. 2014-7-1, passed 7-14-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.27 CONTAMINATED ITEMS.
   (A)   Waste deemed contaminated may be accepted at the county landfill on an
individual basis after testing, verification and prior written permission of
the Landfill Supervisor.
   (B)   Subject to periodic review and revision by this Commission, the fee
for accepted contaminated waste shall be $16 per ton.
(Res. 2007-12-1, passed 12-2-2007)
SOLID WASTE CONVENIENCE STATIONS
§ 50.40 PROHIBITED WASTE MATERIALS.
   No person, company, corporation or enterprise shall deposit or cause to be
deposited in the bins at the solid waste convenience stations operated by the
county the following waste materials:
   (A)   Railroad ties, timber, lumber, limbs, logs, poles, pipes or other
solid objects exceeding six feet in length;
   (B)   Ashes, provided ashes may be dumped at specific sites identified for
ash dumping at such convenience stations;
   (C)   No concrete, masonry, asphalt, rock or metal exceeding two feet in
length, width or depth; or
   (D)   Vehicle bodies or vehicle parts, tires, oil, sewage, animal waste or
animal byproducts.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.010) (Ord. 10-88, passed - -) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.41 COMMERCIAL AND LARGE VEHICLES.
   All commercial vehicles and all vehicles larger than pickup trucks must
deposit waste at the county landfill facility and are prohibited from dumping
waste at the convenience stations.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.020) (Ord. 10-88, passed - -) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.42 UNAUTHORIZED ITEMS TO BE DEPOSITED AT LANDFILL FACILITY.
   Items not authorized to be deposited at the convenience stations must be
deposited directly at the county landfill facility pursuant to directions of
the landfill operators, provided hazardous waste shall not be disposed of at
any site in the county.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.030) (Ord. 10-88, passed - -) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   All persons, firms and corporations having accumulations of garbage
and similar wastes or any other materials described or other objectionable
materials as defined in §§
50.01 to 50.03 of this chapter are charged with the responsibility of making
proper arrangements for the removal thereof not inconsistent with the
provisions of §§
50.01 to 50.03 of this chapter; and any person, firm or corporation failing so
to do and permitting the accumulation thereof, or who shall permit the same to
fall from vehicles carrying the same, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and in
addition, the County Commission may, in its discretion, arrange for the removal
of any such accumulated garbage and/or rubbish from such premises and may
charge the cost of such removal to the owners or occupant of the premises on
which such accumulation was permitted and may proceed by legal action to
collect such expense if not promptly paid on demand.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.040)
   (C)   Violation of any provision of §§ 50.30 to 50.32 of this chapter
constitutes a Class B misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 8.04.040)
(Ord. 10-88, passed - -)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
      
72.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Illegally Parked and Abandoned Vehicles
   
70.01   Vehicles a nuisance
   
70.02   Abandonment; improperly registered or stolen vehicles; impounding
   
70.03   Reclaiming impounded vehicles
   
70.04   Waiving impounding fees, storage charges on stolen vehicles
   
70.05   Fees and expenses a lien
   
70.06   Notice of impounding
   
70.07   Form of notice
   
70.08   Proof of notice
   
70.09   Sale of unclaimed vehicles
   
70.10   Certificate of sale
   
70.11   Disposition of money received
   
70.12   Record to be kept
   
70.13   Designation of vehicle pound
   
70.14   Impounding does not preclude criminal prosecution
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned or inoperative vehicle nuisances, see
Chapter 91
ILLEGALLY PARKED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 70.01 VEHICLES A NUISANCE.
   (A)   Every vehicle parked upon a public street of the county in violation
of any ordinances of the county or laws of the state, if unoccupied, is
declared to be an obstruction in said street and a public nuisance.
   (B)   Every vehicle abandoned upon any street of the county is declared to
be an obstruction in said street and a public nuisance.
   (C)   Every vehicle parked upon a public street of the county longer than 72
hours is declared to be an obstruction in said street and a public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.02 ABANDONMENT; IMPROPERLY REGISTERED OR STOLEN VEHICLES; IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   Every police officer of the county is authorized summarily to abate
every nuisance defined in §
70.01 of this chapter wherever found by removing or causing such vehicle to be
removed and impounded in any authorized vehicle pound. Every police officer of
the county is authorized to seize and take possession of any vehicle which is
being operated upon the public streets of the county with improper
registration, or which any motor number, manufacturer’s number or
identification mark has been defaced, altered or obliterated, and to remove or
cause such vehicle to be removed and impounded in any authorized vehicle pound.
   (B)   Every police officer so impounding a vehicle shall, within 24 hours,
make written report thereof to the Chief of Police specifying the
manufacturer’s trade name and model of the impounded vehicle, its license and
motor number, the time and place where the vehicle was taken and impounded and
the cause of impounding.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.020)
§ 70.03 RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
   The owner of an impounded vehicle may reclaim and obtain the release thereof
upon, and only upon, full compliance with the following conditions precedent.
   (A)   He or she shall furnish to the County Sheriff satisfactory evidence of
his or her identity and his or her ownership of said vehicle.
   (B)   He or she shall pay to the county a pound service fee of $15, which
fee is levied upon the impounding of every such vehicle. Said sum is determined
to be the reasonable cost of impounding a vehicle.
   (C)   He or she shall pay to the county all of its storage costs and
expenses incident to storing the vehicle in the authorized vehicle pound and to
giving notice of the impounding thereof as hereinafter provided.
   (D)   If a criminal charge is made against the owner of such vehicle for the
illegal parking thereof or for the operation thereof while said vehicle is
improperly registered or without proper license plates, he or she shall sign a
written promise to appear at a time certain, as fixed by the County Sheriff, to
answer such charge or, if required by the County Sheriff, shall post bail to
secure such appearance. It is specifically provided, however, that if the owner
of said vehicle resides outside of the county, the posting of bail, as fixed by
the court to answer such charge, shall be required before such vehicle is
released.
   (E)   He or she shall obtain the written order of the County Sheriff
directing the release of the vehicle by the poundkeeper, and upon receiving the
vehicle, he or she shall execute a written receipt therefor.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.030)
§ 70.04 WAIVING IMPOUNDING FEES, STORAGE CHARGES ON STOLEN VEHICLES.
   If, upon the reclaiming of an impounded vehicle by the owner thereof, it
shall be made to appear to the County Sheriff by evidence satisfactory to him
or her that the vehicle was stolen from the owner thereof and that the owner is
not responsible for the cause for which such vehicle was impounded, the County
Sheriff may waive the impounding fee.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.040)
§ 70.05 FEES AND EXPENSES A LIEN.
   The impounding fee levied by this subchapter and all storage charges and all
costs and expenses incidental to the giving of notice of impounding and to the
sale of said vehicle as herein provided shall be a lien upon the impounded
vehicle, which lien may be summarily foreclosed in the manner hereinafter
provided.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.050)
§ 70.06 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING.
   (A)   If the owner of an impounded vehicle fails to appear and reclaim it as
hereinbefore provided within five days after it is impounded, the County
Sheriff shall send to the registered owner thereof, and to every owner of legal
title thereto or lien holder thereon as disclosed by the records of the Motor
Vehicle Division of the State Tax Commission, a written notice of the
impounding of such vehicle and the cause thereof.
      (1)   The notice shall describe the vehicle and shall state that unless
the vehicle is reclaimed within 60 days of the date of giving notice, it will
be deemed to be abandoned and will be sold by the County Sheriff in accordance
with the ordinances of the county.
      (2)   The notice shall be sent to his, her or their last known addresses
as disclosed by the records of the State Tax Commission, as aforesaid.
   (B)   If the County Sheriff is unable to ascertain the name or address of
any person having an interest in the impounded vehicle, such notice shall, in
lieu of mailing by registered mail as aforesaid, be published once in a
newspaper published and having general circulation in the county, and copies
thereof shall be mailed to such person or persons as the County Sheriff may
have reason to believe have or claim some right, title or interest in said
vehicle at his, her or their last post office address according to the
information, if any, received by the Chief of Police from sources other than
the records of the state’s Tax Commission, aforesaid.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.060)
§ 70.07 FORM OF NOTICE.
   (A)   The notice required by §
70.06 of this chapter may be substantially in the following form.
   NOTICE OF IMPOUNDING AND OF INTENTION TO SELL
   To _________ the owner or owners, and to all other persons claiming any right,
title or interest in the vehicle hereinafter described:
   Take notice that on the _____ day of ______________, 20_____, the following
described vehicle, to-wit:
Make and Body Type _______________ Year _____________________ Model
_______________
License Number ___________________ Motor Number ___________________
was parked on a public street of Sevier County, Utah, in violation of (specifying
the ordinance or statute violated) (or, as the case may be, was operated with
improper registration, or was found with the motor number defaced), and was on
that date impounded by the county pursuant to the ordinances of the county, § 1
and following as ordained by County Ordinance No. ____________
   Said vehicle may be reclaimed as provided in said ordinance upon application at
the County Courthouse, Richfield, Utah. If not so reclaimed within 60 days of the
mailing (or publication) as the case may be of this notice, said vehicle will be
deemed abandoned, and will be sold at public auction by the county.
                              Dated_________________________________
                              Sevier County__________________________
                              By____________________________________
                                             County Sheriff
 
   (B)   If the County Sheriff has not received, within five days of the
impounding of such vehicle, information regarding the ownership and claimants
of the ownership of such vehicle, he or she shall note that fact upon the
record of impounding kept by him or her as hereinafter provided, and in such
case, the notice may be directed generally to “Any person claiming any interest
in the following described vehicle.”
(Prior Code, § 10.08.070)
§ 70.08 PROOF OF NOTICE.
   Proof by affidavit of the giving of notice of impounding as provided in §
70.07 of this chapter shall be made in duplicate and preserved with the record
of impounding hereinafter provided for.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.080)
§ 70.09 SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   (A)   If any vehicle impounded as hereinbefore provided is not claimed
within 60 days after the giving of notice as aforesaid, it shall be deemed to
have been abandoned by the owner or owners thereof. At the expiration of such
period of time, the County Sheriff shall advertise such vehicle for sale and
sell the same at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. Such
advertisement shall be by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
the county two times, the first publication not less than seven days nor more
than 14 days prior thereto.
   (B)   The notice of sale shall describe the vehicle by manufacturer’s trade
name or make, body type, year model, if known, and motor and license numbers,
if any, and shall specify the time and place of the sale, which shall be within
the corporate limits of the county. A copy of the notice of sale shall be
mailed to the owner or owners of said vehicle, if known, at his, her or their
last known address at least seven days prior to the date of said sale.
   (C)   At the time and place fixed for the sale, the County Sheriff shall
offer for sale and sell the vehicle at public auction to the highest bidder for
cash.
   (D)   (1)   At such sale, the county may bid upon and purchase said vehicle.
If the county becomes the purchaser at such sale, it may credit upon the
purchase price the pound service fee, the storage costs and charges incident to
the impounding of the vehicle and its costs and expenses incident to the making
of such sale.
      (2)   If the vehicle is not sold to another purchaser as hereinbefore
provided, the County Sheriff shall strike off and sell the same to the county
for the amount of such service fee, storage costs, charges and expenses.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.090)
§ 70.10 CERTIFICATE OF SALE.
   Upon consummation of the sale and receipt of the purchase price therefor,
the County Sheriff shall deliver possession of the vehicle to the purchaser and
shall also execute and deliver to the purchaser his or her certificate of such
sale. The certificate shall describe the vehicle in substantially the same
manner as the notice of impounding, shall recite the fact of the sale, the
price paid and the purchaser’s name and address, and shall contain a reference
to the pertinent sections of the ordinances of the county which constitute the
authority for the sale. A copy of the certificate shall be filed with the
County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.100)
§ 70.11 DISPOSITION OF MONEY RECEIVED.
   All money received by the County Sheriff upon the sale of such vehicle shall
be delivered into the County Treasury of the county. At any time within one
year from and after such sale, the former owner or owners of the vehicle sold,
upon application to the County Commission and upon presentation of satisfactory
proof of ownership of the vehicle sold, shall be paid the proceeds of such
sale, less the impounding fee, storage charges and expenses of sale provided
for herein. If the proceeds of such sale are not reclaimed within the period of
one year, they shall be credited to the General Fund of the county.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.110)
§ 70.12 RECORD TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   The County Sheriff shall keep a record in duplicate of all vehicles
impounded by manufacturer’s trade name or make, body type, model and license
number, the names of the owners of such vehicles if the same are known, and the
names and addresses of all persons claiming the same, and such other
descriptive matter as may identify such vehicles, the nature and circumstances
of the impounding thereof and the violation, if any, on account of which such
vehicles were impounded, the date of such impounding, the name and address of
any person to whom any such vehicles are released, a record of all notices
given with respect to the impounding and sale of such vehicles and a record of
the sale thereof, if any.
   (B)   Whenever such a vehicle has been sold, as hereinbefore provided, one
of the copies of such record shall be filed with the County Recorder with the
certificate of sale and a copy of the affidavit of the giving of notice upon
the impounding and sale of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.120)
§ 70.13 DESIGNATION OF VEHICLE POUND.
   The County Sheriff, with the approval of the County Commission, shall
designate such vehicle pounds and appoint such vehicle poundkeepers to have
charge thereof as may be necessary to conveniently carry out the provisions
hereof, and agree with such poundkeepers as to the terms of their service.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.130)
§ 70.14 IMPOUNDING DOES NOT PRECLUDE CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   Neither the impounding nor the sale of a vehicle, nor the payment of the
impounding fee, storage charges and other expenses as hereinbefore provided,
shall preclude the criminal prosecution of the owner or operator of the
impounded vehicle for any public offense.
(Prior Code, § 10.08.140)
Statutory reference:
   Removal and impoundment of vehicles - reporting and notification
requirements - administrative impound fee - refunds - possessory lien -
rulemaking, see U.C.A. § 41-6a-1406
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Roads Open to Off-Highway Vehicle Use
   
71.01   Roads designated
   
71.02   Compliance with laws
   
71.03   Private land roadways
   
71.04   Provisions in conflict
 
   
71.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:    Map of Open Off-Highway Vehicle Routes
ROADS OPEN TO OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE USE
§ 71.01 ROADS DESIGNATED.
   (A)   The county hereby designates the roads indicated on the map found in
Appendix A of this chapter, entitled “Sevier County Open OHV Routes,” as open
to off-highway vehicle use. This map is maintained by the County Commission and
may be changed, modified or amended from time to time by the county.
   (B)   The additional roads are identified as follows:
      (1)   Class “B” Roads: Co-unique 6018, also known as FH42 1(2) - Fremont
River Road; Co-unique 6016, also known as Gooseberry-Sevenmile Road; lower
portion south of the junction of Class “D” road known as Co-unique 5235; and
      (2)   Class “D” Road: Co-unique 5133, also known as Sheep Valley Road,
from Fremont River Road on the east side to Sheep Valley.
(Ord. 2011-7-1, passed 7-26-2011; Res. 2018-7-1, passed 7-23-2018)
§ 71.02 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   Any person operating an OHV on roads designated by this subchapter shall
comply with all state, county and municipal laws regulating OHV operation and
traffic laws.
(Ord. 2011-7-1, passed 7-26-2011) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 PRIVATE LAND ROADWAYS.
   This designation is not intended to include roads on private property unless
those roads are part of the County Road System or are otherwise deemed public.
(Ord. 2011-7-1, passed 7-26-2011)
§ 71.04 PROVISIONS IN CONFLICT.
   Any provision of state law which is in conflict with any part of this
subchapter shall supercede and control over this subchapter.
(Ord. 2011-7-1, passed 7-26-2011)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The use of OHVs in violation of state, county or municipal laws shall
be penalized according to the provisions of the respective code. If not
otherwise provided for elsewhere, any person who violates any provision of §§
71.01 to
71.04 of this chapter or the rules promulgated from §§
71.01 to
71.04 of this chapter is, upon conviction, guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2011-7-1, passed 7-26-2011)
APPENDIX A: MAP OF OPEN OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE ROUTES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1358.jpg]
(Ord. 2011-7-1, passed 7-26-2011; Res. 2018-7-1, passed 7-23-2018)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Class D road inventory and transportation system network
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 CLASS D ROAD INVENTORY AND TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM NETWORK.
   The County Commission hereby declares the attached map as the official
transportation network and road system of the county.
 
 
(Ord. 2024-10-1, passed - -)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Animal and Livestock Regulations Generally
   
90.001   Definitions
   
90.002   Confining animals and fowl; neat and sanitary conditions
   
90.003   Abandoning sick, diseased or disabled animals
   
90.004   Disposal of animals
   
90.005   Cruelty to animals
   
90.006   Excessive noise
   
90.007   Animals running at large
   
90.008   Impoundment
   
90.009   Keeping certain animals unlawful
   
90.010   Detention of animals
   
90.011   Intraseizure of animals
   
90.012   Animal bites
   
90.013   Defecation and urination
   
90.014   Quarantine of animals
   
90.015   Interference with officer
Dogs
   
90.030   Licensing
   
90.031   Revocation of dog license
   
90.032   Dogs running at large
   
90.033   Female dogs in estrus running at large
   
90.034   Cruelty to dogs
   
90.035   Dog bites
   
90.036   Intraseizure of dogs
   
90.037   Dog noise disturbance
   
90.038   Defecation and urination
   
90.039   Detention of dogs
   
90.040   Abandoning sick, diseased or disabled dogs
   
90.041   Disposal of dogs
   
90.042   Quarantine of dogs
   
90.043   Interference with officer
   
90.044   Dogs in prohibited areas
   
90.045   Allowable number of dogs
   
90.046   Impoundment
Rabies Control
   
90.060   Rabies control; quarantine of animals
   
90.061   Vaccination required
Animal Business and Special Use Regulations
   
90.075   Guard dogs
   
90.076   Pet shops
   
90.077   Grooming parlors
   
90.078   Kennels
Administration and Enforcement
   
90.090   Administration
   
90.091   Duties of animal control
   
90.092   Enforcement generally
   
90.093   Authority
   
90.094   Right of entry for enforcement
   
90.095   Investigation
Hunting by Spotlight for Predator and Nuisance Animals
   
90.110   Definitions
   
90.111   Allowed species
   
90.112   Spotlight use requirements
   
90.113   Restrictions on spotlighting within the county
   
90.114   Exceptions
   
90.115   Property damage
Livestock Fencing
   
90.130   Definitions
   
90.131   Regulation open range or fence out
   
90.132   Fence in
   
90.133   Historic livestock trail
   
90.134   Owner liable for trespass of animals
   
90.135   Failure to close entrance to enclosure
   
90.136   Accident responsibilities; livestock on highways
   
90.137   New development/subdivision livestock fence requirement
 
   
90.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Additional dead animal disposal provisions, see
Chapter 50
ANIMAL AND LIVESTOCK REGULATIONS GENERALLY
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.
   ANIMAL AT LARGE. Any animal, whether or not licensed, not under restraint.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person designated by this state, this county or
a municipal government as a law enforcement officer who is qualified to perform
such duties under the laws of this state.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any facility operated by a humane society or political
subdivision of the state for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals
held under the authority of this chapter or state law.
   ANIMAL UNDER RESTRAINT. An animal on a leash or lead which is held by a
person or attached to a stationary object or confined within a vehicle or
confined upon the real property of the owner or custodian.
   ATTACK. Any biting or attempted biting or other action by an animal which
places a person or another animal in danger of imminent bodily harm. Actual
physical contact shall be required to constitute an ATTACK. ATTACK may include
jumping upon, chasing, nipping or otherwise threatening.
   CAT. Any age feline of the domesticated types.
   CUSTODIAN. Any person having the charge, care, custody or control of an
animal which he/she does not own.
   DOG. Any Canis familiaris.
   DOMESTICATED ANIMAL. Any animal accustomed to live in or about the
habitation of humans, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, fowl, horses,
swine, cattle, sheep and goats.
   EUTHANASIA. The humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method
approved by the most recent report of the American Veterinary Medical
Association Panel of Euthanasia that results in unconsciousness and immediate
death, or by a method that causes painless loss of consciousness and death
during such loss of consciousness.
   GUARD DOG. Any dog that will detect and warn its handler that an intruder is
present or near an area that is being secured and will attack a human pursuant
to training or its handler’s command. A GUARD DOG shall be controlled by an
enclosure or on a leash or under absolute control while working so it cannot
come into contact with the lawful public.
   HANDLER. Any person who has physical control or responsibility for the same
of an animal at any given time.
   HOUSEHOLD PET. Any animal or fowl ordinarily permitted in a house and kept
for company or pleasure and not for profit, such as: dogs, cats, canaries,
fish, hamsters, mice and other animals which are not capable of inflicting harm
or discomfort or endangering the health, safety or welfare of any person or
property.
   KENNEL. Any premises where more than two dogs are raised, kept, housed or
boarded; or any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling
dogs.
   LEASH or LEAD. Any chain, rope or device used to restrain an animal.
   LICENSED DOG. A dog wearing a current dog license tag as issued by County
Animal Control or any municipality.
   NEUTERED. Describes an animal which has had its reproductive organs
(testicles or uterus and ovaries) surgically removed.
   OWNER. Shall be presumed to have the ultimate responsibility for the
physical control for the animal. An OWNER may legally divest himself or herself
of such responsibility by transferring physical control to a legally
responsible adult (over 18 years); such person shall be the HANDLER.
   PET or COMPANION ANIMAL. Any animal of a species that has been domesticated
to live in or about the habitation of humans, is dependent on humans for food
and shelter and is kept by its owner for pleasure rather than utility and/or
commercial purposes.
   PET SHOP. Any establishment, not part of a kennel, containing cages or
exhibition pens wherein dogs, cats, birds or other pets for sale are kept or
displayed.
   PROVOKED. Any deliberate act by a person towards a dog or any other animal
done with the intent to tease, torment, abuse, assault or otherwise cause a
reaction by the dog or animal. However, any act done by a person with the
intent to discourage or prevent a dog or other animal from attacking shall not
be considered PROVOCATION.
   QUARANTINE. The isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that
the animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized
persons.
   SPAYED. Describes an animal which has had its ovaries and uterus surgically
removed, an ovariohysterectomy.
   VETERINARIAN. Any person properly licensed under the laws of the state to
practice veterinary medicine.
   VETERINARY CLINIC. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis or treatment of diseases and injuries of
animals.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. An animal:
      (1)   With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury to or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or
other domestic animals;
      (2)   Which attacks a human being or other domestic animal without
provocation; or
      (3)   Which is trained or used to fight or to attack humans.
   WILD ANIMAL.
      (1)   All animals commonly accepted as being “wild,” and includes, but is
not limited to, the following, no matter how domesticated they may be:
         (a)   Alligators and crocodiles;
         (b)   Bears (Ursidae);
         (c)   Cat family (Felidae), except the commonly accepted domesticated
cats;
         (d)   Coyotes, foxes and wolves;
         (e)   Porcupines (Ercthizontiade);
         (f)   Nonhuman primates (Hominidae);
         (g)   Raccoons (Procyonidae);
         (h)   Skunks;
         (i)   Venomous snakes or venomous lizards; and
         (j)   Weasels (Mustelidae), including martens, wolverines, black-
footed ferrets, badgers, otters, ermine, mink, mongoose and the like.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, animals that are kept commercial
or ranched shall not be WILD ANIMALS.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 90.002 CONFINING ANIMALS AND FOWL; NEAT AND SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Wherever animals, including fowl and pigeons, may be tethered,
corralled, confined and sheltered or fed, the premises shall be maintained in a
neat and sanitary condition so that no nuisance due to unsightliness, odor or
pest breeding or harborage shall be caused by such animals or premises.
   (B)   All barns or stables intended for or presently used to shelter
livestock which are now erected and maintained or may be erected, constructed,
altered or repaired within the jurisdiction shall conform to the requirements
of the applicable zoning ordinance, the building code and all other applicable
laws of the jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.003 ABANDONING SICK, DISEASED OR DISABLED ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to abandon or to turn out at large any sick,
diseased or disabled animal, but such animal shall, when rendered worthless by
reason of sickness or other disability, be disposed of by the owner thereof in
the manner as provided in §
90.004 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.004 DISPOSAL OF ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for the owner of any animal or fowl that die or are killed
within the jurisdiction to fail to remove or bury the carcass of such animal
within two days after its death; disposal shall be in full compliance with
Health Department regulations.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.005 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully or maliciously kill, injure, maim, disfigure, torture, beat,
mutilate, burn or scald, overdrive or otherwise cruelly set upon any animal.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hobble livestock in such a way
as to cause injury or damage to the animal.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or to confine any animals
in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner, including, but not
limited to, caring or confining such animal without adequate ventilation.
   (D)   Every operator of a motor vehicle or self-propelled vehicle within the
jurisdiction shall, immediately upon injuring, striking, maiming or running
down any animal, fully comply with all requirements set forth in U.C.A. § 41-
6a-401.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person within the jurisdiction to, in any
manner whatsoever, encourage or urge any animal to fight or urge them on after
they commence to fight.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful to fail to provide necessary food, care or
shelter for an animal, including veterinary care and adequate protection
against extreme weather conditions.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.006 EXCESSIVE NOISE.
   It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud
noises at any time of the day or night. It shall not be a violation of this
section if the excessive noise is caused due to a person trespassing or
threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal is
situated.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.007 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian to allow any animal to be at
large at any time within the jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.008 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The animal control officer may apprehend and impound any animal found
at large within the jurisdiction. Any person apprehending any animal running at
large on his or her property may deliver the same to any police officer or
animal control officer, which animal may then be impounded in the animal
shelter. Any animal placed in the animal shelter shall be redeemed or
euthanized.
   (B)   Any animal impounded at an animal shelter shall be held five working
days if it has a current year’s license tag. After five working days, if the
animal is not claimed, it shall be sold, adopted or euthanized.
   (C)   Any animal impounded at an animal shelter shall be held three working
days if it has no current year’s license tag. After three working days, if the
animal is not claimed, it shall be sold, adopted, or euthanized.
   (D)   Any animal voluntarily relinquished to the animal control officer or
an animal shelter by the owner or custodian thereof for destruction or other
disposition need not be kept for the minimum holding period, but may be
euthanized immediately.
   (E)   The animal control officer or police officer shall have the sole
discretion to determine serious injury or disease that will require euthanasia
prior to five working days in accordance with U.C.A. § 11-46-103(3), as
amended.
   (F)   Any wild animal placed in the animal shelter may be disposed of
immediately.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.009 KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal which is
prohibited to be kept or harbored by U.C.A. §§ 23A-5-302, 23A-5-309 or 23A-5-
311.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.010 DETENTION OF ANIMALS.
   It is unlawful for any person to detain or hold the animal of another
without notifying the animal control officer or law enforcement agency and
surrendering the animal upon request.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.011 INTRASEIZURE OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   (1)   In enforcement of this chapter, any animal control officer or
peace officer may enter into the open premises of any animal which is
reasonably deemed by the officer to be in violation of this chapter.
Representatives of the Sheriff, animal control officers or any other designated
representative of the county or municipality may enter any premises where
animals are maintained for investigation or inspection with the permission of
the owner or a duly executed warrant in order to determine if the premises are
being used, kept or maintained in violation of this or any other city or county
ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not permit any person to enter a private dwelling
except where necessary to rescue an animal or pursuant to the execution of a
search warrant.
   (B)   If an animal is summarily impounded without the knowledge of the owner
or custodian, a notice that the animal has been impounded shall be given to the
owner or custodian of the animal, if the same is known, by attaching the notice
to the door at the residence thereof, or by mailing a notice to the last known
address of the owner or custodian.
   (C)   If no response is received to the notice of summary impoundment within
the time frames established by the rules and regulations of the animal shelter,
such animal shall be euthanized as an abandoned animal.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 90.012 ANIMAL BITES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any animal to bite or attack any person or
domestic animal. It is no defense that the animal is chained or confined if the
chaining or confining is on public or private property where the public has
access to be on such property.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to keep, own, harbor or have the control
of any fierce or dangerous animal. It is prima facie evidence that an animal is
a fierce or dangerous animal if it bites or attacks a person or domestic
animal. Any police officer or animal control officer may apprehend such animal
and may cause it to be impounded at the animal shelter.
   (C)   Deliberate or malicious provocation may be considered by the fact
finder in determining culpability.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.013 DEFECATION AND URINATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful to allow an animal to defecate or urinate upon private
property not owned by the person owning or in control of such animal.
   (B)   The owner or custodian of any animal shall be responsible for the
removal of any defecation deposited by such animal on public property,
recreation areas or private property not owned by the person owning or in
control of such animal or upon public property.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.014 QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS.
   Whenever any animal attacks or bites a person, the owner of the animal shall
immediately notify the Sheriff’s office, which shall cause the animal to be
impounded or otherwise quarantined for a period of ten days. At the end of the
ten-day quarantine, upon a veterinarian’s examination that such animal is free
from rabies, the animal may be released to the owner if all other regulations
have been satisfied. The expenses incurred in the inspection of such animal
shall be paid by the owner or person in control of such animal, in addition to
any other fines or charges due. Such expenses shall be paid prior to the
release of the animal. If the animal dies within the ten-day quarantine period,
its brain shall be sent to the state’s Department of Health for examination of
rabies. It is unlawful for an owner or keeper to fail to report any attack or
bite.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.015 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or
prevent any police officer or animal control officer in the discharge of his or
her duties as herein prescribed.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
DOGS
§ 90.030 LICENSING.
   Any person owning a dog within the jurisdiction shall license the dog
pursuant to the following provisions.
   (A)   Licensing, fees and registration.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor a dog over the
age of three months within the county without making application to the county
or city with jurisdiction for that purpose and paying to the county or city the
annual registration fee. The licensing due date is March 1 each year.
      (2)   A late fee shall be imposed unless a new license is purchased prior
to the expiration of the current license. Licenses for the following year may
be purchased within 90 days prior to the expiration date.
      (3)   All licenses and late fees required by this chapter shall be in the
amounts established by this chapter.
      (4)   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to register any
dog upon application of the owner or keeper and to issue a registration receipt
and metallic registration tag upon payment by the owner or keeper. Such
registration receipt and metallic registration tag shall be valid and in force
from the date issued until the expiration date.
      (5)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs whose owners
are nonresidents temporarily within the jurisdiction for 30 days or less, nor
to dogs brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any show.
   (B)   Information required for registration. Before receiving a registration
receipt and metallic registration tag, each owner must state, at the time of
application for such a permit, the name and address of the owner and the sex,
breed, age and color of each dog to be registered. The owner must also present
a certificate from a veterinarian stating that the dog has been vaccinated for
the prevention of rabies. Such certificate must give the last date of
vaccination and the number of the vaccination tag used by the veterinarian at
the time of vaccination and the type of vaccine administered and the date when
the next vaccination is due. It is unlawful for the owner to misrepresent the
age of any dog for the purpose of avoiding the payment of the license required
by this chapter.
   (C)   Collar; tag attachment. It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of
any dog so registered to provide a suitable collar for such dog to wear and to
attach thereto the metallic registration tag having a number corresponding with
the certificate of registry inscribed thereon. All dogs not so registered and
collared as prescribed by this chapter may be impounded by the animal control
officer or any police officer or other designated official of the jurisdiction.
   (D)   Removal of collar and registration tag. It is unlawful for any person
other than the owner to remove the collar from any dog to which collar has been
attached the metallic registration tag herein required, or to remove said
metallic registration tag from the collar to which it has been attached.
   (E)   Application for permit within ten days. The owner of any dog of
registration age shall make application for a permit and obtain a permit tag
for such dog within ten days after acquisition or age attainment.
   (F)   License fees. License fees shall apply as follows.
Type Amount
Type                    Amount
Class A kennel          $50 plus individual dog licenses
Class B kennel          $75 plus individual dog licenses
Dog, intact             $35
Dog, neutered/spayed    $10
Guard dog license       $25 plus dog license
Hobby kennel            $25 plus individual dog licenses
Pet store permit        $25 plus a business license
Replacement tag fee     $3
Transfer of license fee $3
 
   (G)   Service fees. Service fees shall apply as follows.
 
Type                                  Amount
Adoption fee                          $25
Board fee for dogs/cats per day       $5
Impound, first time                   $25 plus fee and notification
Impound, second time within 12 months $50 plus fee and notification
Late fee                              $25
Quarantine fee                        $65
 
   (H)   Livestock fees. Fees for livestock shall apply as follows.
 
Type            Amount
Daily board fee $10/head/day
Impound fees    $45/load
 
   (I)   Licensing and fee exemptions.
      (1)   The provisions of division (A)(1) above shall not apply to:
         (a)   Seeing eye dogs properly trained to assist blind persons, if
such dogs are actually being used by blind persons to assist them in moving
from place to place;
         (b)   Hearing dogs properly trained to assist deaf persons, if such
dogs are actually used by deaf persons to aid them in responding to an auditory
stimulus; or
         (c)   Dogs specifically trained to assist officials of governmental
agencies in the performance of their duties and which are owned by such
agencies.
      (2)   Nothing in division (I)(1) above shall be construed to exempt any
dog from having a current rabies vaccination.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.031 REVOCATION OF DOG LICENSE.
   (A)   If the owner of any dog is convicted of a violation of this chapter on
two or more different occasions during any 12-month period involving the same
dog, the license of the dog involved shall be revoked. The animal control
officer or other police officer shall be authorized to immediately impound and
pick up any dog whose license has been revoked.
   (B)   Any dog impounded following revocation of its license shall be dealt
with in accordance with the provisions of the jurisdiction ordinances for
impounded dogs. Under no conditions shall the dog be allowed to be brought back
into the jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.032 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any dog to be at large at any time within the
jurisdiction. Once a license has been revoked for a dog, that dog cannot be
licensed again in the jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.033 FEMALE DOGS IN ESTRUS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   The owners or custodians of female dogs shall cause such dogs, when in heat/
season, to be penned or enclosed in such a manner as to preclude other dogs
from attacking such female dog or from being attracted to such female dog. It
shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any female dog to cause, permit
or allow such dog to be at large, or to enter upon a street or sidewalk while
such female dog is in estrus. If the female dog cannot be controlled by the
owner during the estrus, such dog may be impounded by the animal control
officer.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.034 CRUELTY TO DOGS.
   (A)   Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to
willfully or maliciously kill, injure, maim, disfigure, torture, beat,
mutilate, burn or scald, overdrive or otherwise cruelly set upon any dog.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or to confine any dog in
or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner, including, but not limited
to, carrying or confining such dog without adequate ventilation.
   (C)   Every operator of a motor vehicle or self-propelled vehicle within the
jurisdiction shall, immediately upon injuring, striking, maiming or running
down any dog, fully comply with all requirements set forth in U.C.A. § 41-6a-
401.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person within the jurisdiction to, in any
manner whatsoever, encourage or urge any dog or dogs to fight or urge them on
after they commence to fight.
   (E)   Failure to provide necessary food, water and care is unlawful.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.035 DOG BITES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any dog to bite or attack any person or
domestic animal. It is no defense that the dog is chained or confined if the
chaining or confining is on public or private property where the public has
access to be on such property.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to keep, own, harbor or have the control
of any fierce or dangerous dog. It is prima facie evidence that a dog is a
fierce or dangerous dog if it bites or attacks a person or domestic animal. Any
police officer or animal control officer may apprehend such dog and may cause
it to be impounded at the animal shelter.
   (C)   Deliberate or malicious provocation may be considered by the fact
finder in determining culpability.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.036 INTRASEIZURE OF DOGS.
   (A)   Whenever a police officer or an animal control officer shall have
probable cause to believe that a dog has been abandoned although confined upon
private property, or is a vicious dog, the officer shall be authorized to
immediately seize the dog and may impound the same in the animal shelter, and
such officer shall have the right to enter upon whatever premises the dog may
be kept for such purpose.
   (B)   If a dog is summarily impounded without the knowledge of the owner or
custodian, a notice that the dog has been impounded shall be given to the owner
or custodian of the dog, if the same is known, by attaching the notice to the
door at the residence thereof or by mailing a notice to the last known address
of the owner or custodian.
   (C)   If no response is received to the notice of summary impoundment within
the time frames established by the rules and regulations of the animal shelter,
such dog shall be euthanized as an abandoned dog.
   (D)   A dog summarily impounded as provided in this section may be recovered
by the owner complying with the regulations of the animal shelter. If, in a
subsequent court proceeding, the dog is determined not to be abandoned, vicious
or a nuisance, the dog shall be released to the owner or custodian without any
charge.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.037 DOG NOISE DISTURBANCE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to harbor, keep or own within the
jurisdiction any dog which barks, whines, howls or makes other disturbing
noises in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion day or night. Any police
officer or animal control officer may apprehend such dog and may cause it to be
impounded in the animal shelter.
   (B)   A second conviction of this section by the same dog within a 12-month
period shall be grounds for removal of the dog from the jurisdiction, which dog
will not be allowed to return.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.038 DEFECATION AND URINATION.
   (A)   Generally. It is unlawful to allow a dog to defecate or urinate upon
private property not owned by the person owning or in control of such dog or
upon public property. The owner or custodian of any dog shall be responsible
for the removal of any defecation deposited by such dog on public property,
recreation areas or private property not owned by the person owning or in
control of such dog.
   (B)   Kennels and runs. It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any
premises on which a kennel, run or other structure or area for the housing or
keeping of dogs is situated to allow such kennel, run or other structure or
area of the premises to become unsanitary, unclean or to emit undue stench or
odor. The owner or occupant of any premises permitting any such condition to
exist that does not abate such condition within 24 hours after notice shall be
issued a citation. If such a notice is given, the condition must remain abated
on a permanent basis. Additional notices shall not be necessary prior to the
issuance of a citation
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.039 DETENTION OF DOGS.
   It is unlawful for any person to detain or hold the dog of another without
notifying the animal control officer or law enforcement agency.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.040 ABANDONING SICK, DISEASED OR DISABLED DOGS.
   It is unlawful for any person to abandon or to turn out at large any sick,
diseased or disabled dog, but such dog shall, when rendered worthless by reason
of sickness or other disability, be disposed of by the owner thereof in the
manner as provided in §
90.041 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.041 DISPOSAL OF DOGS.
   It is unlawful for the owner of any dog that dies or is killed within the
jurisdiction to fail to remove or bury the carcass of such dog within two days.
Disposal shall be in full compliance with Health Department regulations.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.042 QUARANTINE OF DOGS.
   Whenever any dog attacks or bites a person, the owner of the dog shall
immediately notify law enforcement, which shall cause the dog to be impounded
or otherwise quarantined for a period of ten days. At the end of the ten-day
quarantine period, the dog may be released from quarantine to the owner, but
not sold or adopted, upon a veterinarian’s examination that such dog is free
from rabies. The expenses incurred in the inspection of such dog shall be paid
by the owner or person in control of such dog, in addition to any other fines
or charges due. Such expenses shall be paid prior to the release of the dog. If
the dog dies within the ten-day quarantine period, its brain shall be sent to
the state’s Department of Health for examination for rabies.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.043 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or
prevent any police officer or animal control officer in the discharge of his or
her duties as herein prescribed.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.044 DOGS IN PROHIBITED AREAS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to take or to permit any dog,
whether loose or on a leash or in arms, in or about any establishment or place
of business where food or food products are sold or displayed, including, but
not limited to, restaurants, grocery stores, meat markets or food or vegetable
stores; and it shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dog to enter or be
in any place of worship during public services; and it shall be unlawful for
any person to allow any dog to enter in or be upon any public park or cemetery
where it is posted that no dogs are allowed.
   (B)   An exception to this section shall be for any dog trained and used for
physically handicapped persons, such as dogs for the blind or hearing impaired.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.045 ALLOWABLE NUMBER OF DOGS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, not more than two dogs which
are three months of age or older shall be kept at any residence or commercial
establishment at any time. This provision shall not apply to licensed kennels,
grooming parlors, veterinary clinics or approved licensed adoption agencies.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.046 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Any dog impounded at any animal shelter shall be held five working
days if it has a current year’s license tag. After five working days, if the
dog is not claimed, it shall be sold, adopted or euthanized.
   (B)   Any dog impounded at an animal shelter shall be held three working
days if it has no current year’s license tag. After three working days, if the
dog is not claimed, it shall be sold, adopted or euthanized.
   (C)   Any dog voluntarily relinquished to the animal control officer or an
animal shelter by the owner or custodian thereof for destruction or other
disposition need not be kept for the minimum holding period, but shall be
euthanized immediately.
   (D)   The animal control officer or police officer shall have the sole
discretion to determine serious injury or disease that will require euthanasia
prior to five working days in accordance with U.C.A. § 11-46-103(3), as
amended.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
RABIES CONTROL
§ 90.060 RABIES CONTROL; QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   A report of bites. All persons bitten and the parents or guardians of
minor children bitten by a dog, cat, skunk, fox, bat, coyote, bobcat or other
animal known to constitute a serious threat of rabies shall notify the animal
control officer immediately thereafter. Physicians treating such bites and
other persons having the knowledge of such bites shall also be required to make
such notification.
   (B)   Report of suspected rabid animals. Any person who observes or has
knowledge of an animal which shows symptoms of rabies or which acts in a manner
which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it may have rabies shall notify
the animal control officer and comply with appropriate laws and regulations
regarding suspected cases of rabies as directed by the state or city/county
health departments.
   (C)   Isolation of biting or suspected rabid animals. Upon the reasonable
order of the animal control or public health officer, a biting or suspected
rabid animal shall be isolated, at the owner’s expense if owned, in strict
confinement under proper care and under the observation of a licensed
veterinarian in an animal shelter or veterinary hospital in a manner approved
by the animal control officer.
   (D)   Examination of head. Any biting or suspected rabid animal may be
humanely euthanized immediately, and such animal’s undamaged and properly
packaged and properly refrigerated head shall be delivered promptly to an
approved medical facility having the capability of performing tests to
demonstrate the presence of rabies.
   (E)   Release. Ten days after the day of infliction of a bite by an animal,
such animal may be released to its owner after a licenced veterinarian has
examined that animal and in his or her opinion found it not to have had rabies
in a transmittable stage on the day of infliction of the bite. Non-immunized
animals shall be vaccinated for rabies before release.
   (F)   Animals possibly exposed to rabies.
      (1)   Any animal of a species subject to rabies which has been bitten by
a known rabid animal, or which has been in intimate contact with such an
animal, shall be isolated, at the owner’s expense if owned, in strict
confinement in a place and manner approved by the animal control officer and
observed by a licensed veterinarian for a period of six months, or euthanized.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following alternative is
permitted in cases of dogs and cats. If the dog or cat has been vaccinated
against rabies at least 30 days prior to the suspected exposure with a type of
vaccine produced under U.S.D.A. license and within the time period approved by
the state veterinarian, the dog or cat may be re-vaccinated and isolated in
strict confinement in a place and manner which is approved by the animal
control officer and observed by a licensed veterinarian for a period of 30
days.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.061 VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Dog, ferret and cat owners shall obtain a rabies vaccination for each
dog, ferret or cat they own, keep, harbor or have custody of within ten days
after it becomes three months of age, or within ten days after obtaining any
dog, ferret or cat over three months of age. It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to own, keep, harbor or possess, or to have in his or her
care, charge or custody, any dog, ferret or cat three months of age or over
unless such dog, ferret or cat has a current and valid rabies vaccination
administered by any duly qualified and licensed veterinarian, with a rabies
vaccine approved by the state’s Department of Health for use in dogs, ferrets
and cats. Such vaccination shall be repeated at intervals specified by the
state’s Department of Health in order to maintain adequate immunity.
   (B)   In addition to the current year’s license, the vaccination tag shall
be attached to or otherwise worn by the dog. It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to remove or cause to be removed the vaccination tag from any
dog without the consent of the owner, keeper or harborer thereof. The
vaccination tag shall not be transferrable from one dog to another.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
ANIMAL BUSINESS AND SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS
§ 90.075 GUARD DOGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own a guard dog without first
obtaining a guard dog permit as provided hereafter. It shall be unlawful for
any person to hire the use of a guard dog that has not been issued a guard dog
permit.
   (B)   A permit required by this section shall be obtained from the animal
control officer. The application shall set forth the type of dog, the site(s)
where said dog shall be used, the hours of use of said dog and any other
information deemed appropriate by the Sheriff’s Office.
   (C)   Permits are not transferrable from one owner to another or from one
site to another.
   (D)   On the premises where a guard dog is used, conspicuous warning signs
shall be posted at each door or gate that gives access to the guard dog. A
telephone number that provides 24-hour access to the dog’s handler must be
provided.
   (E)   A guard dog shall not be allowed to become a nuisance.
   (F)   A guard dog shall, in addition to being licensed, be microchipped and
the microchip number registered with the animal control officer or the
Sheriff’s Office. The license shall be attached to a one-inch wide red or
orange collar with the word “Danger” written or embroidered in black letters.
The collar must be on the dog at all times.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.076 PET SHOPS.
   In addition to obtaining the permit required by this section, all pet shops
within the jurisdiction shall:
   (A)   Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance;
   (B)   Provide an isolation area for animals which are sick or diseased,
sufficiently removed so as not to endanger the health of other animals;
   (C)   Keep all animals caged or under the control of the owner or operator
of the pet store;
   (D)   Comply with the provisions of the chapter regarding the care and
housing of animals as listed in the kennel section, §
90.078 of this chapter;
   (E)   Not sell animals which are unweaned or so young or weak that their
sale poses a serious risk of death or inadequate development to them;
   (F)   Supply any purchaser of a dog/puppy with an application for a license;
and
   (G)   Provide the purchaser of an animal with written instructions as to the
proper care and control of that species.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.077 GROOMING PARLORS.
   (A)   Shall meet zoning requirements of local zoning authority;
   (B)   Shall be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance;
   (C)   Shall provide cages of sufficient space to allow animals to stand up,
lie down and turn around without touching the sides;
   (D)   All animals shall be caged or under control of the owner, operator or
their employees;
   (E)   Shall have a valid business license as required in the jurisdiction;
and
   (F)   Shall have a kennel license if animals are also boarded or kept or
housed overnight.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.078 KENNELS.
   (A)   Allowable number of dogs. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, not more than two dogs which are three months of age or older shall be
kept on any premises at any time. This provision shall not apply to licensed
kennels, grooming parlors, veterinary clinics or approved, licensed adoption
agencies.
   (B)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person shall operate or maintain a kennel without first
obtaining a permit from the division of animal control with jurisdiction over
those premises.
      (2)   All applications for permits to operate or maintain a kennel shall
be submitted in writing upon printed forms provided for such purposes by the
jurisdiction. The application shall first be referred to the animal control
officer. Upon approval, the jurisdiction shall issue the permit upon payment of
the fee herein provided.
      (3)   Before the permit can be issued, the following conditions
concerning the location of the kennel must be met:
         (a)   The location where the dogs are kept, raised, housed or boarded
must be 60 feet away from any neighboring house;
         (b)   Must conform to existing easements, setbacks and zoning
requirements. Approval of the Zoning Administrator of the jurisdiction shall be
required prior to permit issuance; and
         (c)   Fencing which eliminates public sight into and out of the kennel
is required.
      (4)   The following minimum standards shall be complied with to obtain
and maintain a kennel permit.
         (a)   An enclosure must be provided, which shall allow adequate
protection against weather extremes. Floors of buildings, runs and walls shall
be of an appropriate material as required by the specific breed of animal and
also to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting.
         (b)   Adequate ventilation shall be maintained and an appropriate
temperature provided as required by the specific breed of animal housed
therein.
         (c)   Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down
and turn around without touching the sides or tops of cages.
         (d)   Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from
the weather.
         (e)   All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a
sanitary condition.
         (f)   The food shall be free of contamination, palatable and of
sufficient nutritive value as to meet the normal daily requirements for the
condition and size of the animal.
         (g)   Fresh water is to be available at all times.
      (5)   Holders of existing kennel permits which do not meet the distance
requirements required in this section shall have one year within which to come
into compliance.
      (6)   The jurisdiction shall have the power to revoke the kennel permit
in the event that the permit holder is convicted of any other violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Fees. Any person conducting, operating or maintaining a kennel shall
pay to the jurisdiction, for the privilege of conducting, operating or
maintaining such kennel, an annual permit fee adopted by regulation of the
jurisdiction.
   (D)   Violations; permit revocation. Whenever the animal control officer or
police officer finds or discovers any violations of any rule or regulation
promulgated as herein provided by the Health Department, the officer shall,
upon receipt of such notice, immediately notify the owner or custodian of such
kennel to appear before the jurisdiction at a day and time certain to show
cause why the permit should not be revoked for such violation.
   (E)   Inspection. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or
police officer to periodically inspect all registered kennels and to see that
the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the sanitation and care of such
places are being observed.
   (F)   “Kennel” defined; puppy exception.
      (1)   “Kennel” as defined in §
90.001 of this chapter shall be applicable to this section.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to the birth of puppies in a situation
which is not an intentional commercial breeding business so long as the number
of dogs is reduced down to two or less within three months from the birth of
the puppies.
   (G)   Classes of kennels. Kennels shall be classified as follows.
 
Type           Details
               Owners having 3 to 4 dogs, any one of which is intact, and all
Class A kennel owners with more than 5 and less than 10 dogs, neutered or
               intact, are required to obtain a Class A kennel license
Class B kennel Owners having more than 10 dogs are required to obtain a Class B
               kennel license
Hobby kennel   Owners having 3 to 4 dogs which are neutered or spayed are
               required to obtain a hobby kennel license
 
   (H)   Business license. Owners which are maintaining kennels as part of a
business shall be required to purchase the locally required business license.
   (I)   Dog licenses. All dogs that are maintained in a kennel and that are
over three months of age shall be individually licensed.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002) Penalty, see §
90.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 90.090 ADMINISTRATION.
   Animal control services for the unincorporated portion of the county shall
be under the direction and supervision of the County Sheriff. Within the limit
of the cities and towns, the city/town councils may contract with the Sheriff
for the services of his or her officers and for the use of impound facilities.
The Sheriff may designate a Director of Animal Control to be responsible for
the administration of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 90.091 DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL.
   (A)   Enforce this chapter and perform other responsibilities inherent
thereto;
   (B)   Supervise the County Animal Shelter;
   (C)   Keep records of all animals impounded at said shelter;
   (D)   Keep accounts of all moneys collected and received; and
   (E)   Establish, in cooperation with the County Health Department and other
interested governmental agencies, measures for the control of and immunization
for rabies.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 90.092 ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY.
   The Sheriff, each animal control officer and any peace officers are
responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter and other provisions
of applicable state law.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 90.093 AUTHORITY.
   The Sheriff, his or her designated director, his or her authorized deputies
and the authorized animal control officers of the municipalities are empowered
to apprehend, transport and impound any animal found in violation of this
chapter, including licensable animals for which no license has been procured,
or any licensed or unlicensed animal for any other violation thereof, and issue
criminal citations and/or notice of violation of this chapter. Badges of
authority shall be issued by the County Sheriff or municipality, and the
recipient thereof shall be duly sworn in as an animal control officer.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 90.094 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   In enforcement of this chapter, any animal control officer or peace
officer may enter into the open premises of any person to secure or take
possession of any animal which is reasonably deemed by the officer to be in
violation of this chapter. Representatives of the Sheriff, animal control
officers or any other designated representative of the county or municipality
may enter any premises where animals are maintained for investigation or
inspection with the permission of the owner, or a duly executed warrant, in
order to determine if the premises are being used, kept or maintained in
violation of this or any other city or county ordinance.
   (B)   This section does not permit any person to enter a private dwelling
except where necessary to rescue an animal or pursuant to the execution of a
search warrant.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002)
§ 90.095 INVESTIGATION.
   The public health officer, animal control officer and any peace officer may
enter privately owned land to investigate reports of vicious animals, rabies
and other contagious animal diseases and to investigate violations of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002)
HUNTING BY SPOTLIGHT FOR PREDATOR AND NUISANCE ANIMALS
§ 90.110 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. The same meaning as defined in U.C.A. § 41-6a-102.
   SPOTLIGHTING. Throwing or casting the rays of any spotlight, headlight or
other artificial light on any highway or in any field, woodland or forest while
having in possession a weapon by which protected wildlife may be killed.
(Ord. 2012-5-1, passed 5-14-2012)
§ 90.111 ALLOWED SPECIES.
   Species that may be taken while spotlighting are limited to coyote, red fox,
striped skunk, raccoon and/or jack rabbit.
(Ord. 2012-5-1, passed 5-14-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.112 SPOTLIGHT USE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any artificial light used to spotlight coyotes, red foxes, striped
skunks, raccoons and/or jack rabbits must be carried by the hunter.
   (B)   A motor vehicle headlight or light attached to a motor vehicle may not
be used to spotlight the animal.
   (C)   While hunting with the use of an artificial light, the hunter may not
occupy or operate any motor vehicle.
(Ord. 2012-5-1, passed 5-14-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.113 RESTRICTIONS ON SPOTLIGHTING WITHIN THE COUNTY.
   (A)   (1)   Before being able to spotlight, a person must first obtain a
spotlighting permit from the Sheriff’s Office. There is a $20 cost to the
permit; the Sheriff’s Office may restrict the number of permits issued. The
cost of the permit is for the administration costs of the permit and will be
retained by the county. Permits are valid for 365 days from when they are
obtained.
      (2)   Those individuals in the field with a weapon are required to
possess a spotlighting permit. Hunters are required to have either a blue card
or current small game license in order to purchase a spotlighting permit.
Hunters under the age of 16 may receive a free permit if a legal guardian
purchases a permit at full price.
   (B)   The spotlighting season in the county shall be closed from August 1 to
November 30.
   (C)   Any weapon may be used for spotlighting. Firearms may not have a
caliber larger than .24 and must not be capable of being fired fully automatic.
Expanding bullets must be used. Shotguns and archery tackle are permitted.
   (D)   Spotlighting is not allowed within 600 feet of a residence, city or
town boundary.
   (E)   Spotlighting is not allowed on private property without written
permission from the property owner.
   (F)   Hunters are not allowed to trespass on private property while
spotlighting.
   (G)   Spotlighting may not be done by a person under 18 years of age unless
accompanied by a person 18 years of age or more, and each person must posses a
spotlighting permit.
   (H)   Persons hunting with a spotlight must contact the Sheriff’s Office
each day they are hunting and give the following information:
      (1)   Permit number;
      (2)   Approximate location;
      (3)   Approximate time they will be hunting; and
      (4)   If hunting with more than one person, the permit number of each
hunter must be reported.
   (I)   Hunters will report to the Sheriff’s Office within two business days
after the hunt to report the number of predators taken and the location of
each.
(Ord. 2012-5-1, passed 5-14-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.114 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter does not apply to:
   (A)   A person or his or her agent who is lawfully acting to protect his or
her crops or domestic animals from predation by those animals; or
   (B)   An animal damage control agent acting in his or her official capacity
under a memorandum of agreement with the Division of Wildlife Resources.
(Ord. 2012-5-1, passed 5-14-2012)
§ 90.115 PROPERTY DAMAGE.
   (A)   Hunters who are found to have caused damages will be solely
responsible for all damages to any and all property damaged.
   (B)   If found to be criminal in nature, the hunters will be charged
criminally and will face prosecution according to state law.
(Ord. 2012-5-1, passed 5-14-2012) Penalty, see §
90.999
LIVESTOCK FENCING
§ 90.130 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FENCE. A barrier, railing or other upright structure, or cattle guard,
typically of metal, wood or wire, meant to enclose an area of ground to mark a
boundary, control access or prevent escape. A LEGAL FENCE is defined for the
purpose of this subchapter as a FENCE with not less than four horizontal
barriers consisting of wires, boards, poles or other fence material, with posts
set no more than 16 feet apart. The lower barrier shall not be more than 18
inches above the ground and the space between any two barriers shall not be
more than 12 inches, and the height of the top barrier must be at least 42
inches above the ground, unless otherwise approved by the county.
   FENCE OUT. Requiring a property owner to fence out animals in an open range
as identified on the official map.
   FENCE IN. Requiring an animal’s owner to fence it in or otherwise keep
livestock on the person’s own property.
   HISTORIC LIVESTOCK TRAIL. Property over which livestock has historically
traveled to or from a grazing area or market. Width of the trail may vary.
   OPEN RANGE. A large area of grazing land without fences or other barriers,
mostly consisting of Forest, BLM and State Trust Lands, and upon which cattle,
sheep or other domestic animals are grazed or permitted to roam by custom,
license, lease or permit. Those wanting to keep animals off their property must
erect a fence to keep animals out as identified on the official map.
   STATE. Refers to public land owned by the state or Trust Lands managed by
the State School and Institutional Trust Lands Administration.
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, horse, ass, mule, sheep, goat or swine.
(Ord. 2024-6-1, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 90.131 REGULATION OPEN RANGE OR FENCE OUT.
   (A)   This section pertains to the open range or fence out areas of the
county as identified on the official map.
   (B)   It is lawful for livestock to be on private property, or land
belonging to the United States or the state, and used for grazing purposes in
the county and is identified as open range or fence out. It is not lawful for
livestock to be on private property within this area which is maintained by a
properly constructed fence as defined in §
90.130. Nor is it lawful for any person, firm or corporation to willingly herd,
drive or by other means livestock upon private property within this area
without a written contract or agreement from the private land owner.
(Ord. 2024-6-1, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.132 FENCE IN.
   (A)   This section pertains to the fence in areas of the county as
identified on the official map.
   (B)   It is not lawful for livestock to trespass onto another person’s
private property, or land belonging to the United States or the state, and is
identified as closed range or fence in, unless at which time of trespass the
owner has made efforts for livestock to be contained by a legal fence and such
animals have been caused to be estray by unforeseen circumstance. It is
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to willingly herd, drive or by
other means livestock upon another private property owner without a written
contract or agreement.
(Ord. 2024-6-1, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.133 HISTORIC LIVESTOCK TRAIL.
   (A)   This section pertains to historic livestock trails in the county as
identified on the official map and also labeled for times of year and season to
which livestock trail and travel to and from grazing areas identified as open
range.
   (B)   The owner of any cattle, horse, ass, mule, sheep, goat or swine that
trespasses upon the premises of another person is not liable in a civil action
to the owner or occupant of the premises for damage inflicted by the trespass
if:
      (1)   The animal enters the premises from a historic livestock trail as
defined in U.C.A. § 57-13b-102; and
      (2)   The premises that was trespassed is not enclosed by an adequate
fence at the time the trespass occurs.
(Ord. 2024-6-1, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 90.134 OWNER LIABLE FOR TRESPASS OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   The owner of any cattle, horse, ass, mule, sheep, goat or swine that
trespasses upon the premises of another person, except in cases where the
premises are not enclosed by a lawful fence in a county or municipality that
has adopted a fence ordinance, is liable in a civil action to the owner or
occupant of the premises for any damage inflicted by the trespass.
   (B)   A county representative may intervene to remove the animal and the
county is entitled to fair compensation for costs incurred. If the animal is
not claimed within ten days after written notification is sent to the animal’s
owner, a county representative may sell the animal to cover costs incurred.
   (C)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B) above, the owner of any cattle,
horse, ass, mule, sheep, goat or swine that trespasses upon the premises of
another person is not liable in a civil action to the owner or occupant of the
premises for damage inflicted by the trespass if:
      (1)   The animal enters the premises from an historic livestock trail as
defined in U.C.A. § 57-13b-102; and
      (2)   The premises that were trespassed are not enclosed by an adequate
fence at the time the trespass occurs.
(Ord. 2024-6-1, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
90.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see U.C.A. § 4-25-205
§ 90.135 FAILURE TO CLOSE ENTRANCE TO ENCLOSURE.
   A person who willfully opens and leaves open a closed gate to a fence or
opens bars or gates into any livestock enclosure other than the person’s own
livestock enclosure or into any livestock enclosure jointly owned or occupied
by such person and others, and leaves the livestock enclosure open:
   (A)   Is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor; and
   (B)   Is liable in damage for any injury sustained by any person as a result
of such an act.
(Ord. 2024-6-1, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 90.136 ACCIDENT RESPONSIBILITIES; LIVESTOCK ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   A person who owns or is in possession or control of any
livestock may not willfully or negligently permit any of the livestock to stray
or remain unaccompanied on a highway, if both sides of the highway are
separated from adjoining property by a fence, wall, hedge, sidewalk, curb, lawn
or building.
      (2)   Division (A)(1) above does not apply to range stock drifting onto
any highway, moving to or from their accustomed ranges as in open range
identified on the official map.
   (B)   (1)   A person may not drive any livestock upon, over or across any
highway during the period from half an hour after sunset to half an hour before
sunrise.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) above does not apply if the person has a sufficient
number of herders with warning lights on continual duty to open the road to
permit the passage of vehicles.
(Ord. 2024-6-1, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
90.999
Cross-reference:
   Related provisions, see U.C.A. § 41-6a-407
§ 90.137 NEW DEVELOPMENT/SUBDIVISION LIVESTOCK FENCE REQUIREMENT.
   Any individual, developer or corporation who changes the use of agricultural
land(s) to non-agricultural use must adequately fence the property that is
adjacent to irrigated land, grazing land or currently in Greenbelt or
agriculture production to keep any livestock out of the newly developed non-
agricultural land.
(Ord. 2024-6-1, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Except for §§
90.110 to
90.115 and
90.130 to
90.137 of this chapter, a person convicted the first time for an offense within
this chapter for which a specific penalty is not stated is guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor. Second and subsequent offenses shall constitute Class B
misdemeanors.
   (C)   Each act as set out in §
90.005(A) of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation and shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
   (D)   As set out in §
90.015 of this chapter, any person who shall hinder, delay, interfere with or
obstruct any police officer or animal control officer while engaged in
capturing, securing or taking to the animal shelter any animal or animals
liable to be impounded, or who shall break open or in any manner, directly or
indirectly, aid, counsel or advise the breaking open of any animal control
vehicle or other vehicle used for the collecting of any such animals, shall be
deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
   (E)   Each act as set out in §
90.034(A) of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation and shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
   (F)   As set out in §
90.043 of this chapter, any person who shall hinder, delay, interfere with or
obstruct any police officer or animal control officer while engaged in
capturing, securing or taking to the animal shelter any dog or dogs liable to
be impounded, or who shall break open or in any manner, directly or indirectly,
aid, counsel or advise the breaking open of any animal control vehicle or other
vehicle used for the collecting of any such animals shall be deemed guilty of a
Class B misdemeanor.
   (G)   Any person violating any provision of §
90.075 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Each day a
guard dog is deployed for use by any person in violation of this section shall
be deemed a separate offense.
   (H)   (1)   Any person violating a provision of §§
90.110 to
90.115 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any person found in violation of his or her permit will lose the
privilege of holding a county spotlight permit for a minimum of five years.
      (3)   Violations will be reported to state wildlife offices.
   (I)   (1)   A violation of §
90.136(A) and (B) is an infraction.
      (2)   In any civil action brought for damages caused by collision with
any domestic animal or livestock on a highway, there is no presumption that the
collision was due to negligence on behalf of the owner or the person in
possession of the domestic animal or livestock.
(Ord. 2002-11-1, passed 11-4-2002; Ord. 2012-5-1, passed 5-14-2012; Ord. 2024-
6-1, passed 5-13-2024)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Authority of Weed Control Supervisor and Board
General Procedure to Identify and Eliminate Nuisances
   
91.15   Definitions
   
91.16   Nuisance regulations
   
91.17   Examination and investigation
   
91.18   Zoning Administrator nuisance duties
   
91.19   Notice
   
91.20   Appeal procedures; hearings
   
91.21   Abatement by county
   
91.22   Collection by lawsuit
   
91.23   County not civilly liable
   
91.24   Enforcement
Abandoned or Inoperative Vehicles
   
91.35   Definitions
   
91.36   Findings; nuisance conditions
   
91.37   Provisions not exclusive
   
91.38   Administration and enforcement
   
91.39   Exemptions
   
91.40   Contracts or franchises for removal
   
91.41   Administrative cost determination
   
91.42   Authority to remove and abate
   
91.43   Notice to remove; form and content
   
91.44   Public hearing on removal; notice
   
91.45   Public hearing on removal; procedure
   
91.46   Removal of vehicles
   
91.47   Notice to state identifying removed vehicles
   
91.48   Assessment of removal costs
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 AUTHORITY OF WEED CONTROL SUPERVISOR AND BOARD.
   The County Weed Control Supervisor and/or the County Weed Control Board
shall, after giving notice to private landowners as required in § 7 of the Utah
Noxious Weed Act, being U.C.A. § 4-17-109, have the authority to take immediate
steps to cause the control of noxious weeds and to incur costs and expenses in
conjunction therewith, provided, further, that upon taking such steps, the
Board or the Supervisor shall cause to be prepared a summary of costs and
expenses incurred and shall give notice thereof to the owner or possessor of
the property on which the control measures were taken, advising that all such
sums incurred shall become a lien on the property and shall be collectible by
the County Treasurer at the time of the collection of the general taxes.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.010)
GENERAL PROCEDURE TO IDENTIFY AND ELIMINATE NUISANCES
§ 91.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATEMENT. The removal, stoppage, prostration or destruction of that which
causes or constitutes a nuisance, whether by breaking or pulling it down, or
otherwise destroying or effacing it.
   JUNK. Any or all worn out, cast off, destroyed or discarded articles or
materials which are ready for destruction or have been collected and stored for
salvage or conversion to some other use. Any article or material which
unaltered, unchanged and without further reconditioning can be used for its
original purpose as readily as when new shall not be considered JUNK.
   JUNK CARS. Any used car or motor vehicle not in the process of
reconditioning within the last 180 days which has been abandoned for use as a
motor vehicle on a public highway, and which is in unsafe operating condition
and shall have remained in such condition for a period in excess of 365 days;
or portions of JUNK CARS, such as hoods, fenders, radiators, rims, motors,
hubcaps and the like not being immediately utilized in the repair of a motor
vehicle.
   NUISANCE. Any item, thing, manner or condition whatsoever that is dangerous
to human life or health, or renders soil, air, water or food impure or
unwholesome, including, but not limited to, junk, junk cars, rubbish and public
nuisances.
   OWNER. The person, firm or corporation in whose name said premises are
listed in the records of the County Recorder’s Office.
   PROPERTY. Any real property, premises, structure or location on which a
nuisance or public nuisance is alleged to exist.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any fence, wall, shed, deck, trailer, house, garage,
building, structure or any part of any of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole or
smokestack; or any excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk, subspace,
dock, wharf or landing dock; or any lot, land, yard, premises or location which
in its entirety or in any part thereof, by reason of the condition in which the
same is found or permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health,
safety, life, limb or property, or cause any hurt, harm, damage or injury to
any one or more individuals in the county, in any one or more of the following
particulars:
      (1)   By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general
health and safety of the community;
      (2)   By reason of being a fire hazard;
      (3)   By reason of being unsafe for occupancy or use on, in, upon, about
or around the aforesaid property; or
      (4)   By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the
property and/or being vacant, any of which depreciates the enjoyment and use of
the property in the immediate vicinity in which such property is situated or
such condition exists.
   RUBBISH. Includes, but is not limited to: wire, chips, shavings, boxes,
barrels, rags, bottles, broken glass, crockery, tin, cast or wooden ware, iron,
stumps, tree trunks, paper circulars, handbills, boots, shoes, ashes, trash or
any similar waste material.
(Ord. 2022-10-1, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 91.16 NUISANCE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Storage of rubbish prohibited. No person, firm or corporation shall
deposit, store, maintain, collect or permit the storage, deposit, maintenance
or collection of any junk, junk cars or rubbish on his, her or their own
premises or any premises it or they own or use under his, her or their control,
or in any other place within the county except as is expressly provided by law.
   (B)   Maintaining a public nuisance. No person, firm or corporation shall
maintain or commit any nuisance or public nuisance.
(Ord. 2022-10-1, passed 10-24-2022) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.17 EXAMINATION AND INVESTIGATION.
   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to make examination and investigation
of all real property in the county to determine whether owners of such property
are complying with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2022-10-1, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 91.18 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR NUISANCE DUTIES.
   Upon determination that a violation of the provisions of this subchapter
exists, the Zoning Administrator shall ascertain the name of the owner and a
description of the premises where the violation exists and shall serve notice
in writing upon the owner or occupant of such property, either personally or by
mailing notice, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or occupant at the last
known post office address as disclosed by the records of the County Treasurer,
requiring such owner or occupant, as the case may be, to eradicate, destroy or
remove the junk, junk cars, rubbish, nuisances or structures causing the
violation within such time as the Zoning Administrator may designate, which
shall not be more than 60 days from the date of service of such notice.
(Ord. 2022-10-1, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 91.19 NOTICE.
   (A)   Letter; content. The notice herein provided for shall be in the form
of a letter, approved by the County Commission, stating the manner in which
this subchapter is being violated, the description and/or location of the
premises, the name of the owner and tenant (if known) of said premises and the
period of time within which said premises shall be cleared from the violation
of this subchapter. The Zoning Administrator shall sign such letter.
   (B)   Publication. If service of such notice is unable to be perfected by
any of the methods described in this section, the Zoning Administrator shall
cause a copy of the aforesaid notice to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county once a week for three consecutive weeks, and shall
further cause a copy of the aforesaid notice to be left with the individual, if
any, in possession of such property on which it is alleged such a nuisance or
public nuisance exists, or if there is no individual in possession thereof, the
Zoning Administrator shall cause a copy of the notice to be posted at such
structure, location or premises.
   (C)   Statement of findings; failure to comply. The aforesaid notice to the
owner of the property shall state clearly and concisely the findings of the
Zoning Administrator with respect to the existence of a nuisance or public
nuisance. The notice shall further state that unless the owner thereof shall
cause the abatement of the nuisance or public nuisance pursuant to the orders
contained in the Zoning Administrator’s notice, the nuisance or public nuisance
shall be abated by the county at the expense of the owner.
   (D)   Record owner responsible. Any person who is the record owner of the
premises, location or structure at the time an order pursuant to this
subchapter is issued and served upon him or her shall be responsible for
complying with that order and liable for any costs incurred by the county
therewith, notwithstanding the fact that he or she conveys his or her interests
in the property to another after such order was issued and served.
(Ord. 2022-10-1, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 91.20 APPEAL PROCEDURES; HEARINGS.
   (A)   Demand for hearing. The owner or occupant of the property who has been
served with a notice pursuant to this subchapter that a nuisance or public
nuisance exists and that it must be abated within 30 days may, within seven
calendar days after receipt of such notice, make written demand to the Zoning
Administrator for a hearing on the question of whether a nuisance or public
nuisance in fact exists. The hearing shall be held at the next County
Commission meeting following receipt by the Zoning Administrator of the written
demand, and at least two business days’ notice of hearing shall be given to the
individual who made the written demand for the hearing.
   (B)   Conduct of hearing. The County Commission shall conduct the hearing.
The County Commission may amend or modify the notice and/or order to extend the
time for compliance with the Zoning Administrator’s order.
   (C)   Evidence. The owner, agent of the owner and occupant, if any, of the
subject property shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to the
County Commission in the course of the hearing.
(Ord. 2022-10-1, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 91.21 ABATEMENT BY COUNTY.
   Should any nuisance or public nuisance not be abated at the expiration of
the time stated in the notice/order, or within such additional time as the
Zoning Administrator or County Commission may grant, the Zoning Administrator
shall have the authority to enter upon the property and abate the nuisance or
public nuisance found thereon. In abating such a nuisance, the Zoning
Administrator may go to whatever extent may be necessary to complete the
abatement of the nuisance or public nuisance. In abating a nuisance or public
nuisance, the Zoning Administrator may call upon any of the county departments
or agencies for whatever assistance shall be deemed necessary or may by private
contract cause the abatement of the nuisance or public nuisance. The Zoning
Administrator shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in
the removal and destruction of the same and shall mail a copy thereof to the
owner demanding payment within 30 days of the date of mailing. Such notice
shall be deemed delivered when mailed by registered mail and addressed to the
last known address of the property owner on the records of the County Assessor.
(Ord. 2022-10-1, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 91.22 COLLECTION BY LAWSUIT.
   (A)   In the event the owner fails to make payment of the amount set forth
in such statement to the County Treasurer within 30 days of the date of
mailing, the Zoning Administrator may cause suit to be brought in the
appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. In the event collection for
expenses for destruction and removal are pursued through the court, the county
shall sue for and receive judgment for all expenses for destruction and
removal, together with reasonable attorney fees, interest and court costs, and
shall execute upon such judgment in the manner provided by law.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall make a certified and itemized statement
of all expenses incurred in the removal and destruction of the same and shall
deliver the statement to the County Treasurer within ten days after the
expiration of the 30-day period provided for such payment. After entry by the
County Treasurer, the amount entered shall have the force and effect of a valid
judgment of the District Court; is a lien upon the property; and shall be
collected by the County Treasurer at the time of the payment of general taxes.
Upon payment of the costs and expenses, the judgment is satisfied and the lien
is released from the property.
(Ord. 2022-10-1, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 91.23 COUNTY NOT CIVILLY LIABLE.
   Neither the county nor its officers or agents or employees shall be civilly
liable to any owner or occupant or person having an interest in real property
for the removal of a nuisance or public nuisance under the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2022-10-1, passed 10-24-2022)
§ 91.24 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Planning Commission, County Commission, Zoning Administrator, Building
Official, County Attorney, Sheriff’s Office and such other departments or
agencies of county government as may be designated are hereby authorized as the
agencies charged with the enforcement of this subchapter and shall enter such
actions in court as are necessary. Failure of such departments to pursue
appropriate legal remedies shall not legalize any violation of such provisions.
(Ord. 2022-10-1, passed 10-24-2022)
ABANDONED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
§ 91.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular travel. HIGHWAY includes
STREET.
   OWNER OF THE LAND. The owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts
thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.
   OWNER OF THE VEHICLE. The last registered owner and legal owner of record.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Does not include “highway.”
   VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or
drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.36 FINDINGS; NUISANCE CONDITIONS.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the state to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the Board of
Commissioners makes the following findings and declarations.
   (A)   The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not
including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value
of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering,
to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard
to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and
insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not
including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby
declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.37 PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   This subchapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the unincorporated area of the
county. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes,
statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the county, the
state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.38 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this subchapter
shall be administered and enforced by the County Sheriff.
   (B)   In the enforcement of this subchapter, such officer and his or her
deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or
parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and to
remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a
nuisance pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.39 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a
solid fence or other enclosure in a lawful manner where it is not visible from
a street or other public or private property; or
      (2)   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or junk dealer, or when such storage or
parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or
private nuisance as defined under provisions of law.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.40 CONTRACTS OR FRANCHISES FOR REMOVAL.
   When the Board of Commissioners has contracted with or granted a franchise
to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter
upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a
vehicle, or parts thereof, that is declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.41 ADMINISTRATIVE COST DETERMINATION.
   The Board of Commissioners shall from time to time determine and fix an
amount to be assessed as administrative costs under this subchapter.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.42 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE AND ABATE.
   Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property
within the county, the Sheriff shall have the authority to cause the abatement
and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed herein.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.43 NOTICE TO REMOVE; FORM AND CONTENT.
   (A)   A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or
parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail, or
certified mail, to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle unless
the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available
to determine ownership.
   (B)   The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following
forms.
      (1)   Form for land owner.
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
   (Name and address of owner of the land)
   As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at
_____________________ (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned
pursuant to County Ordinance No. 10.10, has determined that there exists upon
said land an abandoned (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle registered to ________________ (license number), which
constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of County Ordinance No.
10.10.
   You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by removal of said vehicle, or
said parts of a vehicle within ten days from the date of mailing of this notice,
and upon your failure to do so, the same will be abated and removed by the county
and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as
owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.
   As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is
located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the mailing
of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such request is not
received by the Board of Commissioners within such ten-day period, the County
Sheriff shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts
of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a
public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such ten-day
period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of
a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall
be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You
may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle,
or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time
for consideration at such hearing.
Notice mailed __________________________________
         (Date)
s/_____________________________________________
Sheriff of _____________________________ County
 
      (2)   Form for vehicle owner.
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of
vehicle—notice should be given to both if different.)
   As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of
vehicle—make, model, license and the like), you are hereby notified that the
undersigned pursuant to Ordinance No. 10.10 of the county has determined that
said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled
or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and
constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 10-10
of the county.
   You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle
(or said parts of a vehicle) within ten days from the date of mailing of this
notice.
   As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of
a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the
mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a
request is not received by the County Board of Commissioners within such ten-day
period, the Sheriff shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or
said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.
Notice mailed __________________________________
         (Date)
s/_________________________________________
(Locally designated officer)
 
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.44 PUBLIC HEARING ON REMOVAL; NOTICE.
   (A)   Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received
by the Sheriff within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to
abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the Board of Commissioners
on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of
the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts
thereof against the property on which it is located.
   (B)   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such
ten-day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing
which does not require his or her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be
mailed, by registered mail or certified mail, at least ten days before the
hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle unless the
vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to
determine ownership.
   (C)   If such a request for hearing is not received within the ten days
after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the county shall
have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a
public nuisance without holding a public hearing.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.45 PUBLIC HEARING ON REMOVAL; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All hearings under this subchapter shall be held before the Board of
Commissioners, which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent.
Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle
or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the said
private property or public property. The Board of Commissioners shall not be
limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in
person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for
consideration at the hearing and deny responsibility for the presence of the
vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners may impose such conditions and take such
other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the
purpose of this subchapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or
parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the
conclusion of the public hearing, the Board of Commissioners may find that a
vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is
inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the
property as a public nuisance, as hereinafter provided, and determine the
administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of
the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the
vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license
number of the vehicle, if available, at the site.
   (C)   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the
land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he or she has not
subsequently acquiesced to its presence, the Board of Commissioners shall not
assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the
property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such
costs from such owner of the land.
   (D)   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land but does not
appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the Board of
Commissioners but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of
the decision.
   (E)   Such appeal shall be heard by the Board of Commissioners, which may
affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.
   (F)   The Clerk/Auditor shall give written notice of the time and place of
the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in §
91.43 of this subchapter.
   (G)   In conducting the hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall not be
limited by the technical rules of evidence.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.46 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
   Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle, or parts
thereof, to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice
of the decision, if such notice is required, or 15 days after such action of
the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle, or parts
thereof, may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile
dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be
reconstructed or made operable.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.47 NOTICE TO STATE IDENTIFYING REMOVED VEHICLES.
   Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof,
notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the
vehicle, or parts thereof, removed. At the same time, there shall be
transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration
available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and
license plates.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.48 ASSESSMENT OF REMOVAL COSTS.
   If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged
against the owner of a parcel of land are not paid within 30 days of the date
of the order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall
be assessed against the parcel of land and shall be transmitted to the tax
collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other
county taxes.
(Ord. 2000-3-1, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of §§
91.15 to 91.24 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in §
10.99 of this code. Any violation shall constitute a separate offense on each
successive day continued.
(Ord. 2022-10-1, passed 10-24-2022)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSING GENERALLY
      
111.   SOLICITORS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND PEDDLERS
      
112.   ALCOHOL
      
113.   FOOD SERVICES
      
114.   LODGING AND CARE FACILITIES
      
115.   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSING GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Application
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Doing business without a license prohibited
   
110.04   Failure to obtain a license
   
110.05   Constructive notice of time periods
   
110.06   Exemptions
License Procedures and Regulations
   
110.20   Application for license
   
110.21   License issuance; fee collection
   
110.22   Inspections; audits
   
110.23   Multiple businesses at one location
   
110.24   Separate license required for each location
   
110.25   Term of licenses; certificate form; transfer prohibited
   
110.26   License fees
   
110.27   Renewals of business licenses
   
110.28   Additional fees
   
110.29   Reciprocal licenses; no fee required
   
110.30   Displaying license
   
110.31   New license; six-month wait
   
110.32   Code compliance
Administration and Enforcement
   
110.45   Grounds for suspension or revocation
   
110.46   Suspension or revocation hearings
   
110.47   Appeal procedures
 
   
110.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Business Fee Schedule
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 APPLICATION.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all county business licensing activities.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS. An establishment that:
      (1)   Provides amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
      (2)   Features topless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators or similar entertainment;
      (3)   A book or video store having the substantial or significant portion
of its trade in books, magazines, periodicals or other materials which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas; or
      (4)   A theater used exclusively or primarily for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by persons 18 years of age or older on the
premises.
   AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY OR BUSINESS. An industry or business involving
agricultural products in manufacturing, packaging, treatment, sales, intensive
feeding or storage, including, but not limited to, commercial greenhouses, feed
yards, fur farms, food packaging or processing plants, fruit and vegetable
stands, commercial poultry or egg production and similar uses. AGRICULTURAL
INDUSTRY OR BUSINESS shall not include the raising or sale of unprocessed
crops, including hay.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE REGULATIONS. The county regulations governing the
requirements related to beer are defined by this Title XI or the currently
adopted state code, U.C.A. Title 32B. The more strict requirement shall apply
within the county.
   APPLICANT. Any person, corporation or partnership applying for a license
provided for in this Title XI.
   APPLICATION. A form written request for the issuance of any license
permitted under this Title XI.
   BUSINESS, TRADE, PROFESSION or CALLING. Includes all activities engaged
within the unincorporated limits of the county carried on for the purpose of
gain or economic profit, except that the acts of employees rendering service to
employers shall not be included in the term BUSINESS unless otherwise
specified.
   CHURCH. A building:
      (1)   Set apart for worship;
      (2)   In which religious services are held;
      (3)   With which clergy is associated; and
      (4)   That is tax exempted under the laws of the state.
   CLERK/AUDITOR. The Sevier County Clerk/Auditor.
   COMMUNITY LOCATION.
      (1)   A public or private school;
      (2)   A church;
      (3)   A public library;
      (4)   A public playground; or
      (5)   A public park.
   COUNTY. The County of Sevier, State of Utah.
   DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION. The practice of engaging in or attempting to
engage in conversation with any person at a residence, whether or not that
person is a competent individual, while making or seeking to make or facilitate
a home solicitation sale, or attempting to further the sale of goods and/or
services.
   EDUCATIONAL FACILITY. Includes:
      (1)   A nursery school;
      (2)   An infant day care center; and
      (3)   A trade and technical school.
   ENGAGING IN BUSINESS. The sale of tangible personal property at retail or
wholesale, the manufacturing of goods or property and the rendering of personal
services for others for consideration by persons engaged in any profession,
trade, craft, business, occupation or other calling, except the rendering of
personal services by an employee to an employer under any contract of personal
employment. ENGAGING IN BUSINESS also includes agricultural industries, but not
farming or ranching.
   FARMING. Tilling soil, raising and selling unprocessed crops, including hay,
horticulture and gardening, breeding, grazing and keeping or raising domestic
animals and fowl, but shall not include any agricultural industry or business.
   FEE SCHEDULE. The schedule of fees listed in Appendix A of this chapter.
   FIRE HAZARD. Includes any combustible or explosive matter or dangerous
accumulation of waste paper, boxes or highly inflammable substances especially
likely to ignite in any building or premises.
   FOOD TRUCK or FOOD CART. A fully encased food service establishment:
      (1)   On a motor vehicle or on a trailer that a motor vehicle pulls to
transport; and
      (2)   From which a food vendor prepares, cooks, sells or serves food or
beverages for immediate human consumption.
   FOOD TRUCK EVENT. An event where an individual has ordered or commissioned
the operation of a food truck at a private or public gathering.
   FOOD TRUCK VENDOR. A person who sells, cooks or serves food or beverages
from a food truck.
   GOODS. One or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise,
perishables of any kind, subscriptions or manufactured products offered,
provided or sold.
   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Central Utah Public Health Department.
   HOME-BASED BUSINESS. A business that is operated out of a person’s primary
residence.
   ICE CREAM TRUCK. A fully encased food service establishment:
      (1)   On a motor vehicle or on a trailer that a motor vehicle pulls to
transport;
      (2)   From which a vendor, from within the frame of the vehicle, services
ice cream;
      (3)   That attracts patrons by traveling through a residential area and
signaling the truck’s presence in the area, including by playing music; and
      (4)   That may stop to serve ice cream at the signal of a patron.
   LICENSED PREMISES. Relative to beer licenses, any room, house, building,
structure or place occupied by any person licensed to sell beer or to allow the
consumption of liquor on such premises under this Title XI, provided that, in
any multi-roomed establishment, an applicant shall designate a room or portion
of a building of such business for consumption or the sale of beer, which
portion so specifically designated in the application and in the license issued
pursuant thereto shall be the LICENSED PREMISES. Multiple dining facilities
located in one building and owned or leased by one licensed applicant shall be
deemed to be only one LICENSED PREMISES.
   LICENSEE. Relative to beer licenses, any person(s) holding any beer, liquor
or private club license in connection with the operation of a place of business
or private club. This term shall also include any employee of the LICENSEE.
   NO SOLICITATION SIGN. A reasonably visible and legible sign that states “No
Soliciting,” “No Solicitors,” “No Salespersons,” “No Trespassing” or words of
similar import.
   NUISANCE. Relative to beer licenses, any room, building, structure or place
which is licensed under the provisions of this Title XI, where:
      (1)   Alcoholic beverages are manufactured, sold, kept, bartered, stored,
given away or used contrary to the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, being
U.C.A. Title 32B, or this Title XI, or where persons resort for drinking
beverages contrary to the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act or this Title
XI;
      (2)   Persons under the age of 21 are permitted to purchase or drink
beer; or
      (3)   Applicable laws or ordinances governing a licensee’s business
operation are violated by the licensee or his or her agents or patrons with the
consent or knowledge of the licensee.
   OFF-SITE IMPACT. The cumulative effect of light, noise, traffic, dust and
street use that a home-based business has on the primary residential use and
surrounding neighborhood.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. Each separate location maintained or operated by a person
within the unincorporated limits of the county from which a business activity
is conducted or transacted; and as used in connection with the issuance of a
beer license, means and includes cafés, restaurants, public dining rooms,
cafeterias, lounges, taverns, cabarets and any other place where the general
public is invited or admitted for business purposes, and shall also be deemed
to include private clubs, corporations and associations operating under charter
or otherwise wherein only the members and their guests are invited. Occupied
hotel and motel rooms that are not open to the public shall not be deemed to be
PLACES OF BUSINESS as herein defined.
   RESORT. Any place consisting of one or more buildings or structures within
the county open to public patronage for compensation and wherein there are
facilities for dining, boating, lodging and/or any other similar activity. It
does not include such picnic areas and mountain retreats which are dedicated
for public use for limited activities of churches or civic organizations which
use the proceeds for charitable or religious purposes.
   RETAILER. Relative to beer licenses, any person engaged in the sale or
distribution of beer to the consumer.
   SALE OF GOODS OR SERVICES. The conduct and agreement of a solicitor and the
competent individual in a residence regarding particular goods or services that
entitles the consumer to rescind the same within three days under any
applicable federal, state or local law.
   SERVICES. The intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided or
sold to a competent individual of a residence.
   SCHOOL. A building used primarily for the general education of minors.
SCHOOL does not include an educational facility.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL. A residential unit, or any portion of a residential unit,
that the owner of record or the lessee of the residential unit offers for
occupancy for fewer than 30 consecutive days.
   SOLICITING, SOLICIT or SOLICITATION. Any of the following activities:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or
consideration, regardless of whether an advance payment is sought;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase
insurance, subscriptions to publications or publications;
      (3)   Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of
value for the benefit of any person or entity;
      (4)   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or
services;
      (5)   Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence for
the purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding
religious belief, political position, charitable conduct or a home solicitation
sale; or
      (6)   Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of
SOLICITING, such as hawking or peddling.
   SOLICITOR. A person engaged in door-to-door solicitation.
   YOUTH. Any person under 21 years of age.
   YOUTH CAMP or YOUTH HOME. Any facility for the accommodation, care,
recreation or training of youth for hire where the care, accommodation,
recreation or boarding of youth is done for compensation, whether by fee or
gift.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.03 DOING BUSINESS WITHOUT A LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To commence or carry on any business, trade, profession or calling
without taking out a license;
   (B)   To engage in any activity regulated or licensed under the provisions
of this Title XI if a license has been suspended or revoked; or
   (C)   To otherwise violate any provision of this Title XI.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 FAILURE TO OBTAIN A LICENSE.
   Any person doing business without a license when a license is required,
including circumstances where a license has expired, been suspended or been
revoked, shall, in addition to applicable criminal penalties, be required to
pay all applicable fees as though the license had been issued during the period
of unlicensed activity, plus penalties described in §
110.26 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE OF TIME PERIODS.
   (A)   All businesses, owners, licensees and applicants are obligated to be
aware of and are deemed to have constructive notice of all time periods and/or
deadlines and the effect of noncompliance with said time periods and/or
deadlines as set forth in this chapter relating to the application, issuance,
renewal, expiration, appeal or other action relating to business licenses, or
any other licensing matters set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the county to
take any affirmative action to notify businesses, owners, licensees or
applicants of any time periods and/or deadlines or the effect of noncompliance
with said time periods and/or deadlines set forth in this chapter relating to
the application, issuance, renewal, expiration, appeal or other action relating
to business licenses or any other licensing matters as set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Any business exempt from the business license requirements as provided
in this section must comply with all other requirements of the county’s Land
Use Ordinance, this code and the state.
   (B)   Acquisition of a business license is not required for the following:
      (1)   Any person or organization for an activity which is conducted,
managed or carried on wholly for charitable or religious purposes from which
profit is not derived, directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or
profit corporation;
      (2)   Any bona fide farming or ranching operation which is engaged in the
raising of plants and/or animals useful to humans unless said business is
authorized to collect state sales taxes under the state statute for sales made
on such products;
      (3)   Yard sales of used personal goods, when such sales are held not
more frequently than once per quarter of each calendar year for not more than
three continuous days on the premises;
      (4)   Activities of minors in short-term entrepreneurial activities, such
as lemonade stands;
      (5)   Any business that is operated only occasionally, and by an
individual who is under 18 years of age, shall not be required to obtain a
business license. Any such business may still apply for a business license and
pay the usual business license fee; and
      (6)   (a)   Any home-based business whose combined off-site impact of the
home-based business and the primary residential use does not materially exceed
the off-site impact of the primary residential use alone shall not be charged a
business license fee.
         (b)   This exemption does not apply when the home-based business:
            1.   Employs people (other than family members);
            2.   Receives regular deliveries (more than once per week);
            3.   Conducts in-person client meetings;
            4.   Displays signage (as defined in Chapter 150 of this code);
            5.   Utilizes on- or off-street parking for the business;
            6.   Stores inventory or materials on-site;
            7.   Gives rise to any other activity or condition that may have a
greater impact on the surrounding area than the impact created solely by normal
residential use; or
            8.   Any person engaged in a business specifically exempted from
municipal licensing by the laws of the United States or the state. The person
claiming an exemption has the burden of establishing such exemption.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
LICENSE PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS
§ 110.20 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for a license shall be in writing on a form provided by
the Clerk/Auditor requiring such information as the Clerk/Auditor deems
necessary to enforce this Title XI.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to incorrectly or fraudulently state or
misrepresent any fact as part of applying for or retaining any license.
   (C)   The Clerk/Auditor’s office shall produce a report summarizing
application activity to the County Commission upon request.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.21 LICENSE ISSUANCE; FEE COLLECTION.
   (A)   The County Clerk/Auditor shall issue licenses and assess and collect
license fees.
   (B)   (1)   Applicants for a business license shall submit a properly
completed application form to the Clerk/Auditor. Unless otherwise provided, if
issuance of the requested license is consistent with applicable law, the Clerk/
Auditor shall approve the application and issue a license.
      (2)   The completed application should be accompanied by:
         (a)   Zoning clearance from the Zoning Administrator. If zoning
clearance is disapproved or conditionally approved, no business license
application can be submitted until all outstanding items of disapproval have
been successfully completed by the applicant to bring the proposed business
location into compliance with all county and state laws; and
         (b)   Clearance from the County Sheriff’s office (for alcohol-related
business activities).
   (C)   The application must include full payment of all business license
fees.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.22 INSPECTIONS; AUDITS.
   As a condition of the issuance, continuation or renewal of a business
license, the applicant shall, upon reasonable demand, permit continuing
inspections of the place of business or other activity to ensure compliance
with all applicable business, zoning, health or safety regulations.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to examine
and inspect all places of business to verify that businesses authorized by the
license issued are carried on in accordance with this Title XI and other
applicable laws. He or she may enter any building or premises during regular
business hours, or if there are no regular business hours, shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control
of the building or premises and request entry. If the property owner or other
responsible person refuses entry or inspection of the property, the Zoning
Administrator or designee may obtain and execute a search warrant.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall report to the County Clerk/Auditor and
the County Attorney all persons doing business without a license and instances
of conduct by any party or business other than that covered by the license
issued.
   (C)   The county may audit the records of applicants or licensees to ensure
compliance with any licensing provision. The Clerk/Auditor may refuse to issue
a license or may suspend or revoke a license if the applicant or licensee
should, for any reason, fail or refuse to cooperate with such an inspection or
audit.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.23 MULTIPLE BUSINESSES AT ONE LOCATION.
   If a person desires to engage in a business which may include two or more
businesses at the same location, the person may only be required to obtain one
business license, provided each different business is listed in the application
for a license. The licensee shall pay the applicable license fees of the
business, trade, profession, calling or occupation from which the greatest
percent of his or her gross revenue and/or income is derived. In the case of a
resort, a resort fee will be charged.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.24 SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH LOCATION.
   (A)   A separate license must be obtained and a separate fee paid for each
place of business where a business activity is established (i.e., two different
gas stations from the same franchise). Each license shall authorize the
licensee to engage in only that business activity described in such license and
only at the location which is indicated thereon. A location shall be considered
separate if it has been assigned a different mailing or street address.
   (B)   A business that regularly provides goods or services at various
locations in the county but has no place of business shall still be required to
obtain a business license.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.25 TERM OF LICENSES; CERTIFICATE FORM; TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   Unless otherwise expressly provided, the following shall apply to all
licenses issued pursuant to this Title XI.
   (A)   All licenses shall be valid for up to one year during the calendar
year of January 1 to December 31, except single-event beer licenses. The
license fee paid as part of a new application for a business license submitted
to the Clerk/Auditor after November 15 will also apply for the following
calendar year.
   (B)   Every certificate of license shall specify by name the person to whom
it is issued and shall designate the particular business licensed and the
location.
   (C)   No license shall be in any manner assignable or transferable to
another owner or authorize any other business than is therein mentioned, except
by permission of the County Commission or unless otherwise provided herein.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.26 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided for in §
110.06 of this chapter, every person intending to engage in business shall,
before commencing business in the unincorporated areas of the county, obtain a
license and pay to the county the appropriate fee as listed on the fee schedule
in Appendix A of this chapter for each place of business, or if no place of
business is established, for each business activity that takes place within the
county.
      (2)   The fees are categorized in the fee schedule by type of business.
If a particular type of business is not listed in the fee schedule, the Clerk/
Auditor shall determine the category that most closely fits the business.
   (B)   An employee who is not a partner or owner shall not be required to pay
for an individual license.
   (C)   License fees shall be paid in advance for the term of the license.
They shall not be prorated when a new application is made during the license
term or when the business activity is temporary (i.e., a corn maze or haunted
house).
   (D)   License fees shall not be refunded because the business or activity
for which the same was obtained has been discontinued for any reason.
   (E)   No rebate shall be allowed upon any license.
   (F)   Other than when a business is renewing its license, if there is a
change in the name of the business, address or owners different than what is
shown on the County Clerk/Auditor’s records, a new application should be
submitted.
   (G)   Any person or firm who fails to renew the license before it expires
shall be assessed an administrative penalty of 20% of the business license fee
(with a $10 minimum) in addition to the fee specified in the fee schedule.
   (H)   License fees and penalties shall be collected by the County Clerk
pursuant to procedures established by the County Clerk/Auditor and Treasurer.
Payment shall be enforced as authorized by law.
   (I)   There is no right to continue a licensed activity without the payment
of required fees and penalties. In addition to any criminal action, the county
may bring a civil action to collect any delinquent or unpaid fees. In the event
legal action is filed to collect delinquent or unpaid fees, the debtor shall
pay a reasonable attorney fee and costs.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.27 RENEWALS OF BUSINESS LICENSES.
   Each calendar year, licensees shall renew their business licenses by
completing an application for a license renewal, signed that all information
contained therein is true, and returning it, along with the proper fees, to the
Clerk/Auditor within the time period set forth in this chapter. Upon receipt of
the application and fees, the Clerk/Auditor shall submit a list of the
applications to the Zoning Administrator and Sheriff’s Department (where
applicable). The Clerk/Auditor shall be authorized to prepare a certificate of
license as provided in this chapter as long as there is not a violation on
file.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.28 ADDITIONAL FEES.
   The fees required under this chapter are in addition to the fees that may be
required by the state.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.29 RECIPROCAL LICENSES; NO FEE REQUIRED.
   Wherever any person, firm or corporation doing business in the
unincorporated limits of the county has no office, building or plant in the
county, but does have a current business license in a city or town located
within the county, such license shall be recognized by the county.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.30 DISPLAYING LICENSE.
   Every certificate of license shall be displayed by the licensee in a
conspicuous place, easily viewed by the public, in which the licensed business,
trade, profession or calling is carried on. When such a certificate of license
has expired, it shall be removed from public view. A licensee without a fixed
place of business shall carry a certificate of license while engaged in
business. It shall be the duty of each licensee, agent and employee to show the
certificate of license upon demand.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.31 NEW LICENSE; SIX-MONTH WAIT.
   No person who has been denied a license or whose license has been revoked,
and no person associated or connected with such a person in the conduct of
business, shall be granted a new license until six months after such denial or
revocation has elapsed.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.32 CODE COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The issuance of a business license does not excuse a licensee from
compliance with applicable zoning, building, fire, electrical or health codes
or other regulatory requirements. No license shall be issued until the
applicant first obtains written preliminary approval of the business location
from the Zoning Administrator or designee indicating that the proposed business
complies with the county’s zoning regulations.
   (B)   The following shall be printed on the face of each license:
 
BUSINESS LICENSE:
The below named person(s) or firm is hereby granted a license to do business as
stated below in Sevier County subject to all County and State health and safety
codes, including those related to zoning, building, health, and fire safety,
and subsequent amendments relating to business licenses for the period
indicated.
 
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 110.45 GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The Clerk/Auditor may suspend or revoke a license if:
   (A)   The business fails or refuses to permit or cooperate with an audit or
inspection;
   (B)   The business fails to pay a required fee;
   (C)   Continuing operation of the licensed activity would constitute a
nuisance or present a danger to the health, general welfare or morals of the
community; or
   (D)   The business is violating this Title XI or any other applicable law,
including zoning, building or health regulations.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.46 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION HEARINGS.
   No license issued under this Title XI shall be suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held before the Clerk/Auditor. Written notice of such hearing shall
be served at least ten days prior to the date thereof upon the licensee.
Service shall be effective when sent by first-class mail to the address
indicated in the business license application. Such notice shall state the
basis of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The decision of
the Clerk/Auditor may be appealed to the County Commission as per §
110.47 of this chapter. No part of the license fee shall be refunded in cases
of suspension or revocation.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.47 APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   If a business license is denied by the Clerk, or if the Clerk suspends
or revokes a license, or if a penalty is imposed, the applicant or licensee may
appeal such action.
   (B)   The filing of an appeal must be within ten days of the date of service
of the notice of any denial, qualified approval, suspension, revocation or
penalty. Upon receiving the notice of such appeal, a public meeting of record
shall be scheduled before the County Commission within 20 days from the date of
the appeal unless such time shall be extended for good cause.
   (C)   The Commission shall hold a public meeting, with a record of the
proceedings being kept, and take such facts and evidence as necessary to
determine whether the denial, qualified approval, suspension, revocation or
penalty was proper under the law.
   (D)   After the public meeting of record, the Commission shall have seven
working days, unless extended for good cause, in which to render findings of
fact, conclusions of law, and recommend a decision.
   (E) The business license appeal procedure is as follows.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1400.jpg]
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or entity found operating a business in violation of Title
XI of this code shall be assessed an administrative penalty of $100 in addition
to the fee specified in the fee schedule in Appendix A of this chapter if they
continue in violation within 30 days of receiving a formal notice.
   (B)   Any violations of this chapter shall be a Class B misdemeanor. Where
applicable, each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
APPENDIX A: BUSINESS FEE SCHEDULE
Type Fee
Type                                           Fee
Agricultural industry, small business, food
trucks, short-term rentals, high-impact home   $45
occupation or temporary activities (i.e., corn
maze, Christmas tree lot)
                                               Class A: $300
Beer license fees                              Class B: $300
                                               Temporary license: $300
Commercial business, retail, industrial,       $75
transportation, warehousing, manufacturing
Duplicate business licenses                    $10 (each)
Itinerant merchants                            $40
                                               Greater of 20% or $10 plus:
Late payment fees                              $30 if paid by February 1
                                               $50 if paid after February 1
Resort                                         $125
                                               0—10 youths: $100
Youth home                                     11—20 youths: $200
                                               21—30 youths: $300
                                               Over 31 youths: $400
 
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
CHAPTER 111: SOLICITORS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND PEDDLERS
Section
Residential Solicitation
   
111.01   Purpose
   
111.02   Deceptive solicitation practices prohibited
   
111.03   “No Soliciting” notice
   
111.04   Duties of solicitors
   
111.05   Time of day restrictions
   
111.06   Buyer’s right to cancel
 
   
111.99   Penalty
RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
§ 111.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Residents of the county have an inalienable interest in their personal
safety, well-being and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability to
provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief, political
or charitable activities and goods and services lawfully in commerce. The
county has a substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or
otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as criminal activity.
   (B)   There must be a balance between these substantial interests. Based on
the collective experiences of county officials derived from regulating business
activity, protecting persons and property from criminal conduct, responding to
the inquiries of citizens regarding door-to-door solicitation, the experience
of its law enforcement officers and those affected by door-to-door canvassing
and soliciting, as well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of
constitutional protections afforded and denied to persons seeking to engage in
door-to-door solicitation, the county adopts this subchapter to promote the
county’s substantial interests in:
      (1)   Respecting citizen’s decisions regarding privacy in their
residences;
      (2)   Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
      (3)   Providing equal opportunity to advocates for and against religious
beliefs, political positions or charitable activities; and
      (4)   Permitting truthful and non-misleading door-to-door solicitation
regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 111.02 DECEPTIVE SOLICITATION PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
   (B)   (1)   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during
face-to-face solicitation:
         (a)   The name of the solicitor;
         (b)   The name and, if requested, the address of the entity with whom
the solicitor is associated; and
         (c)   The purpose of the solicitor’s contact with the person and/or
competent individual.
      (2)   This requirement may be satisfied through the use of a badge or an
informational flyer.
   (C)   No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias or any name other
than his or her true and correct name.
   (D)   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the
granting of a business license implies any endorsement by the county of the
solicitor’s goods or services or of the individual solicitor.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03 “NO SOLICITING” NOTICE.
   (A)   Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse
solicitors by displaying a “No Solicitation” sign, which shall be posted on or
near the main entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the
sidewalk leading to the residence.
   (B)   The display of such a sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute
notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to
receive and/or does not invite solicitors.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 111.04 DUTIES OF SOLICITORS.
   (A)   Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for
any “No Solicitation” sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a
solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to, “No
Solicitation” signs. If such a sign or placard is posted, such solicitor shall
desist from any efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall
immediately depart from such property.
   (B)   It is a violation of this chapter for any person soliciting or
advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell or in any other manner
attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a “No
Solicitation” sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or
attempting to engage in advocating, a home solicitation sale, door-to-door
soliciting or soliciting.
   (C)   It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor, through ruse,
deception or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take action
calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
   (D)   Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence
or dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.
   (E)   The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical
contact with or touch another person without the person’s consent.
   (F)   The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without his
or her explicit consent.
   (G)   The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person
and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally his or
her lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 111.05 TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at
a residence before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Mountain Time unless the
solicitor has express prior permission from the resident to do so.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 111.06 BUYER’S RIGHT TO CANCEL.
   In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to
provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or
solicitor shall present to the buyer, and obtain the buyer’s signature to, a
written statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the
third business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of
“buyer’s right to cancel” shall be in the form required by any adopted state or
federal law modifying or amending such provision.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or entity found operating a business in violation of Title
XI of this code shall be assessed an administrative penalty of $100 in addition
to the fee specified in the fee schedule in Appendix A of Chapter 110 if he,
she or it continues in violation within 30 days of receiving a formal notice.
   (B)   Any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to
exceed $1,000 and a jail sentence of not to exceed six months.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOL
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Alcoholic beverages regulated
Beer
   
112.15   License required to sell beer
   
112.16   Classification of licenses
   
112.17   License applications; fee refund and forfeiture
   
112.18   Beer licensing fees
   
112.19   Suspension or revocation of beer license
   
112.20   Appeal procedures
   
112.21   Single-event beer license
   
112.22   Applicability
   
112.23   Local consent
 
   
112.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Beer licenses at resorts, see §
114.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES REGULATED.
   The county’s regulations governing the requirements related to alcoholic
beverages are defined by this code or the currently-adopted State Code, U.C.A.
Title 32B. The more strict requirement shall apply within the county.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
BEER
§ 112.15 LICENSE REQUIRED TO SELL BEER.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer, either as a
wholesaler or retailer, without first having applied for and obtained a license
therefor. All licensees shall have qualified under and shall comply with the
provisions and regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, being U.C.A.
Title 32B, and the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and all other
statutes of the state pertaining thereto.
   (B)   All licenses granted under the authority of this section shall be
subject to revocation as provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.16 CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Class A licenses. Class A: Off-Premises beer retailer licenses shall
entitle the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises in the original
containers for consumption off the premises.
   (B)   Class B licenses. Class B: On-Premises beer retailer licenses shall
entitle the licensee to sell beer on the licensed premises for consumption on
the premises and to all of the privileges granted to the holder of an off-
premises beer retailer license.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 112.17 LICENSE APPLICATIONS; FEE REFUND AND FORFEITURE.
   (A)   Application for a license to engage in the business of a wholesaler or
retailer of beer shall be made to the County Clerk/Auditor.
   (B)   If the applicant does not already have a county business license, the
applicant shall apply for a business license at the same time as the
application for an alcoholic beverage license is made.
   (C)   Application for a beer license shall be upon a form furnished by the
county and signed under oath by the applicant, accompanied by the appropriate
license fees. If the application is granted, the fee shall be deposited in the
County Treasury; otherwise, it shall be returned to the applicant.
   (D)   Each applicant and licensee must be 21 years of age or older, of good
moral character and a citizen of the United States. No license shall be granted
to any applicant who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude.
   (E)   If an applicant is a partnership, association or corporation, each
partner, association member or corporate director and officer must meet the
requirements of division (D) above.
   (F)   No license fee shall be refunded after a license has been issued.
   (G)   If the Clerk/Auditor determines that the applicant has complied with
the provisions of this subchapter and all other applicable county and state
laws and regulations, the Clerk/Auditor shall approve the application and issue
a license.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 112.18 BEER LICENSING FEES.
   Fees shall be required as shown on the fee schedule, adopted by the County
Commissioners, in Appendix A of Chapter 110 of this code.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 112.19 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF BEER LICENSE.
   (A)   No license issued under this subchapter shall be suspended or revoked
until a formal meeting of record is held before the County Clerk/Auditor.
Written notice of such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least ten
days prior to the date thereof. Service shall be effective when sent by
certified mail to the address indicated in the beer license application. Such
notice shall state the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing.
   (B)   No part of the license fee shall be refunded in cases of suspension or
revocation.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 112.20 APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   To appeal the procedures under this Title XI, refer to §
110.47 of this code for procedures.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 112.21 SINGLE-EVENT BEER LICENSE.
   A single-event beer license shall enable a licensee to sell beer, including
draft, for consumption in conjunction with a special event in open containers
not exceeding one liter, provided that the licensee(s) complies with the
following.
   (A)   A single-event beer license shall not be issued to or in the name of
an individual or natural person. An applicant organization or an artificial
entity must have been in existence as a bona fide organization registered with
a state government for at least one year prior to the date of application.
   (B)   The organization, prior to the issuance of a license, must provide
three letters of reference from local jurisdictions (city or county) where it
has previously held events. The letters shall address the organization’s
compliance with laws, attention to public safety and overall experience with
the organization. The organization shall also provide a list and contact
information for all local jurisdictions where it has held events during the
most recent year.
   (C)   A single-event beer license shall be valid for a period of time not to
exceed three consecutive calendar days.
   (D)   Not more than four permits may be issued to the same organization in
the same calendar year.
   (E)   The organization shall submit a written plan, to be approved by the
license official prior to the issuance of a license, generally describing the
proposed event and demonstrating how the organization will prevent the sale or
distribution of beer to minors and how it will limit consumption by attendees
to a responsible level. Beer shall be sold in an area separated from the event
by a barrier, approved by the license official, where persons under the age of
21 years shall not be allowed.
   (F)   The sale and consumption of beer shall be restricted to the immediate
proximity of the event.
   (G)   Attendees of the event shall not bring any alcoholic beverage into the
event.
   (H)   A single-event license for the sale of liquor shall not be granted.
   (I)   A single-event beer licensee shall abide by all requirements of this
code and as set forth by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control and
the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, being U.C.A. Title 32B.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 112.22 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter applies to all establishments and persons within the
unincorporated limits of the county.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 112.23 LOCAL CONSENT.
   (A)   Any person or entity which had applied to the State Alcoholic Beverage
Control Commission for a beer license pursuant to U.C.A. Title 32B, to be
operated within the unincorporated area of the county, is required to obtain
local consent from the Board of County Commissioners of this county prior to
receiving said license from the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission. In
order to obtain local consent, the applicant shall complete an application for
local consent, business and beer licenses. The completed application, together
with all required attachments, shall be submitted to the County Clerk/Auditor
for consideration by the Commission during a regularly scheduled public
meeting.
   (B)   Before granting local consent, the County Commission shall:
      (1)   Determine that the applicant has complied with all basic
qualifications and requirements for making application for local consent;
      (2)   Consider the locality within which the proposed liquor license is
sought, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Physical characteristics, such as condition of the premises,
square footage and parking availability; and
         (b)   Operational factors, such as tourist traffic, proximity to and
density of other state stores, package agencies and outlets, demographics,
population to be served and the extent of and proximity to any school, church,
public library, public playground or park.
      (3)   Consider the applicant’s ability to manage and operate a facility
with a liquor license, including, but not limited to, management experience,
past retail liquor experience and the type of management scheme employed by the
applicant; and
      (4)   Consider the nature or type of facility or operation, including,
but not limited to, the type of menu items offered and emphasized, whether the
facility emphasizes service to an adult clientele or to minors, the hours of
operation, the seating capacity of the facility and the gross sales of food
items, and any other factors or circumstances it considers necessary.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or entity found operating a business in violation of Title XI of
this code shall be assessed an administrative penalty of $100 in addition to
the fee specified in the fee schedule in Appendix A of Chapter 110 of this code
if they continue in violation within 30 days of receiving a formal notice.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
CHAPTER 113: FOOD SERVICES
Section
Food Trucks
   
113.01   Requirements generally
   
113.02   Fees
   
113.03   Application
   
113.04   Compliance responsibility
   
113.05   Denial, suspension or revocation
 
   
113.99   Penalty
FOOD TRUCKS
§ 113.01 REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall operate a food truck without first having obtained a
business license from the county in accordance with Chapter 110 of this code.
   (B)   Food trucks are allowed to operate in the public rights-of-way and
shall be allowed to vend on private property within all the residential zones
in the county with prior consent from the private property owner.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.02 FEES.
   (A)   Fees shall be required as shown on the fee schedule in Appendix A of
Chapter 110 of this chapter, adopted by the County Commissioners. No license
shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder has paid an annual
business regulatory fee as set forth in Appendix A of Chapter 110.
   (B)   Licenses shall be paid in advance for the term of the license.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 113.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a business license to conduct a food truck business
shall be filed in writing with the County Clerk prior to the commencement of
operation.
   (B)   The license application shall include:
      (1)   The name and location of the applicant’s principal place of
business, or residence if no permanent place of business exists;
      (2)   The number of vehicles to be used in the business, a description of
each vehicle, its license plate number, vehicle identification number (VIN),
proof of insurance coverage and safety inspection; and
      (3)   If any of the foregoing information changes, the applicant or
licensee, as the case may be, shall deliver current information to the County
Clerk/Auditor within ten business days following the change.
   (C)   A valid copy of all necessary licenses or permits required by the
state or the County Health Department, including, but not limited to, proof of
business name and business owner’s or registered agent’s name as registered
with the Department of Commerce, and proof of a valid sales tax certificate
from the state, that includes this county, where business is to be conducted;
   (D)   A signed statement that the licensee shall hold the county and its
officers and employees harmless from any and all liability and shall indemnify
the county and its officers and employees from any claims for damage to
property or injury to persons arising from any activity carried on under the
terms of the license; and
   (E)   Each applicant for a license or renewal under this subchapter shall
also submit with the application a valid fire inspection based on the criteria
that the State Fire Prevention Board establishes in accordance with U.C.A. §
53-7-204.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 113.04 COMPLIANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The license holder shall not be relieved of any responsibility for
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, whether the holder pays
salary, wages or any other form of compensation to drivers.
   (B)   All vendors are subject to the county sales tax for goods sold within
the boundaries of the county. Vendors shall be required to keep accurate
records of daily sales that occur within county limits. The county reserves the
right to audit sales records. Failure to keep accurate records may result in
revocation of the business license.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   Failure to comply with the requirements of this subchapter shall be grounds
for denial, suspension or revocation of a business license.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or entity found operating a business in violation of Title XI of
this code shall be assessed an administrative penalty of $100 in addition to
the fee specified in the fee schedule in Appendix A of Chapter 110 of this code
if they continue in violation within 30 days of receiving a formal notice.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
CHAPTER 114: LODGING AND CARE FACILITIES
Section
Resorts
   
114.01   Applicability
   
114.02   Leasing portion of resort
Short-Term Rentals
   
114.15   License required
   
114.16   License application and contents
   
114.17   License fee
   
114.18   Inspections and compliance
Youth Homes and Youth Camps
   
114.30   Rules and regulations
   
114.31   Fire hazards prohibited
   
114.32   Water and other facilities
   
114.33   Use of firearms
   
114.34   Licensing procedure
 
   
114.99   Penalty
RESORTS
§ 114.01 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   A RESORT is any place consisting of one or more buildings or
structures within the county that is open to public patronage for compensation
and wherein there are facilities for dining, boating, lodging and/or any other
similar activity.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to such picnic areas
and mountain retreats which are dedicated for public use for limited activities
of churches or civic organizations which use the proceeds for charitable or
religious purposes.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 114.02 LEASING PORTION OF RESORT.
   If any part or portion of the resort business has been leased to another
individual or entity, that portion of the resort will require a separate
business/beer license.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
SHORT-TERM RENTALS
§ 114.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to conduct or operate a short-term rental without having
obtained a license through the County Clerk in accordance with Chapter 110 of
this code.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.16 LICENSE APPLICATION AND CONTENTS.
   An application for a business license for short-term rentals within
unincorporated parts of the county must meet the requirements outlined in §
154.224. The application also available through the county offices must be
completed before a decision is made.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 114.17 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The annual fee for a license under this subchapter shall be the same
as the general business license fee as defined in Appendix A of Chapter 110 of
this code.
   (B)   A license with an applicable fee is required for each separate short-
term rental property.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 114.18 INSPECTIONS AND COMPLIANCE.
   After a license has been granted, a county official may make periodic
inspections of a short-term rental to ensure compliance with this subchapter
and all other applicable laws.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
YOUTH HOMES AND YOUTH CAMPS
§ 114.30 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The county shall, as authorized by this subchapter, promote such rules and
regulations for the operation of the youth facilities in the county which it
finds necessary or proper to carry out the intent of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 114.31 FIRE HAZARDS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person, operator or conductor of a youth facility to
permit a fire hazard in any building or premises thereon.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.32 WATER AND OTHER FACILITIES.
   Culinary water and sanitary facilities meeting minimum standards of the
State Health Department shall be installed and kept in good condition at all
times.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.33 USE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for guns to be used by youths unless they are properly
supervised by a qualified adult. Not more than five youths shall be permitted
for each supervisor where guns are used for hunting or training. In the event
guns are permitted to be used by youths, the licensee shall be jointly
responsible for said youths for any damage caused or which may result from the
use of said firearms to persons, corporations or residents of the county or
their property.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.34 LICENSING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   License required. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, operate or
maintain, or to permit to be maintained, conducted or operated, or to
participate in the conduct, maintenance or operation of, a youth camp/home
within the county without having a valid license under this subchapter which is
in full force and effect.
   (B)   Application. The application for a license shall include such
information and data respecting the youth camp/home for which the license is
required as the Clerk/Auditor may prescribe, including a description of the
facility and service and a statement of the personnel and programs that are to
be used therefor.
   (C)   Investigation. Upon receipt of an application for a license, the
county shall cause an investigation to be made of activities, services and
facilities of the applicant, including the character, reputation, health and
qualifications of the applicant and members of the applicant’s staff and of the
applicant’s financial responsibility. The applicant shall afford the
representatives of the county reasonable opportunity to inspect the applicant’s
living facilities for which the license is requested and to interview the
applicant’s agents and employees and any youth within the care of the applicant
in such a youth camp/home.
   (D)   Issuance. A license shall be issued upon completion of such
investigation and upon a determination that the facilities meet health and
safety requirements of the state, and the determination that the applicant is
adequately qualified and equipped to conduct, operate and maintain the youth
camp/home for which the license is issued; that such youth camp/home facilities
and personnel conform to the requirements of this section; that it will be
operated and maintained in such a manner as to be conducive to the benefit and
welfare of the youth in such camp/home and to the citizens and residents of the
county; that the applicant’s financial responsibilities are such as to give
reasonable assurance of the continued operation and maintenance of such
facility; the applicant’s staff are of good character and reputation.
   (E)   Terms.
      (1)   Number of youths. Licenses shall designate the maximum number of
youths to be accompanied in the youth camp/home to which it applies, and this
number shall not be exceeded.
      (2)   Expiration. Each license, whether an original or a renewal license,
shall expire at the end of the year unless sooner revoked or surrendered.
      (3)   Form and transferability. The license shall not be transferable
either as to place or person.
      (4)   Provisional license. The county may issue a provisional license to
any applicant for a period not to exceed one month if the applicant is
temporarily unable to comply with all of the requirements of this subchapter.
Such provisional license may be renewed, but only for one additional period,
providing the applicant has made reasonable efforts to comply with such
regulations.
      (5)   Fees. Fees shall be paid according to the fee schedule in Appendix
A of Chapter 110 of this code.
      (6)   Denial. The county shall deny a license for a youth camp/home if it
shall appear that the applicant, or any of the applicant’s employees or agents
who shall be active in the youth camp/home, shall have been convicted of a
felony or of a misdemeanor or has had inadequate training or experience in the
care of youths.
      (7)   Rules and regulations. The county shall have the power, as
authorized by this chapter, to promote such rules and regulations for the
operation of the youth facilities in the county which it finds necessary or
proper to carry out the intent of this section.
      (8)   Register. Every youth camp/home licensee shall provide and maintain
in such youth camp/home a register in bound book form setting forth the
following facts concerning each youth received, cared for or accommodated in
such facility: name, previous address, age, date of admission, next of kin,
name and address of the person responsible for care and maintenance.
      (9)   Record. Each licensee shall maintain a record setting forth the
following facts concerning each employee, assistant, recreation director or
supervisor: name, age, date of employment beginning in youth facility, present
and previous addresses, name and address of employers during the preceding
three-year period, position and duties.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or entity found operating a business in violation of Title XI of
this code shall be assessed an administrative penalty of $100 in addition to
the fee specified in the fee schedule in Appendix A of Chapter 110 of this code
if they continue in violation within 30 days of receiving a formal notice.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
CHAPTER 115: ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
115.01   Purpose
   
115.02   Application
   
115.03   License required
   
115.04   Issuance conditions
   
115.05   Expiration of license
   
115.06   Suspension or revocation of license
   
115.07   Enforcement
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses in
order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens
of the county and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent
the negative secondary effects of adult-oriented businesses within the county.
The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of or reasonable access to any
communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials. Similarly, it is
not the intent or effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults
to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access
by the distributors and exhibitors of adult-oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 115.02 APPLICATION.
   This chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on
certain business activities which are characterized as adult-oriented
businesses. Except where the context or specific provisions require, this
chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related ordinances, including,
but not limited to, those codified in this Title XI.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 115.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult-oriented
business in the county without a valid adult-oriented business license and in
zones where it is not permitted.
   (B)   (1)   An applicant for an adult-oriented business license or a
sexually-oriented business employee license shall file in person at the county
offices a complete application made on a form provided by the County Clerk/
Auditor. The application shall be signed as required by division (D) below.
      (2)   An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for
each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items
required in divisions (B)(2)(a) through (B)(2)(e) below, accompanied by the
appropriate fee identified in Appendix A of Chapter 110 of this code:
         (a)   The applicant’s full true name and any other names used by the
applicant in the last five years;
         (b)   Current business address or another mailing address of the
applicant;
         (c)   Written proof of age, in the form of a driver’s license or a
copy of a birth certificate;
         (d)   A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has
pled guilty to a specified criminal activity, and if so, each specified
criminal activity involved, including the date, place and jurisdiction of each
as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where
applicable; and
         (e)   A statement of whether any sexually-oriented business in which
an applicant has had an influential interest has, in the previous five years
(and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest):
            1.   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or
            2.   Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking.
      (3)   The information provided pursuant to divisions (B)(2)(a) to (B)(2)
(e) above shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the County Clerk/Auditor within ten working days of a change of
circumstances which renders the information originally submitted false or
incomplete.
   (C)   An application for a sexually-oriented business license shall be
accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is
located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an
individual, the person shall sign the application for a license as an
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is
other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the
business shall sign the application for a license as applicant.
   (E)   The information provided by an applicant in connection with an
application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the County
Clerk/Auditor on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed
only as may be required by law or court order, and only to the extent required
by law or court order.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.04 ISSUANCE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon the filing of a complete application, the County Clerk/
Auditor may require the Sheriff to report in writing within five days giving
his or her recommendations as to granting or denying said application. Within
ten business days, the County Clerk/Auditor shall issue an adult-oriented
business license to the applicant or issue to the applicant a letter of intent
to deny the application.
      (2)   The County Clerk/Auditor shall issue a license unless:
         (a)   An applicant is less than 18 years of age;
         (b)   An applicant has failed to provide information required by §
115.03 of this chapter for issuance of a license or falsely answered a question
or request for information on the application form;
         (c)   The license application fee required by Appendix A of Chapter
110 of this code has not been paid;
         (d)   The sexually-oriented business does not comply with locational
requirements set forth in §§
154.070 through
154.081;
         (e)   Any sexually-oriented business in which the applicant has had an
influential interest has, in the previous five years (and at a time during
which the applicant had the influential interest):
            1.   Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or
            2.   Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking.
         (f)   An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty to a specified
criminal activity.
   (B)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to
the licensee(s), the expiration date and the address of the sexually-oriented
business. The sexually-oriented business license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-oriented business so
that it may be read at any time.
   (C)   All adult entertainment must be located at least 1,000 feet from the
property line of established residences, schools, churches, parks, recreational
or instructional facilities or businesses where children congregate, and from
any other adult business or use.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 115.05 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license may be renewed only by submitting an application as provided
by the County Clerk/Auditor and paying the fee required by Appendix A of
Chapter 110 of this code.
   (B)   Application for renewal of a license should be made at least 30 days
before the expiration date pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
115.02 of this chapter. When made less than 30 days before the expiration date,
the expiration of the license shall not be affected.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 115.06 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Procedure.
      (1)   The denial, suspension or revocation of any license issued pursuant
to this chapter shall be done in accordance with the procedures set forth in §§
154.050 through
154.056.
      (2)   The county may issue a notice suspending or revoking an adult-
oriented business license granted under this chapter if a licensee or an
employee of the licensee has:
         (a)   Violated or is not in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter;
         (b)   Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the adult-
oriented business specifically authorized by this chapter or by any other
statute or ordinance;
         (c)   Given materially false or misleading information in obtaining
the license;
         (d)   Knowingly operated the adult-oriented business during the period
when the business license was suspended;
         (e)   Committed an offense which would be grounds for denial of a
license for which the time period required has not elapsed;
         (f)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person
committed in or on, or solicited for on the licensed premises, or an outcall
employee solicited or committed on or off the premises, an offense which would
be grounds for denial of a license for which a conviction has been obtained,
and the person was an employee of the adult-oriented business at the time the
offenses were committed; or
         (g)   Delinquent in payment to the county for ad valorem taxes or
sales taxes related to the adult-oriented business.
   (B)   Effective date. Suspension or revocation shall take effect within 30
days of the issuance of notice.
   (C)   Appeal has no effect on revocation. The fact that a conviction is
being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
   (D)   Length of revocation. When a license issued pursuant to this chapter
is revoked, the revocation shall continue for six months from its effective
date and the license shall not be reissued to the adult-oriented business or
employee for six months from the date of such revocation.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
§ 115.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   An entity or individual who operated or caused an adult-oriented business to
be operated without a license, or who employs or is employed as an employee of
an adult-oriented business, or who operates such a business or functions in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, is subject to penalties under §§
110.04 and
110.99(B) of this code.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or entity found operating a business in violation of Title XI of
this code shall be assessed an administrative penalty of $100 in addition to
the fee specified in the fee schedule in Appendix A of Chapter 110 of this code
if they continue in violation within 30 days of receiving a formal notice.
(Ord. 2020-11-1, passed 11-23-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS
Section
Curfew
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Curfew for minors
   
130.03   Responsibility of owners of public places
   
130.04   Responsibility of parents and guardians
 
   
130.99   Penalty
CURFEW
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CRUISING. To travel about in a motor vehicle or other means of
transportation without the intention of traveling by a direct route to a
specific and previously determined destination. CRUISING shall be presumed to
be occurring and shall be investigated if a vehicle or other mode of
transportation is seen twice passing the same location within a period of 20
minutes or is observed following a route other than the most direct between two
locations.
   CUSTODIAN. A person over the age of 18 years who is in loco parentis to a
juvenile.
   GUARDIAN. Any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a
minor.
   LOITERING or LOITER. Remaining idle in essentially one location, to be
dilatory, to tarry or to dawdle, and shall include, but not be limited to,
standing around, hanging out, sitting, kneeling, sauntering, prowling,
strolling, wandering or to be idle. LOITERING shall be presumed and
investigated if individuals are observed at or near the same location for a
period of more than 30 minutes.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
   PARENT. The natural or adoptive parent of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground or
place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for
business, entertainment or other lawful purpose. PUBLIC PLACE shall include,
but not be limited to, any store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley,
café, theater, drugstore, pool hall, shopping center or any other place devoted
to amusement or entertainment for the general public. It shall also include
parking areas immediately in the area of such places.
(Ord. 1996-5-1, passed 5-5-1996)
§ 130.02 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minors to loiter or cruise in any public
place in the jurisdiction between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. Sunday
through Thursday and between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. Friday
through Saturday unless accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or other
adult person having custody or control of such minor or unless the minor is on
an emergency errand or specific business or activity directed or permitted by
his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody
of the minor or where the presence of such minor is connected with or requested
by some legitimate employment, trade, profession or occupation, unless exempted
under division (B) below.
   (B)   It is an exemption to a violation under this section that the person
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (l)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the U.S.
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 1996-5-1, passed 5-5-1996) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS OF PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating or having
charge of any public place to knowingly permit or suffer the presence of minors
under the age of 18 between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. Sunday
through Thursday and between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. Friday
through Saturday.
(Ord. 1996-5-1, passed 5-5-1996) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS AND GUARDIANS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person
having custody or control of any minor under the age of 18 to permit or by
inefficient control to allow such minor to loiter or cruise on or in any public
property or public place within the jurisdiction between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 4:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 12:01 a.m.
and 4:00 a.m. Friday through Saturday.
   (B)   However, the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, custodian or other adult person
having care, custody and control of the minor, or if the minor is on an
emergency errand or specific business or activity directed by the parent,
guardian, custodian or other adult having care and custody of the minor, or if
the parent, guardian or other adult person herein has made a missing person
notification to the County Sheriff’s Department.
(Ord. 1996-5-1, passed 5-5-1996) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any minor violating the provision of §§
130.01 to 130.04 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any parent,
guardian or other adult person having care and custody of a minor violating §§
130.01 to
130.04, after having been previously notified of a prior violation of §§
130.01 to
130.04, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 1996-5-1, passed 5-5-1996)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
      
153.   SUBDIVISION
      
154.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
Codes Adopted
   
150.01   International Building Code
   
150.02   International Residential Code
   
150.03   International Energy Conservation Code
   
150.04   National Electrical Code
   
150.05   International Plumbing Code
   
150.06   International Mechanical Code
   
150.07   Fuel Gas Code
   
150.08   International Fire Code
Buildings and Like Structures
   
150.20   Building permit required for all buildings
   
150.21   Enclosed storage containers regulated
   
150.22   Requirements for obtaining building permits on scattered parcels
Signs
   
150.35   Purpose
   
150.36   Definitions
   
150.37   Sign permit required
   
150.38   Prohibited signs
   
150.39   Animated signs
   
150.40   Temporary signs
   
150.41   Clearance
   
150.42   Outdoor advertising structures
   
150.43   Exceptions
   
150.44   Signs permitted within all zones
   
150.45   Nonconforming signs
   
150.46   Violations
   
150.47   Effective date
CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.01 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the County Clerk/Auditor, being marked and designated as the International
Building Code, 2018 edition, as amended, including Appendix Chapters A to B, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Building Code of the county for regulating and governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, ensuring buildings and structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of the buildings
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use; and the demolition of such
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of
the county are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1: SEVIER COUNTY;
      (2)   Section 1612.3: SEVIER COUNTY; and
      (3)   Section 1612.3: 2018.
   (C)   Nothing in this section or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
division (B) above; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this section.
(Ord. 2022-2-1, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 150.02 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the County Clerk/Auditor, being marked and designated as the International
Residential Code, 2021 edition, including Appendix Chapters A to L, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Residential Code of the county for regulating and governing the construction,
alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location,
removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with
separate means of egress as hereby provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential Code on file in
the office of the county are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section R101.1: SEVIER COUNTY;
      (2)   Table R301.2(1): SEISMIC ZONE D1–WIND 90MPH–ROOF SNOW LOAD
30LB.–FOOTINGS 30” FROST DEPTH; and
      (3)   Section P2603.5.1: 30”–30”.
   (C)   Nothing in this section or in the Residential Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
division (B) above; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this section.
(Ord. 2022-2-2, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 150.03 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the County Clerk/Auditor, being marked and designated as the International
Energy Conservation Code, 2021 edition, including the Appendix, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Energy
Conservation Code of the county for regulating and governing energy-efficient
building envelopes and installation of energy-efficient mechanical, lighting
and power systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code on file in the
office of the county are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised: Section 101.1: SEVIER
COUNTY.
   (C)   That nothing in this section or in the Energy Conservation Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any
court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as
cited in division (B) above; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this section.
(Ord. 2022-2-3, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 150.04 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the County
Office, being marked and designated as the National Electrical Code, 2021
edition, including Annex Chapters A to F, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the county
regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Electrical Code on file in the County Office are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes.
   (B)   Nothing in this section or in the Electrical Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
this section; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this section.
(Ord. 2022-2-4, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 150.05 INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the County Clerk/Auditor, being marked and designated as the International
Plumbing Code, 2021 edition, including Appendix Chapters F to G, as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Plumbing
Code of the county regulating and governing the design, construction, quality
of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation,
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1: SEVIER COUNTY;
      (2)   Section 106.6.2.: 1997 UBC FEE SCHEDULE;
      (3)   Section 106.6.3.: 80%–80%;
      (4)   Section 108.4.: CLASS C MISDEMEANOR–$750.00–90 DAYS;
      (5)   Section 108.5.: $750.00–$750.00;
      (6)   Section 305.4.1: 30”–30”; and
      (7)   Section 903.1: 30”–30”.
   (C)   Nothing in this section or in the Plumbing Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
division (B) above; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this section.
(Ord. 2022-2-5, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 150.06 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the County
Office, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2021
edition, including Appendix Chapters A to G, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the county
regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Mechanical Code on file in the County Office are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1: SEVIER COUNTY;
      (2)   Section 106.5.2: 1997 UBC FEE SCHEDULE;
      (3)   Section 106.5.3: 80%–80%;
      (4)   Section 108.4: CLASS C MISDEMEANOR–$750.00–90 DAYS; and
      (5)   Section 108.5: $750.00–$750.00.
   (C)   Nothing in this section or in the Mechanical Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
division (B) above; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this section.
(Ord. 2022-2-6, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 150.07 FUEL GAS CODE.
   (A)   That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the County Clerk/Auditor of, being marked and designated as the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2021 edition, including Appendix Chapters B to D,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Fuel Gas Code of the county for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and
gas-fired appliances as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code on file in
the office of the County Clerk/Auditor are hereby referred to, adopted and made
a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1: SEVIER COUNTY;
      (2)   Section 106.6.2.: 1997 UBC FEE SCHEDULE;
      (3)   Section 106.6.3.: 80%–80%;
      (4)   Section 108.4.: CLASS C MISDEMEANOR–$750.00–90 DAYS; and
      (5)   Section 108.5.: $750.00–$750.00.
   (C)   Nothing in this section or in the Fuel Gas Code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
division (B) above; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this section.
(Ord. 2022-2-7, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 150.08 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the County Clerk/Auditor, being marked and designated as the International Fire
Code, 2021 edition, including Appendix Chapters A to G, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the
county regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire
and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and
property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Fire Code on file in the office of the County Clerk/Auditor are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
division (B) below.
   (B)   The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1.: SEVIER COUNTY;
      (2)   Section 109.3.: CLASS C MISDEMEANOR, $750.00, 90 DAYS; and
      (3)   Section 111.4.: $750.00–$750.00.
   (C)   Nothing in this section or in the Fire Code hereby adopted shall be
constructed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
section.
(Ord. 2016-8-8, passed 7-26-2016)
BUILDINGS AND LIKE STRUCTURES
§ 150.20 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ALL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   All BUILDINGS, defined as structures exceeding 120 square feet, built
in the unincorporated areas of the county shall be required to obtain a
building permit.
   (B)   All building permits must be approved by the Zoning Administrator and
issued by the Building Official.
   (C)   If the building is for a legitimate agricultural use, as determined by
the Building Official, there will be no charge for the permit.
(Ord. 2014-2-1, passed 2-24-2014)
§ 150.21 ENCLOSED STORAGE CONTAINERS REGULATED.
   (A)   Enclosed storage containers larger than 120 square feet shall be
regulated as any other building or structure.
   (B)   Purchasers, owners or users of enclosed storage containers subject to
regulation shall obtain a building permit for each container from the County
Building Department prior to placing or moving the container onto their
property.
   (C)   Placement of the enclosed container shall meet all setback and hold-
down requirements for the zone in which it will be located.
   (D)   The exterior of the enclosed container shall be painted or altered to
cover any advertising, lettering or numbers.
   (E)   An exemption for temporary storage can be obtained from the County
Building Department but shall not exceed 90 days.
   (F)   This section shall be applicable to any enclosed storage container on
private property in the county which did not have a valid building permit prior
to placement.
   (G)   Any violation of this section shall be punishable as set forth in the
Building Code.
(Ord. 2008-8-1, passed 8-18-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.22 REQUIREMENTS FOR OBTAINING BUILDING PERMITS ON SCATTERED PARCELS.
   Parcels of land that were split after 1969, but before January 1, 1999,
shall be considered eligible for building permits if they meet the following.
   (A)   The parcel must have been of a legal lot size according to the zoning
in place at the time of its creation.
   (B)   The parcel must have had a separate Tax I.D. number prior to January
1, 1999.
   (C)   The parcel must be able to meet all other requirements for a building
permit, including access, power, potable water, irrigation water if applicable,
septic approval from the State Health Department, flood-zone compliance and the
like.
(Res. 2009-3-1, passed 3-2-2009)
SIGNS
§ 150.35 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose and intent of the sign standards is to provide for a
reasonable display of all signage in the unincorporated areas of the county to
identify and advertise products, services, institutions, events and business
establishments for the information and convenience of the general public.
   (B)   These standards and criteria are designed to protect and promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of persons within the community. It
is the county’s policy to regulate signs in a manner that is consistent with
the free speech protections and provisions of the United States Constitution
and of the State Constitution by enacting regulations which do not restrict
speech on the basis of its content, viewpoint or message, and do not favor one
form of speech over another. This subchapter applies in all zones of the
county, and all signs shall conform to the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020)
§ 150.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign structure that has ceased to be used, and the owner
intends no longer to have used, for the display of sign copy, or as otherwise
defined by state law.
   A-FRAME SIGN. Any sign or structure which is composed of two sign faces
mounted or attached back-to-back in such a manner as to form a basically
triangular vertical cross-section through the faces.
   ANIMATED SIGN. Any sign which is designed and constructed to give its
message through movement which are located, constructed, manufactured or sold
upon the same premises upon which the sign is erected.
   ATTACHED SIGN. Any sign which advertises products, services or business
establishments which are located, conducted, manufactured or sold upon the same
premises upon which the sign is erected.
   BILLBOARD. Any sign erected for the purpose of advertising or promoting a
product, event, person or subject that may or may not be located on the
premises on which the sign is located.
   CLEAR-VIEW AREA. An area bounded by lines drawn from a point on the
centerline of the driveway, set back 15 feet from the front property line to
points at the property line in front of the property, 30 feet either side of
the centerline of the driveway for local collectors and 50 feet on collectors
and arterials. Within this area, no view-obstructing object may be located with
a height over two feet from average grade at property line.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A sign identifying an existing or proposed development
project, which may contain the name of the project, name and address of
construction firms, architects, engineers, developers and the like.
   ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SIGN. Any sign, or portion thereof, that displays
electronic images, graphics or pictures, with or without textual information.
Such a sign has the capability of being changed or altered by electronic means
on a fixed display screen composed of a series of lights, including light
emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, plasma displays, light bulbs or other
illumination devices, within the display area where the message is displayed.
ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SIGNS include computer programmable, microprocessor-
controlled electronic or digital displays.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. Any sign that is standing on or erected into the ground.
Such signs are usually, but not necessarily, supported from the ground by one
or more poles or posts or similar uprights, with or without braces. Any sign
which is mounted into the ground but has the support passing through any
portion of the roof of a building or structure shall be a roof sign.
   MONUMENT SIGN. A sign which is incorporated into the landscape or
architectural design scheme and displays the name of uses or buildings.
   NAMEPLATE SIGN. A sign indicating the name and/or occupation of a person
legally occupying the premises or indicating a legal home occupation thereon.
   MOVABLE, FREESTANDING SIGN. Any sign not affixed to or erected into the
ground.
   NON-ATTACHED SIGN. Any sign advertising products, services or business
establishments which are not located, conducted, manufactured or sold upon the
same premises upon which the sign is erected.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. A structure erected and maintained for
outdoor advertising purposes upon which a poster, bill, printing or painting
may be placed to advertise products, goods, services or business establishments
other than those located, conducted, manufactured or sold upon the premises on
which the structure is erected.
   POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign intended to advance a political statement,
cause or candidate for office. A legally permitted outdoor advertising sign
shall not be considered a POLITICAL SIGN.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease or rental of
the property or premises on which it is located.
   ROOF SIGN. Any sign which is erected upon or over the roof or over a parapet
of any building or structure.
   SIGN. Any device visible from a public place that displays either commercial
or noncommercial messages by means of graphic presentation of alphabetic or
pictorial symbols or representations. Noncommercial flags or any flags
displayed from flagpoles or staff will not be considered to be SIGNS.
   SIGN AREA. The area of a sign that is used for display purposes, excluding
the minimum frame and supports. In computing SIGN AREA, only one side of a
back-to-back or double-face sign covering the same subject shall be computed
when the signs are parallel or diverge from a common edge by an angle of not
more than 45 degrees.
   SIGN SETBACK. The minimum distance that any portion of a sign or sign
structure shall be from any street right-of-way line and yard line coterminous
with a street.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display
constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or
other light material displayed out-of-doors shall be considered to be a
temporary sign and shall be permitted, subject to all provisions of this
subchapter, for a period not to exceed 30 days. No sign, handbill, poster,
advertisement or notice of any kind or sort shall be fastened, placed, posted,
painted or attached in any or upon a utility pole, except signs owned and
erected by a public agency or erected by permission of any authorized public
agency as required by law. Any sign not located or not in a fixed position on
property, within a building or car, such as an A-frame, trailer sign or
pedestal-type sign, shall be approved for temporary use not to exceed 72 hours,
and shall be approved by the zoning enforcement officer. Furthermore, if such a
moveable, TEMPORARY SIGN is used on a recurring basis, an agreement shall be
made with the County Commissioners with a fee based on the evaluation of such
sign.
   WALL SIGN. Any sign posted or painted upon, suspended from, or otherwise
affixed to a wall, fascia, canopy or marquee in an essentially vertical
position or with the exposed face of the sign in a place approximately parallel
with the wall or fascia upon which it is attached.
   WINDOW SIGN. A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message
intended to be visible to and readable from the public way or from adjacent
property.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020)
§ 150.37 SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall erect any sign or outdoor advertising structure
without first obtaining approval from the Zoning Administrator in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter and the International Building Code.
   (B)   No person shall erect, construct or maintain any sign upon any
property or building without the consent of the owner or person entitled to
possession of the property or building, if any, or his or her authorized
representatives.
   (C)   No person shall erect or maintain or permit to be erected or
maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him or her any sign which
does not comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   International Building Code, see §
150.01
   International Sign Code, see International Building Code, §
150.01, Appendix H
§ 150.38 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, the following signs are
prohibited:
   (A)   All movable freestanding A-frame signs;
   (B)   Signs mounted or painted upon vehicles or trailers which are parked in
any location for the purpose of calling attention to or advertising a person,
place or thing;
   (C)   No sign shall be permitted at the intersection of any street in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of motor vehicle operators or at
any location where its position, shape or color may interfere with or be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device or which makes use
of a word, symbol, phrase, shape or color in such a manner as to interfere
with, mislead or confuse traffic;
   (D)   No sign, handbill or poster, advertisement or notice of any kind or
sort, whether political or otherwise, shall be fastened, placed, posted,
painted or attached in any way in or upon any curbstone, lamp post, telephone
pole, telegraph pole, electric light or power pole, hydrant, sidewalk or
street, except when the sign is owned and erected by a public agency or erected
by permission of an authorized public agency or required by law; and
   (E)   No lighting associated with a sign shall be installed which will
permit direct rays of light to penetrate onto any adjoining property having a
residential use in such a way as could constitute a nuisance.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.39 ANIMATED SIGNS.
   Flashing or rotating signs are permitted when the following standards are
met.
   (A)   Flashing signs shall be limited to sequential, chasing or subdued
color change. No intense strobe-type flashing will be permitted.
   (B)   Rotation shall be limited to six revolutions per minute; provided,
however, that the lights described above may not be used within 300 feet of a
residential apartment, hotel or other residential structure.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.40 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   The following temporary signs shall be permitted in any zone:
   (A)   Political signs not within 150 feet of polling places and not larger
than 32 square feet. Signs shall be removed not later than 14 days after the
election;
   (B)   Signs advertising a yard sale posted on private property with the
consent of the property owner. The area of the sign shall not exceed eight
square feet;
   (C)   Signs pertaining to the sale or lease of property and/or buildings;
   (D)   Signs advertising temporary uses, including special events as outlined
in §§
154.110 through
154.116; are able to put up signs advertising the event 30 days in advance of
the event. Signs associated with the event need to be removed within 14 days
after completion of the event.
      (1)   For multi-tenant, commercial and industrial properties, the sign
may not exceed 50 square feet. In all other cases, the area may not exceed
eight square feet.
      (2)   Signs must be removed from parcels that are not actively offered
for sale.
   (E)   Signs shall not be placed in a public right-of-way except as allowed
below.
      (1)   Signs shall not obstruct free passage through a right-of-way or
create a safety hazard to the public.
      (2)   Temporary signs as described may be placed in the park strip by the
owner of the property directly adjacent to said park strip. Such a sign shall
be placed for not more than 45 days, nor exceed six square feet in size in said
park strip.
   (F)   Temporary signs shall in no way regulate the content of speech, only
the place and manner in which it is permitted.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.41 CLEARANCE.
   (A)   No sign shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of the sign
or its support will extend over a public or private walkway with a minimum
clearance of less than nine feet from grade level to the bottom of the sign.
   (B)   No sign shall be erected in such a manner than it protrudes into a
traffic area or parking lot without a minimum clearance of 14 feet.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.42 OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Non-attached advertising structures shall be regulated and permitted
as shown in the table below.
 
Zones      Permitted Not Permitted
AG                   X
Commercial X
GRF-20R              X
GRF-20S              X
Industrial X
RA         X
 
   (B)   Non-attached advertising structures shall be erected and maintained
only in conformance with the following provisions.
      (1)   Area. Each non-applicable outdoor advertising structure shall have
a maximum area of 750 square feet per face, exclusive of border and trim.
      (2)   Height. No such advertising structure shall exceed a height of 25
feet.
      (3)   Location.
         (a)   Spacing. All such non-attached advertising structures shall be
located behind the line of the required front yard of the zone in which it is
located and a minimum of 20 feet from the nearest residential zone. Said
advertising structures shall also be spaced in conformance with the following
standards.
         (b)   Level ground. All sign structures shall be constructed on level
ground. Signs shall be prohibited on hill tops, knolls and scenic vistas (as
determined by the Planning Commission), natural slopes or grated slopes
modified by freeway design of 25% or greater.
         (c)   Setback. All sign structures shall be set back from the highway
or interstate right-of-way a minimum of ten feet and a maximum 125 feet.
         (d)   Freeways, major arterials and other highways, streets and roads.
A minimum of l,500 feet shall be maintained between each non-applicable
advertising structure measured in any direction (“major arterial” as defined by
the street standards of the county).
         (e)   Number. Each non-attached sign or outdoor advertising structure
shall be limited to one sign face, except that two sign faces may be permitted
when said faces are mounted back-to-back with faces in parallel planes at
distances not exceeding four feet apart; or that two sign faces may also be
permitted when said faces are mounted in a “V” configuration, when said faces
are attached at one end and having a maximum distance of 30 feet apart at the
other end. Two sign faces may also be permitted if the total area of two is not
greater than the maximum area for one face, if both faces are supported on the
same structure and if both faces were originally erected together.
      (4)   Construction. All non-attached signs and outdoor advertising
structures shall be constructed of materials prescribed by the International
Building Code, and construction techniques shall be approved by the chief
Building Inspector of the county. All said non-attached signs and outdoor
advertising structures must be issued a building permit prior to construction.
      (5)   Maintenance. The owner or persons in control of any sign shall be
responsible for maintaining such sign, including borders, trim, faces, weight-
bearing and bracing structures and surrounding grounds or environment, in a
litter-free and safe manner.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   International Building Code, see §
150.01
§ 150.43 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall have no application to signs used exclusively for:
   (A)   The display of official notices used by any court or public body or
official, or the posting of notices by any public officer in the performance of
duty, or by any person giving legal notice;
   (B)   Directional, warning or information signs of a public or semipublic
nature, directed and maintained by an official body or public utility;
   (C)   Any sign of a noncommercial nature when used to protect the health,
safety or welfare of the general public;
   (D)   Any official flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, county or
other political unit;
   (E)   Non-illuminated and non-floodlights flat signs, wall signs and
freestanding signs having an area not in excess of 36 square feet announcing
the destruction or construction or remodeling of a building or announcing the
enterprise to be located in a building under construction or announcing the
name and address of the architect or contractor of the building, or the owner
thereof, provided that not more than one such sign shall be erected on each
street frontage and also provided that said signs are not erected more than 30
days prior to construction and are removed not more than 30 days after
completion;
   (F)   Freestanding signs over five feet in height after completion; and
   (G)   Traffic and other municipal signs, house numbers or legal notices.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020)
§ 150.44 SIGNS PERMITTED WITHIN ALL ZONES.
   For each place of business or occupancy, the following types of signs shall
be permitted in conformance with the standards set forth.
   (A)   Nonresidential zones.
      (1)   Attached freestanding signs five feet or less in height shall meet
the following requirements: There may be one such sign for each frontage of the
property, plus one additional sign for each 100-foot increment of said frontage
in excess of 100 feet. Said signs shall be placed not closer than 50 feet
apart. In the case of a parcel of property having multiple occupations with a
common frontage, the FRONTAGE shall be deemed to be that of the entire commonly
used parcel of property and not the frontage of the individual business or
occupations.
      (2)   Attached freestanding signs over five feet in height shall comply
with the following provisions.
         (a)   There may be one such sign on each street frontage and one
additional sign for any portion of each such frontage in excess of 200 feet.
The size of any such additional sign shall be determined by counting as
frontage that portion of each frontage which is in excess of 200 feet.
         (b)   No such sign shall exceed 25 feet in height.
         (c)   No such sign shall project over a property line, nor more than
five feet into any required front yard.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, every wall sign
and painted wall sign in a commercial zone shall comply with the following
requirements.
         (a)   There may be two such signs for each building face. No building
shall be deemed to have more than four building faces.
         (b)   No part of any such sign shall extend above the top level of the
wall upon, or in front of, which it is situated.
         (c)   No such sign, including any light box or structural part, shall
project more than 12 inches from the face of the part of the building to which
it is attached. No copy is permitted on the sides of any such sign.
      (4)   Projecting signs shall comply with the following requirements.
         (a)   No projecting signs shall exceed 50 square feet in area.
         (b)   There may be not more than one projecting sign for the front of
each business establishment.
         (c)   No projecting sign shall project more than five feet from the
front line of the building, nor any closer than two feet to the curb and
gutter.
      (5)   Roof signs shall comply with the following requirements.
         (a)   There shall be not more than one such sign for the roof of each
business establishment.
         (b)   No part of any such sign shall extend more than five feet above
the highest point of the roof.
         (c)   No part of any such sign shall project beyond the front line of
the building.
         (d)   No roof sign shall be erected in such a manner that there is any
visual support.
         (e)   No part of any such sign shall have any animation.
      (6)   Regarding off-premises signs and billboards:
         (a)   1.   Billboards shall be permitted in any nonresidential zoning
districts adjacent to Interstate 70 and U.S. Routes 89 and 50. Signs located
along or adjacent to highways shall also comply with UDOT standards; and
            2.   Billboards along highways must be located within 200 feet of
the highway centerline, measured to the billboard pole. Billboards within the
county must be in compliance with this subchapter and the State Outdoor
Advertising Act as found in U.C.A. § 72-7-501 et seq.
         (b)   The maximum height of an off-premises sign shall be 35 feet;
         (c)   Shall not exceed 300 square feet in size; and
         (d)   Billboards must be located at least 1,000 linear feet from any
other billboard located on the same side of the street, and at least 500 linear
feet from an interstate exchange, as measured from any part of the billboard to
the nearest portion of any other off-premises sign or off-premises electronic
display sign, or to the nearest right-of-way line of the interchange.
   (B)   Residential zones. The following signs shall be permitted in
residential zones throughout the county:
      (1)   A single-property identification sign containing only the address
of the property and a personal name.
         (a)   The sign may not exceed four feet in height or six feet in
width; and
         (b)   The sign may not advertise a business or commercial activity
other than home occupations.
      (2)   Nameplates or signs indicating the existence of a home occupation:
         (a)   Within any zone, home occupation signs are allowed. Home
occupation signs must be attached to the home; and
         (b)   Signs shall not exceed eight square feet.
      (3)   Temporary signs; and
      (4)   Residential development entrance signs. A sign may be placed at the
entrance of a residential subdivision, planned residential urban development or
manufactured home park advertising the name of the development or subdivision.
         (a)   The sign must be within the boundary of the development that is
named on the sign.
         (b)   A maximum of two entrances may have signs placed at them.
         (c)   Signs must be set back ten feet from any property line or public
right-of-way.
         (d)   Signs proposed to exceed five feet in height and ten feet in
width shall require approval by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.45 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   All signs which have been made nonconforming by the adoption of provisions
contained within this subchapter shall be subject to the regulations of:
   (A)   Unsafe signs. Any sign or portion declared unsafe by a proper building
inspector must be restored to a safe condition or removed within 30 days of
mailing or otherwise given notice of the unsafe condition;
   (B)   Alterations. A nonconforming sign shall not be reconstructed, raised,
moved, placed, extended or enlarged unless said sign is changed to conform to
all provisions of this subchapter. Alterations shall also mean that changing of
the text or message that the sign is conveying from one use of the premises to
another use of the premises and the changing of the ownership of the sign when
that ownership necessitates a change in the text or message of the sign.
Alterations shall not be interpreted to include changing the text or copy on
off-premises advertising signs, theater signs, outdoor bulletins or other
similar signs which are designed to accommodate changeable copy; and
   (C)   Restoration. Nonconforming signs which have been allowed to
deteriorate or which have been damaged by fire, explosion, an act of God or an
act of vandalism, or damaged by any other cause, to the extent of more than 60%
of its assessed value shall, if repaired or rebuilt, be repaired or rebuilt in
conformity with the regulations of this subchapter or shall be removed.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.46 VIOLATIONS.
   It is unlawful to erect or maintain a sign contrary to the provisions of
this subchapter. If a sign is erected or maintained in violation of this
subchapter the county may do the following:
   (A)   Order the defect corrected within a fixed period of time, not
exceeding 30 days, if correction of the defect will bring the subject sign into
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter;
   (B)   If correction of the defect will result in a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, order that the subject sign be removed by, and at
the expense of, the owner of the sign within a fixed period of time not
exceeding 30 days; and
   (C)   If the owner of the sign contests the order of the Zoning
Administrator, the remedy shall be an appeal to the Board of Adjustment as
outlined in §§
154.050 through
154.056. If the owner of the sign fails or refuses to remove the subject sign
at the order of the county, the county may remove the sign at any time after
the owner exhausts his or her administrative remedies as outlined above unless
otherwise ordered by a court of law. Removal by the county shall be at the
expense of the owner.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.47 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from September 14, 2020,
and after the required approval and publication according to law.
(Ord. 2020-9-1, passed 9-14-2020)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Lands to which applicable
   
151.07   Basis for special flood hazard areas
   
151.08   Development permit established
   
151.09   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.10   Interpretation
   
151.11   Warning; disclaimer of liability
   
151.12   Compliance
   
151.13   Stop-work orders
   
151.14   Enforcement provisions established   
   
151.15   Effective date
Administration
   
151.30   Floodplain Administrator designated
   
151.31   Floodplain Administrator duties and responsibilities
   
151.32   Requirement to submit new technical data
   
151.33   Permit procedures
   
151.34   Use of elevation certificates
   
151.35   Variance procedures
Flood Hazard Reduction Provisions
   
151.50   General standards
   
151.51   Substantial improvements
   
151.52   Substantial damage
   
151.53   Determining substantial improvement or damage
   
151.54   Specific standards
   
151.55   Residential construction
   
151.56   Nonresidential construction
   
151.57   Enclosures
   
151.58   Crawlspaces
   
151.59   Manufactured homes
   
151.60   Appurtenant or accessory structures
   
151.61   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
151.62   Floodways
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of this state has in statutes delegated the responsibility
of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood
losses. Therefore, the county does ordain as follows.
   (A)   The county elects to comply with the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 through 4138. The National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is a voluntary program administered by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), a component of the U.S. Department
of Homeland Security, and the county’s officials have elected to join the
program, participate and enforce this flood damage prevention chapter and the
requirements and regulations of the NFIP.
   (B)   The NFIP, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the
county having a special flood hazard be identified by FEMA and that floodplain
management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. Furthermore, the
county may elect to administer this chapter to areas not identified as special
flood hazard areas (SFHAs) by FEMA on the community’s effective Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) if the community has documentation to support that there is an
inherent risk of flooding in such areas.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic
inundation by floodwaters, which results in potential loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief;
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of
the inhabitants of the county.
   (B)   These potential flood losses are caused by:
      (1)   The cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains that are known
to cause increases in flood heights and velocities;
      (2)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by structures vulnerable to
floods because they are inadequately elevated or otherwise unprotected from
flood damages; and
      (3)   Uses deemed unsuitable for floodplain areas or that do not account
for the increased flood risk.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community and to minimize public and private losses due
to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize damage to public infrastructure, including, but not limited
to, utilities, streets and bridges that are susceptible to flooding;
   (C)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions caused by flooding;
   (D)   Minimize public expenditures on flood-control projects;
   (E)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts that are associated
with flooding and are generally undertaken at the expense of the public;
   (F)   Protect and safeguard the welfare and safety of first responders
should an emergency response be needed;
   (G)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (H)   Promote that potential buyers are notified if properties are in a
flood area.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   To accomplish the purposes outlined in §
151.03 of this chapter, this chapter applies the following methods:
   (A)   Restricts or prohibits land uses that are dangerous to health, safety
or property in times of flooding, or cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities;
   (B)   Requires that land uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controls the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Controls filling, grading, dredging and other developments that may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevents or regulates the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is on the same parcel of property as a
principal structure. Its use is incidental to the use of the principal
structure. The ownership of the ACCESSORY STRUCTURE is the same owner as of the
principal structure. An ACCESSORY STRUCTURE is a nonresidential structure of
low value that is used solely for the parking of vehicles and storage of tools,
materials or equipment. No human habitation is allowed within an ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE.
   ADDITION. Any improvement that expands the enclosed footprint or increases
the square footage of an existing structure. This includes lateral additions
added to the side, front or rear of a structure, vertical additions added on
top of a structure and enclosures added underneath a structure.
   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan
or similar landlord that originates at the apex. It is characterized by high-
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition;
and unpredictable flow paths.
   APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landlord below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. See ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.
   AREA OF FUTURE-CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be
inundated by the 1%-annual-chance (100-year) flood based on future-conditions
hydrology.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH zone on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined
into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/
A or VI-30, VE or V. For the purposes of these regulations, the term SPECIAL
FLOOD HAZARD AREA is synonymous in meaning with the phrase AREA OF SPECIAL
FLOOD HAZARD.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARD. The land within a community
that is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The
area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After
the detailed evaluation of the special FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARD AREA in
preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further refined.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION or BFE. The water surface elevation of the 1%-annual-
chance flood event. It is the height in relation to mean sea level expected to
be reached by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the
floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. It is also the elevation shown on
the FIRM and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones A,
AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30 or VE that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that
level in any given year.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides. A walkout basement that does not require a step up to
grade is not considered a BASEMENT.
   BEST AVAILABLE DATA. Existing flood hazard information adopted by a
community and reflected on an effective FIRM, FBFM and/or within an FIS report;
or draft or preliminary flood hazard information supplied by FEMA or from
another source. Other sources may include, but are not limited to, state, other
federal agencies or local studies, the more restrictive of which would be
reasonably used by the community.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system. Any walls below the lowest
floor in a building in a V or VE Zone should give way under wind and water
loads without causing collapse, displacement or other damage to the elevated
portion of the building of the supporting pilings or columns. BREAKAWAY WALLS
apply only to V or VE Zones.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHANNELIZATION. The artificial creation, enlargement, realignment or
alteration of a stream channel’s slope, shape or alignment. Streambank
restoration may be deemed as CHANNELIZATION.
   CODE OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS  or C.F.R. The codification of the general and
permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive departments
and agencies of the federal government.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION or CLOMR. FEMA’s comment on a proposed
project that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic and/or hydraulic
characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the
existing regulatory floodway, the effective BFEs and/or the SFHA. The letter
does not revise an effective map; it indicates whether the project, if built as
proposed, would be recognized by FEMA.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL or CLOMR-F. FEMA’s comment
on a proposed structure or property. The letter does not revise an effective
map; it indicates whether the project, if built as proposed, would be removed
from the floodplain.
   CRAWLSPACE. An under-floor space that has its interior floor area (finished
or not) not more than four feet from the bottom floor joist of the next higher
floor elevation, designed with proper openings that equalize hydrostatic
pressures of floodwater, and is not used for habitation. Reference §
151.58 of this chapter.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility or building where even a slight chance of
flooding is too great a threat. Typical CRITICAL FACILITIES include hospitals,
fire stations, police stations, schools, storage of critical records, assisted
living and similar facilities. Reference Article V, Section G. Standards for
Critical Facilities.
   DEED RESTRICTION. A clause in a deed that limits the future use of the
property in some respect. DEED RESTRICTIONS may impose a vast variety of
limitations and conditions. For example, they may limit the density of
buildings, dictate the types of structures that can be erected or prevent
buildings from being used for specific purposes, or from being used at all.
   DETACHED GARAGE. A building that is used solely for the storage of materials
or vehicle parking for up to four housing occupants. If a detached garage is
designed or used for habitation or conducting business, or has multiple
stories, then the building is not considered a DETACHED GARAGE under the NFIP.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, demolition, excavation or drilling operations or
storage, either temporary or permanent, of equipment or materials.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building built, in the case of a building
in Zone A1-30, AE, A, A99, AR, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and
piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of
up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of a building in Zone A1-30,
AE, A, A99, AR, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, an ELEVATED BUILDING also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
   ENCLOSURE. An enclosed walled-in area below the lowest floor of an elevated
building. ENCLOSURES below the BFE may only be used for building access,
vehicle parking and storage.
   EROSION. The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses by wind,
water or other natural agents.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for
FIRMs effective before that date. It may also be referred to as EXISTING
STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXISTING STRUCTURES. See EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FILL. The placement of materials, such as dirt, sand or rock, to elevate a
structure, property or portion of a property above the natural elevation of the
site, regardless of where the material was obtained from. The common practice
of removing unsuitable material and replacing with engineered material is not
considered FILL if the elevations are returned to the existing conditions. Any
fill placed or used prior to the area being mapped as a flood hazard area is
not deemed as FILL.
   500-YEAR FLOOD. A flood having a recurrence interval that has a 0.2% chance
of being equaled or exceeded during any given year (0.2%-annual-chance flood).
The term docs not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 500
years, and a mandatory flood insurance requirement generally does not apply.
   500-YEAR FLOODPLAIN. The area of land susceptible to being inundated due to
the occurrence of a 0.2%-annual-chance flood.
   FLOOD or FLOODING.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
         (a)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
         (b)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
      (2)   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) that are proximately caused by FLOODING
as defined in this chapter and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on
the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current
of water and deposited along the path of the current; and
      (3)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or
an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in FLOODING as defined in this chapter.
   FLOOD INSURANCE MANUAL. The document FEMA produces twice a year and is used
to write flood insurance policies underwritten by the NFIP. The document
contains definitions, policy rates, coverage and limitations, application and
insurance policy forms.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP or FIRM. An official map of a community on which
the Administrator has delineated both the SFHAs and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY, FIS or FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination,
evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD OPENING. An opening in the wall of an enclosed structure that allows
floodwaters to automatically enter and exit the enclosure. Refer to FEMA
Technical Bulletin 1.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. The physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area
within a community subject to an SFHA and to reduce the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams,
reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized, flood-modifying works are those
constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. FEMA only
accredits levees, both private and public, that have been certified by a
professional engineer or firm in which the certification shows that the levees
have met and continue to meet the minimum regulatory standards cited in 44
C.F.R. § 65.10.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source, whether or not identified by FEMA (see definition of
FLOODING).
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A community-issued permit or document that is
used for any development that occurs within an SFHA identified by FEMA or the
community. It is used to address the proposed development to ensure compliance
with the community’s ordinance.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, mitigation plans and
floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinances, grading ordinances and erosion-control
ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents. FLOODPROOFING can either be accomplished in the
form of DRY FLOODPROOFING, in which the structure is watertight below the
levels that need flood protection, or WET FLOODPROOFING in permanent or
contingent measures applied to a structure that prevent or provide resistance
to damage from flooding while allowing floodwaters to enter the structure or
area.
   FLOODWAY. See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES. The lines marking the limits of floodways on
federal, state and local floodplain maps.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of
the watershed.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A development that cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers and ship building and repair
facilities. It does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE or HAG. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. In AO
Zones, the HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE is utilized by comparing the lowest floor
elevation to that of the highest adjacent grade and the depth of the AO Zone.
Reference Article V, Section D. Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH
Zones).
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs that have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT or LOMA. An official amendment, by letter, to an
effective FIRM. A LOMA establishes a property’s location in relation to the
SFHA. It is usually issued because a property or structure has been
inadvertently mapped as being in the floodplain when the property or structure
is actually on natural high ground above the BFE.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION or LOMR. FEMA’s modification or revision to an entire
or portion of the effective FIRM, or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, or both.
LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that
affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and
thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the
effective BFEs or the SFHA.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL or LOMR-F. FEMA’s amendment, by letter,
to an effective FIRM where fill was brought in or used to elevate a property,
portion of property or structure above the BFE.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system that consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE or LAG. The lowest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. For an
existing structure, it means the lowest point where the structure and ground
touch, including, but not limited to, attached garages, decks, stairs and
basement windows.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 C.F.R. § 60.3.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle; however, a
MANUFACTURED HOME may be used for both residential and nonresidential use.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP. The FHBM or the FIRM for a community issued by FEMA.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For the purposes of the NFIP, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other
datum to which BFEs shown on a community’s FIRM are referenced.
   MIXED USE STRUCTURES. Structures with both a business and a residential
component, but where the area used for business is less than 50% of the total
floor area of the structure.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by
a community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or
after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   NO-RISE CERTIFICATIONS. Formal certifications signed and stamped by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the state, demonstrating through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practice that a proposed development will not result in any
increase (0.00 feet) in flood levels within the community during the occurrence
of a base flood event.
   100-YEAR FLOOD. A flood having a recurrence interval that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded during any given year (1%-annual-chance flood). The
terms 100-YEAR FLOOD and 1%- ANNUAL-CHANCE FLOOD are synonymous. The term does
not imply that the flood will necessarily happen once every 100 years.
Mandatory flood insurance requirements may apply.
   100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN. The area of land susceptible to being inundated due to
the occurrence of a 1%-annual-chance flood.
   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION or PMR. FEMA’s action whereby one or more map panels
are physically revised and republished.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four-hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, creek and the like, which can be intermittent or
perennial.
   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 through 4138, as amended, which provides for the denial of
flood insurance coverage for any property that the Administrator finds has been
declared by a duly constituted state or local authority to be in violation of
state or local floodplain management regulations. SECTION 1316 is issued for a
property, not a property owner, and remains with the property even after a
change of ownership.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 3501
et seq., includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
   STRUCTURE.
      (1)   For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
culvert, bridge, dam or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
      (2)   (a)   STRUCTURE, for insurance purposes, means:
            1.   A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully
secured roof which is affixed to a permanent site;
            2.   A manufactured home (a manufactured home, also known as a
mobile home, is a STRUCTURE built on a permanent chassis, transported to its
site in one or more sections and affixed to a permanent foundation); or
            3.   A travel trailer without wheels built on a chassis and affixed
to a permanent foundation that is regulated under the community’s floodplain
management and building ordinances or laws.
         (b)   For insurance purposes, STRUCTURE does not mean a recreational
vehicle or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in
division (2)(a)3. above, or a gas or liquid storage tank.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement
of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed.
      (2)   The term does not, however, include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure if the alteration will
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation. Reference §
151.35 of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in VIOLATION until
such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies, such as the 1%-annual-chance flood event,
in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. The channel and banks of an identifiable water in a creek,
brook, stream, river, ditch or other similar feature.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.06 LANDS TO WHICH APPLICABLE.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard identified by
FEMA or in areas of identified and documented flood risk supported using best
available data. Where best available data contradicts the FIRMs, FIS and/or the
FBFM, the more restrictive data shall be utilized.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.07 BASIS FOR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and
engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study, Sevier County Utah and
Incorporated Areas,” dated December 12, 2012, accompanying FIRMs and any
revisions thereto are hereby automatically adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.08 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT ESTABLISHED.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.09 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.10 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.11 WARNING; DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions, greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.
   (B)   This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.12 COMPLIANCE.
   No structures or developments, including buildings, recreation vehicles or
manufactured homes or land, shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent the county from taking
such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violations.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.13 STOP-WORK ORDERS.
   (A)   Authority. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other community
official discovers any work or activity regulated by this chapter being
performed in a manner contrary to the provision of this chapter, the Floodplain
Administrator is authorized to issue a stop-work order.
   (B)   Issuance. The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the
person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop-work order, the cited work shall
immediately cease. The stop-work order shall state the reason for the order and
the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
   (C)   Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject
to penalties as prescribed by local or state law including, but not limited to,
the penalties outlined in §
151.99 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.14 ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   In accordance with 44 C.F.R. § 59.2(b), Chapter 1 of the NFIP
Regulations, to qualify for the sale of federally subsidized flood insurance, a
community must adopt floodplain management regulations that meet or exceed the
minimum standards of 44 C.F.R. part 60. “These regulations must include
effective enforcement provisions.”
   (B)   In accordance with 44 C.F.R. § 60.1(b), Chapter 1 of the NFIP
Regulations, “These regulations must be legally-enforceable, applied uniformly
throughout the community to all privately and publicly owned land within flood-
prone (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion areas and the community must
provide that the regulations take precedence over less restrictive conflicting
local laws, ordinances or codes.”
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.15 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is February 14,
2021.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.30 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR DESIGNATED.
   The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate
sections of the NFIP Regulations and 44 C.F.R. pertaining to floodplain
management.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.31 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Uphold the goals of the community and the NFIP to reduce risk when
possible and increase the community’s resistance to future disasters;
   (B)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter, including the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement or crawlspace) of all new or substantially improved
structures and any floodproofing certificates, including the data supporting
such certificates;
   (C)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection maps that identify and
locate the boundaries of the SFHAs to which this chapter applies, including,
but not limited to, the FIRM;
   (D)   Review development proposals to determine whether a proposed building
site, including sites designed for the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding;
   (E)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by the adoption of this chapter;
   (F)   Ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state or local governmental agencies (including § 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1344 and the
Endangered Species Act of 1973, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531 et seq.) from which
prior approval is required;
   (G)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
   (H)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and other state
agencies as applicable prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA;
   (I)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation;
   (J)   When BFE data has not been provided by FEMA, the Floodplain
Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any BFE data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including data
provided by the applicant, in order to administer the provisions of this
chapter;
   (K)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new
construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill)
shall be permitted within Zones A1-30, AE and AH on the community’s FIRM unless
it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase
the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the community, unless the community has adopted higher standard options;
   (L)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. § 65.12, Chapter 1 of the NFIP
Regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE and
AH on the community’s FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the
base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first meets the
requirements of 44 C.F.R. § 65.12 for a conditional FIRM revision through
FEMA’s CLOMR process;
   (M)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated and if the project
is determined or reasonably believed to cause an adverse impact, the Floodplain
Administrator may require new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill, grading or excavation) permitted in Zone A to have
an encroachment analysis done prior to the issuance of a floodplain development
permit. The encroachment analysis shall create a baseline of existing
conditions model and compare it to the proposed conditions model to determine
the potential impact of the project. Based on the findings, the Floodplain
Administrator may require as a condition of the permit a CLOMR to be submitted
and approved prior to any work occurring and/or that a LOMR be submitted to
FEMA within 6 months of completion of the development;
   (N)   Inspect all development as needed and at appropriate times during the
period of construction to ensure compliance with all provisions of this
chapter, including the proper elevation of structures;
   (O)   In addition to utilizing the effective FIRMs, FIS and Flood Boundary
and Floodway Map, all permit reviews will utilize best available data; and
   (P)   If the project is determined or reasonably believed to cause an
adverse effect on the BFE(s), boundaries of the floodplain or any insurable
structures, technical justification for the proposed development shall be
submitted, and the community may require a CLOMR or LOMR to be submitted prior
to the permit approval or as a requirement of the permit.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.32 REQUIREMENT TO SUBMIT NEW TECHNICAL DATA.
   (A)   The property owner or developer shall notify FEMA by submittal of a
LOMR within six months of project completion when an applicant had obtained a
CLOMR from FEMA or when development altered a watercourse, modified floodplain
boundaries or modified the BFE.
   (B)   The property owner or developer shall be responsible for preparing
technical data to support the CLOMR or LOMR application and paying any
processing or application fees to FEMA. The property owner or developer is
responsible for submitting the CLOMR and LOMR to FEMA and shall provide all
necessary data to FEMA if requested during the review process to ensure the
CLOMR or LOMR is issued.
   (C)   The Floodplain Administrator shall be under no obligation to sign the
Community Acknowledgment Form, which is part of the CLOMR/LOMR application,
until the applicant demonstrates that the project will or has met the
requirements of this chapter and all applicable state, federal and local laws.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.33 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include, but
not be limited to:
      (1)   Fill out the floodplain development permit form for this county and
answer the questions and follow the instructions therein, in addition to the
instructions provided below;
      (2)   Duplicated plans drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions
and elevation of proposed landscape alterations;
      (3)   Duplicated plans drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions
and elevation of existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes;
      (4)   Location of the foregoing in relation to SFHAs;
      (5)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement and crawlspace) of all new and substantially improved
structures, if applicable;
      (6)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), to which any
nonresidential structure (if applicable) shall be floodproofed;
      (7)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure (if applicable) shall meet the
floodproofing criteria of this chapter and the NFIP Regulations;
      (8)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated because of proposed development, if
applicable;
      (9)   At the community’s discretion, the community may charge a fee for
the issuance of floodplain development permits; and
      (10)   Copies of all floodplain development permits and the associated
documents shall become property of the community and a permanent record.
   (B)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and of
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.34 USE OF ELEVATION CERTIFICATES.
   The county requires that the following elevation certificates be completed
for any new residential or nonresidential building construction and submitted
to the county for its records.
   (A)   Proposed conditions. A proposed conditions elevation certificate is
required to be completed by a professional and licensed engineer, surveyor or
architect as part of the floodplain permit package.
   (B)   Finished construction. A finished construction elevation certificate
is required to be completed by a professional and licensed engineer, surveyor
or architect once the structure is completed, utilities are installed and
grading and landscaping has been completed. The permit is required within 60
days of the completion of construction.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.35 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Requests for variances. The Board of Adjustment, as established by the
community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter after a floodplain development permit has been
denied.
      (1)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment, as established by the community, shall
hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error
in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to FEMA and the State
Coordinating Agency upon issuing a variance.
      (4)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in this section have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (5)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of
this chapter, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this chapter.
      (6)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (7)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure. The term “substantial
improvement” does not include any alteration of a structure or facility listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Places.
   (B)   Prerequisites for granting variances.
      (1)   (a)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         (b)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
            1.   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
            2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
            3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, conflict with existing local laws or ordinances, considers the
need of ingress and egress during times of floods and does not jeopardize first
responders’ health and welfare.
      (2)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the BFE and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
      (3)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use, provided that:
         (a)   The criteria outlined in this section are met; and
         (b)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION PROVISIONS
§ 151.50 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements.
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be designed or located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.51 SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a building or structure if the cumulative cost of the entire
project equals or exceeds 50%, unless a higher standard option is selected
below, of the market value of the structure only (not of the structure and land
value combined) before the improvement or repair is started, then the work
shall be considered as substantial improvement. If the structure has sustained
substantial damage, any repairs are considered SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS
regardless of the actual repair work performed. For substantial damage, refer
to §
151.52 of this chapter.
   (B)   The term does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the Building
Official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions;
or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic
structure.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.52 SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure only, unless a higher
standard option is selected, before the damage occurred. This term also applies
to structures which have incurred any damage that equals or exceeds 50% of the
structure’s market value regardless of the actual repair work performed. When a
structure or building has been determined as substantially damaged, any work or
repair on said structure or building will be considered as substantial
improvement and will be required to meet the development requirements set forth
within this chapter for substantial improvement.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.53 DETERMINING SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT OR DAMAGE.
   For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures,
including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of
occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations and any other improvement of
or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in
coordination with the applicable community officials and staff, shall:
   (A)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure only, not of land and building, before the start of
construction of the proposed work. In the case of repair, the market value of
the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred
and before any repairs are made;
   (B)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
   (C)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; the determination
requires evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs as
specified in §
151.51 of this chapter;
   (D)   Utilize FEMA’s Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk
Reference when making any determination on substantial improvement and/or
substantial damage;
   (E)   The substantial improvement regulations apply to all of the work that
is proposed as the improvement, even if multiple permits are issued. Therefore,
the determination of the cost of the improvement should consider all costs of
all phases of the work before issuance of the first permit; and
   (F)   Notify the applicant that if it is determined that the work
constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that
compliance with the flood, this chapter is required.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.54 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all SFHAs, and if best available data indicates that the area is a known
or suspected flood risk area, the provisions of §§
151.55 to
151.60 of this chapter are required.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.55 RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to the BFE plus one
foot of freeboard. A registered professional engineer, architect or land
surveyor shall submit certified elevations to the Floodplain Administrator that
the standards of this chapter are satisfied.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.56 NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated to the base flood level plus one foot of
freeboard, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
designed so that below the base flood level, the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall develop and/or review structural designs, specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this
section. A record of such certification that includes the specific elevation
(in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall
be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (B)   If the use or occupancy of the building changes in the future to
residential, then the dry floodproofing of the structure cannot be used when
determining compliance of the structure to the residential construction of this
chapter as seen in §
151.55 of this chapter. As such, the building will not be grandfathered into
compliance and will be required to be brought into compliance with the
residential construction requirements of this chapter. The development and
construction of the structure must conform to the provision in FEMA/FIA
Technical Bulletins 1, 2, 10 and 11. Certification and documentation from a
professional, licensed engineer or architect is required if the structure’s
lowest floor is built below the BFE.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.57 ENCLOSURES.
   (A)   (1)   New construction and substantial improvements with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are to be used solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement, and are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters.
      (2)   Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be not higher than one foot
above grade; and
         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (B)   The development and construction of the structure must conform with
the provision in FEMA/Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) Technical
Bulletins 1 and 2. Certification and documentation from a professional,
licensed engineer or architect is required if the structure’s lowest floor is
built below the BFE.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.58 CRAWLSPACES.
   New construction and substantial improvements built on a crawlspace or a
subgrade (below grade) crawlspace may be permitted if the development is
designed and meets or exceeds the standards found in FEMA’s Technical Bulletins
1, 2 and 11, which include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (A)   The structure must be affixed to a permanent foundation, designed and
adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy. Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawlspace construction is
not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second
unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a
registered architect or professional engineer;
   (B)   The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the BFE and, as such, must
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each flood vent opening can be not
more than one foot above the LAG;
   (C)   The crawlspace enclosure must have proper openings that allow the
equalization of hydrostatic pressure by allowing automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. To achieve this, a minimum of one square inch of flood opening is
required per one square foot of the enclosed area subject to flooding;
   (D)   Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation
walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists,
insulation, piers or other materials that extend below the BFE. Ductwork, in
particular, must either be placed above the BFE or scaled from floodwaters;
   (E)   Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated
above the BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within
the system components during flood conditions;
   (F)   The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than
two feet below the LAG;
   (G)   The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the lowest
interior grade of the crawlspace floor to the bottom of the floor joist of the
next higher floor, cannot exceed four feet at any point;
   (H)   There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained
within a reasonable time after a flood event; and
   (I)   Buildings with below-grade crawlspaces will have higher flood
insurance premiums than buildings that have the preferred crawlspace
construction, with the interior elevation at or above the LAG.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.59 MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   It is required that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A
on a community’s FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices
that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
   (B)   It is required that manufactured homes that are placed or
substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM on
sites outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the BFE, unless a higher standard
option was selected, and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
   (C)   In A1-30, AH, AO and AE Zones, it is required that manufactured homes
to be placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park be
elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the BFE unless a higher
standard option was selected or the chassis is supported by reinforced piers
not less than 36 inches in height above grade and securely anchored.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.60 APPURTENANT OR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Accessory or appurtenant structures shall not exceed 120 square feet in
size, and are located within Zones A, A1-A30, AH, AO or AE must be:
   (A)   Detached from a residence;
   (B)   On the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured;
   (C)   Incidental to the use of the principal structure;
   (D)   Is solely used for parking or limited storage and not human
habitation;
   (E)   Is low valued, represents a minimal investment and must be unfinished
on the interior;
   (F)   As required in 44 C.F.R. § 60.3(a)(iii):
      (1)   Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
      (2)   Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage below the
BFE, be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters and meet all
applicable building codes;
      (3)   Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages; and
      (4)   Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/
or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding.
   (G)   Comply with the floodway encroachment “no-rise” provisions of the NFIP
Regulations and §
151.62 of this chapter;
   (H)   Not be used for human habitation, including, but not limited to,
working, sleeping and living; and
   (I)   Include, in the submittal for a floodplain development permit,
sufficient documentation demonstrating full compliance with this section,
including, but not limited to, the use of flood-resistant materials, anchoring
and flood openings.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.61 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
   (C)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development
permit requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   BFE data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, or whichever is
lesser.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
   (F)   All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.62 FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Floodways located within SFHAs are extremely hazardous areas due to
the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles and
erosion potential.
   (B)   The following provisions shall apply:
      (1)   Designate a regulatory floodway that will not increase the base
flood level more than one foot;
      (2)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway, unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase greater than zero feet,
unless a higher standard option is selected, in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;
      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with
all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§
151.50 to 151.62 of this chapter; and
      (4)   Under the provisions of 44 C.F.R. § 65.12, Chapter 1 of the NFIP
Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in BFEs provided that the community
first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by
failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a Class C misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
$750 daily or imprisoned, or both, for up to 90 days. Persons in violation, in
addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2020-12-1, passed 12-14-2020)
CHAPTER 152: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Section
Encroachments to County Road Rights-of-Way
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Encroachment permit required
   
152.03   Class 1 encroachment permit
   
152.04   Class 2 encroachment permit
   
152.05   Class 3 encroachment permit
   
152.06   Class 4 annual blanket encroachment permit
   
152.07   Class 5 encroachment permit
   
152.08   Exception to permit requirement
   
152.09   Encroachment denial
   
152.10   Letters of encroachment
   
152.11   Bond requirements
   
152.12   Liability insurance
   
152.13   Encroachment procedure
   
152.14   Emergency encroachments
   
152.15   Notice regarding maintenance
   
152.16   Fees
   
152.17   Minimum construction standards generally
   
152.18   Preparation minimum standards
   
152.19   Backfill minimum standards
   
152.20   Surface restoration minimum standards
   
152.21   Concrete or asphalt road surface restoration minimum standards
   
152.22   Relocation and protection of utilities minimum standards
   
152.23   Jetting and boring minimum standards
   
152.24   Street intersection and driveway approach spacing minimum standards
   
152.25   Non-permitted encroachment unlawful
   
152.26   Non-permitted obstruction unlawful
   
152.27   Parking in undesignated areas without permit unlawful
   
152.28   Cattle guards
   
152.29   Injunction
   
152.30   Liability, loss or damages
Vacation of County Road Rights-of-Way and Utility Easements
   
152.45   Definitions
   
152.46   Authority to vacate interest; results of vacation
   
152.47   Discretion whether to require compensation
   
152.48   Relation to subdivision vacations and amendments
   
152.49   Vacation by petition
   
152.50   Procedural requirements; pubic hearing
   
152.51   Fees
   
152.52   Effect of road vacating ordinances
 
   
152.99   Penalty
ENCROACHMENTS TO COUNTY ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AASHTO. The most recent edition of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways
and Streets, published by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials.
   AGREEMENT TO TRANSFER. A written agreement between a property owner and the
county by which the property owner has conveyed, or will convey, to the county
any rights-of-way across the landowner’s property that are deemed necessary by
the county and is agreed to between the parties.
   APPLICANT. Any natural person, partnership, corporation, firm, association
or other legal entity seeking to engage in activities that constitute an
encroachment upon existing county road rights-of-way.
   APPROACH. The part of the landowner’s driveway access that initially leaves
the active roadway.
   ASPHALT. A mixture of aggregates, binder and filler used for constructing
and maintaining roads, parking areas, railway tracks, ports, airport runways,
bicycle lanes and sidewalks.
   BLUE STAKE(S). To have the Blue Stakes service, provided by dialing 8-1-1,
locate the utilities in the vicinity of work being done.
   COUNTY. Sevier County, Utah.
   COUNTY ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The corridor width for the road itself, all of
its appurtenant shoulders, culverts, drains, turnarounds and the like, and any
additional corridor width that constitutes the county’s rights-of-way therefor,
plus any and all other rights-of-way acquired by the county in or appurtenant
to the corridor width, all of which the county has acquired by any legal means,
including, but not limited to, conveyance, construction with county resources,
prescriptive use or dedication by public use.
   DEDICATED RIGHTS-OF-WAY. For any given county road rights-of-way, in
addition to its meaning under controlling state statutory and case law, means
that a duly recorded plat, survey or related document has been developed which
contains a legal description of a county road rights-of-way and which names the
county as the rights-of-way owner. Under controlling state law, a road may be
dedicated to the county for public motorized travel by mere continuous public
use for the required number of years or by construction with public funds, for
example. Therefore, the lack of a duly recorded plat, survey or related
document for any given county road rights-of-way does not alone render the
county’s rights-of-way for that road invalid.
   DESIGNATED PARKING. Areas that are marked by the county as parking areas.
Parking is not permitted within a county road rights-of-way unless it is
clearly marked for parking. Parking is not allowed on roadway shoulders within
a county road rights-of-way.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction or improvement of buildings,
structures, roads or accessory structures; the construction of additions, or
substantial alterations to buildings, structures, roads or accessory
structures, including agricultural structures and appurtenances; the
construction of bridges and impoundments; the placement of mobile homes; the
carrying out of below-ground exploration or drilling operations; and the
depositing or extraction of earthen materials.
   DISPROPORTIONATE USE. Uses or impacts exceeding the functional design
specifications of an existing road, rights-of-way and/or associated structure,
or substantially expanding the normal use patterns thereof.
   ENCROACHMENT. Any disturbance of a county road rights-of-way.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ENCROACHMENT. Any short-term encroachment to a county road
rights-of-way that results from activities undertaken to construct and connect
residential driveways, other private roadways, private parking areas or other
private structures affecting or altering the shoulder of a county road rights-
of-way, or by the installation of cattle guards in or adjacent to a county road
rights-of-way.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ENCROACHMENT. Any short-term encroachment to a county road
rights-of-way caused by grading, construction, reconstruction, surfacing or
resurfacing, alignment or realignment, excavation, boring or jetting, cutting
of pavement, obstruction, removal of materials, vibroseising, heavy haulage or
any other extraordinary or disproportionate use, or use exceeding the function
thereof.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ENCROACHMENT. Any short-term encroachment to a county road
rights-of-way for excavating, boring, jetting, cutting of pavement or other
disturbance by utilities within county road rights-of-way for the purpose of
installing, repairing or maintenance of cables, pipelines and the like. A CLASS
3 ENCROACHMENT also includes any type of Class 2 encroachment that is caused by
utilities.
      (4)   CLASS 4 ANNUAL BLANKET ENCROACHMENT. The applicant has multiple
encroachments in multiple locations on one or more county road rights-of-way
for a project over the course of one year. This type of permit will alleviate
the necessity of obtaining separate performance and completion bonds for each
encroachment.
      (5)   CLASS 5 ENCROACHMENT. Any short-term encroachment to a county road
rights-of-way caused by overweight or over length/width vehicles. Overweight,
over length and over width vehicles are any vehicles hauling greater than legal
loads set forth by the State Department of Transportation.
   ENCROACHMENT PERMIT. The written permission given to an applicant by the
Supervisor conditionally authorizing an encroachment or a series of
encroachments on a county road rights-of-way or rights-of-way and setting forth
the detailed requirements, conditions, specifications and limitations thereof.
   EXISTING COUNTY ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any county road rights-of-way that is
recognized by the county as part of the County Road System.
   EXTRAORDINARY USE. Includes disproportionate use of a county road rights-of-
way as defined herein and any use or impact that is not typical or reasonably
contemplated by the county.
   HEAVY HAULAGE. A type of encroachment caused when a permit applicant intends
to haul a large volume of material on any county road rights-of-way. If HEAVY
HAULAGE is contemplated as part of an applicant’s requested encroachment
permit, the applicant must first consult with the County Road Department and
comply with the Department’s approved hauling routes.
   LETTER OF ENCROACHMENT. Such letter, or denial thereof, means a tentative,
conditional written approval, or denial, by the Supervisor stating, for each
lot shown in a professionally prepared survey plat of a proposed subdivision,
whether or not that lot may have an access to and from an existing county road
rights-of-way or proposed county road rights-of-way to be dedicated to the
county, and if so, whether more than one access will be allowed for each lot,
and if so, how many. Whether or not to issue or deny a LETTER OF ENCROACHMENT
is considered by the Supervisor only after he or she receives a professionally
surveyed plat of a proposed subdivision, which, in the judgment of the
Supervisor, is professionally and adequately prepared showing all necessary
technical and location specifications to enable the Supervisor to make an
informed decision. A LETTER OF ENCROACHMENT is considered and acted upon by the
Supervisor prior to, and as a prerequisite for, a landowner’s making an
application to the County Planning and Zoning Department for a proposed
subdivision. A LETTER OF ENCROACHMENT is not an actual encroachment permit as
defined herein, and a LETTER OF ENCROACHMENT is controlled by and subject to
the eventual approval or denial of an actual encroachment permit and its terms,
conditions and specifications. A LETTER OF ENCROACHMENT does not determine the
actual location of each proposed access for a given lot, as that is controlled
and subject to the encroachment permit application process and ultimate
encroachment permit and its terms, conditions and specifications. The LETTER OF
ENCROACHMENT, rather, merely determines for each lot in question whether and
how many accesses shall be allowed for each county road rights-of-way or
proposed county road rights-of-way that fronts, or may front, the lot. The
Planning and Zoning Department may at times require a LETTER OF ENCROACHMENT in
the case of a conditional use permit or other land use matters.
   LINE. Any pipeline, cable, wire or conduit used by a utility for
transmission of its product or services.
   MAINTENANCE. Work on a county road rights-of-way which, although
constituting an encroachment hereunder, is required to keep the same in good
condition, extend its life, repair normal wear and tear, repair, replace or
modify existing structures, including, but not limited to, poles, culverts,
pipelines, guardrails, signs or other items consistent with the existing
condition and design specifications of the roadway.
   MUTCD. The most recent edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices promulgated by the federal Highway Administration of the U.S.
Department of Transportation.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any activity on or near a county road rights-of-way that
changes its current condition or use, including, but not limited to, the
installation, realignment, relocation and upgrading of poles, culverts,
pipelines, concrete pads, driveway approaches or other objects or structures
in, on or under the county road rights-of-way, including any upgrading,
construction, reconstruction, surfacing or resurfacing, and any necessary
impacts of such activity on the overall county road rights-of-way.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any object, or the placement thereof, or any practice,
occurrence or development that is deliberately done by a landowner or other
person or entity, or carelessly allowed by such persons or entities, which
unreasonably impairs the public’s right of passage along a county road rights-
of-way, or which damages, degrades or threatens to damage or degrade any county
road-rights-of-way. An OBSTRUCTION may include, but is not limited to, gates,
the overgrowth of trees and other vegetation, and irrigation practices of
adjacent or nearby landowners that cause inundation, flooding or erosion to the
surfaces of roads, shoulders, berms and ditches in and along a county road
rights-of-way.
   OVERWEIGHT, OVER LENGTH AND OVER WIDTH VEHICLES. Any vehicles hauling
greater than legal loads set forth by the State Department of Transportation.
   PERMITTEE. An applicant who has obtained an encroachment permit from the
county.
   ROAD IMPROVEMENT. Any surface type upgrade, any other surface work
improvement, any road realignment, including vertical and horizontal
realignments, any installation of culverts, drains, turnarounds and other road
appurtenances and any upgrading, widening, surfacing or relocating of any
structures upon any existing county road rights-of-way. ROAD IMPROVEMENT does
not include maintenance, repair and resurfacing of existing surface types.
   ROADBASE GRAVEL. Well-graded aggregate material that meets the county
standards as set forth in this subchapter.
   SERVIENT ESTATE. The land owned by a person or entity, including
governmental entities, other than the county across which a county road rights-
of-way passes, which land is subject to the public’s right of motorized passage
by virtue of the county road rights-of-way.
   STANDARDS or SPECIFICATIONS. The standards and specifications that are
determined and updated from time to time by the Supervisor upon review and
approval by the County Commission. Such STANDARDS and SPECIFICATIONS are
available for inspection at the County Road Department.
   SUPERVISOR. The County Road Department Supervisor or agent whom the
Supervisor expressly authorized to exercise the functions of the Supervisor
under this subchapter. This term does not permit reliance upon apparent
authority, apparent agency or actions by county road employees in general. All
pronoun references to the term SUPERVISOR in this subchapter include he or she,
as the case may be.
   UTILITY. Any entity who provides, through overhead and/or underground
pipelines, cables or conduits, public services to supply or transport gas, oil,
water, electricity, telecommunications, television/radio signals and fiber
optics. UTILITY also means an entity who provides sewer and other wastewater
services.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.02 ENCROACHMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Five classes of encroachment permits may be issued under this subchapter:
   (A)   Class 1 encroachment permit. For a single Class 1 encroachment as
described in §
152.01 of this chapter, good from 30 days up to one year, issued to a property
owner or his or her agent;
   (B)   Class 2 encroachment permit. For a single Class 2 encroachment as
described in §
152.01 of this chapter, good for 30 days, issued to a contractor;
   (C)   Class 3 encroachment permit. For a single Class 3 encroachment as
described in §
152.01 of this chapter, good for 30 days, issued to a utility;
   (D)   Class 4 annual blanket encroachment permit. For a single Class 4
blanket encroachment as described in §
152.01 of this chapter, good for one year from the time of issuance, issued for
the purposes and functions described in §
152.01 of this chapter, including work on numerous approaches to one or many
county road rights-of-way and determining heavy haulage routes; and
   (E)   Class 5 encroachment permit. For a single Class 5 encroachment as
described in §
152.01 of this chapter, good for 30 days, issued to a contractor.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.03 CLASS 1 ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.
   A Class 1 encroachment permit may be obtained by completing and submitting
an application in a form which shall be adopted and provided by the County Road
Department.
   (A)   The encroachment permit application shall be signed by all persons and
entities who own the lot or lots that are associated with the proposed
encroachment, and the signed application shall set forth and include the
following:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant or
applicants;
      (2)   The location of the proposed encroachment and the county road
rights-of-way, or portion(s) thereof, to be affected thereby;
      (3)   A description on a route map of the proposed encroachment(s),
including the purpose therefor, the type and scope of activities, the
dimensions thereof, the materials to be used, the times and dates thereof and
such other information as the Supervisor may deem pertinent;
      (4)   A statement as follows:
 
(a)   I/we, the applicant/applicants are the legal owners of the lot/lots that are
associated with the proposed encroachments;
(b)   I/we hereby acknowledge that all roads and streets affected by the proposed
encroachment are valid and existing county road rights-of-way dedicated to the
county for motorized travel by the public; and
(c)   I/we agree to execute and sign, upon the county’s request, either a quit-claim
deed, and/or a dedication of rights-of-ways on a survey or plat, and/or an agreement
to transfer in favor of the county for all subject roads and streets, as a condition
for receiving an encroachment permit from the County Road Department.
 
      (5)   A statement that upon any failure of the applicant or applicants to
fully and timely complete the encroachment project according to the terms of
the encroachment permit:
         (a)   The county may complete the same to its satisfaction and charge
the costs thereof, including any administrative fees, against the applicant’s
organization and/or against the applicant or applicants personally until paid
in full. Said costs shall include any attorney fees, interest and other
litigation, court costs and charges incurred by the county to recover the
costs; and
         (b)   The applicant may be subject to criminal prosecution pursuant to
§
152.99(B)(2) of this chapter.
      (6)   A statement that any persons or entities hired, contracted or
retained to perform any of the work allowed under the encroachment permit shall
be currently licensed contractors with the state.
   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee in the amount set forth in the most current fee schedule issued by the
Supervisor, which application fee shall accompany each application.
   (C)   After receipt of the application for an encroachment permit, the
Supervisor shall review the application and shall, within a reasonable time,
either grant the same or decline it. At any time after the Supervisor’s
decision, the applicant may request that the Supervisor reconsider the
decision. The Supervisor is authorized to waive application fees for amended
applications if, in his or her opinion and at his or her sole discretion, the
amended application will not entail a significant amount of additional time for
review beyond that previously conducted.
   (D)   The applicant and his or her employees, assigns, agents and
contractors shall not exceed or otherwise go beyond the county road rights-of-
way involved in the encroachment permit. Permission is not given to encroach
upon any privately owned property in the project area. Fences do not
necessarily define property lines or county road rights-of-way.
   (E)   Upon granting the application, the Supervisor may impose any
requirements, conditions, limits or assurances he or she may deem necessary to
protect the county or assure compliance by the applicant with the terms of said
encroachment permit, including liability insurance as required. The
encroachment permit shall not be issued until such requirements, conditions,
limits and assurances are received.
   (F)   At the Supervisor’s discretion, he or she may require the owners of
the lot/lots that are associated with the encroachment permit to enter into an
agreement to transfer rights-of-way and/or to sign a quitclaim deed for rights-
of-ways, and/or to sign a dedication of rights-of-ways on a survey or plat,
before an encroachment permit is issued.
   (G)   Pullouts for new mailboxes shall be constructed to match the existing
roadway surface as shown in county details in this subchapter. A minimum of
five feet from the paved shoulder to the front of the mailbox shall be paved or
graveled to match the existing road surface. Placement of mailboxes or a mail
delivery cluster box/CBU shall be at the discretion of the Postal Service, but
installation must meet county specifications.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.04 CLASS 2 ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.
   A Class 2 encroachment permit may be obtained by completing and submitting
an application in a form which shall be adopted and provided by the County Road
Department.
   (A)   The encroachment permit application shall set forth and include:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The location(s) of the proposed encroachment and the county road
rights-of-way, or portion(s) thereof, to be affected thereby;
      (3)   A description on a route map of the proposed encroachment,
including the purpose therefor, the type and scope of activities, the
dimensions thereof, the materials to be used, the times and dates thereof and
such other information as the Supervisor may deem pertinent. If haulage is
anticipated, the application shall be accompanied with a route map and shall
describe the haul tonnage, haul schedules and/or such other information as the
Supervisor may deem pertinent. All materials used require approval by the
County Road Supervisor;
      (4)   A statement that upon any failure of the applicant or applicants to
fully and timely complete the encroachment project according to the terms of
the encroachment permit:
         (a)   The county may complete the same to its satisfaction and charge
the costs thereof, including any administrative fees, against the applicant’s
organization, and/or against the applicant or applicants personally, until paid
in full. Said costs shall include any attorney fees, interest and other
litigation, court costs and charges incurred by the county to recover the
costs; and
         (b)   The applicant may be subject to criminal prosecution pursuant to
§
152.99(B)(2) of this chapter.
      (5)   A statement that any persons or entities hired, contracted or
retained to perform any of the work allowed under the encroachment permit shall
be currently licensed contractors with the state.
   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee in the amount set forth in the most current fee schedule issued by the
Supervisor, which application fee shall accompany each such application.
   (C)   After receipt of the application for an encroachment permit, the
Supervisor shall review the application and shall, within a reasonable time,
either grant the same or decline it. At any time after the Supervisor’s
decision, the applicant may request that the Supervisor reconsider the
decision. The Supervisor is authorized to waive application fees for amended
applications if, in his or her opinion and at his or her sole discretion, the
amended application will not entail a significant amount of additional time for
review beyond that previously conducted.
   (D)   The applicant and his or her employees, assigns, agents and
contractors shall not exceed or otherwise go beyond the county road rights-of-
way involved in the encroachment permit. Permission is not given to encroach
upon any privately owned property in the project area. Fences do not
necessarily define property lines or county road rights-of-ways.
   (E)   Upon granting the application, the Supervisor may impose any
requirements, conditions, limits or assurances he or she may deem necessary to
protect the county or assure compliance by the applicant with the terms of said
encroachment permit, including liability insurance as required. The
encroachment permit shall not be issued until such requirements, conditions,
limits and assurances are received.
   (F)   Pullouts for new mailboxes shall be constructed to match the existing
roadway surface as shown in county details in this subchapter. A minimum of
five feet from the paved shoulder to the front of the mailbox shall be paved or
graveled to match the existing road surface. Placement of mailboxes or a mail
delivery cluster box/CBU shall be at the discretion of the Postal Service, but
installation must meet county specifications and standards.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.05 CLASS 3 ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.
   A Class 3 encroachment permit may be obtained by a utility company by
completing and submitting an application in a form which shall be adopted and
provided by the County Road Department.
   (A)   The encroachment permit application shall set forth and include:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The location of the proposed encroachment and/or the county road
rights-of-way, or portion(s) thereof, to be affected thereby;
      (3)   A description on a route map of the proposed encroachment,
including the purpose therefor, the type and scope of activities, the
dimensions thereof, the materials to be used, the times and dates thereof and
such other information as the Supervisor may deem pertinent. If haulage is
anticipated, the application shall be accompanied with a route map and shall
describe the haul tonnage, haul schedules and/or such other information as the
Supervisor may deem pertinent;
      (4)   If the Supervisor requires it, evidence of a satisfactory bond,
guarantee or other financial undertaking tendered by the applicant or by a
third-party entity on behalf of the applicant, guaranteeing the completion of
any and all improvements and or construction proposed therein in conformance
with the specifications contained in the application, and a written and signed
acknowledgment that upon the applicant’s failure to so perform, the county may
complete the same to its satisfaction and charge the costs thereof, including
any administrative fees, against the third-party bonding entity or other
guarantor, and/or against the applicant’s organization, and/or against the
applicant personally until paid in full. Said recoverable costs may, at the
Supervisor’s discretion, include any attorney fees, litigation and other court
costs necessarily incurred by the county to recover the costs; and
      (5)   Maps, plats or engineering drawings displaying the current
locations in pertinent views of utility lines within the county road rights-of-
way to be affected by the proposed encroachment, and the proposed alignment of
any new or replacement lines or pipelines for which the encroachment permit is
requested.
   (B)   The Supervisor shall review all applications with a view toward
eliminating or minimizing potential overlaps, conflicts or interference between
utilities using the affected county road rights-of-way and may, at his or her
discretion, specify where the applicant may place its proposed line or lines in
relation to existing utility lines, and may impose any additional conditions,
limits, bonds, insurance, waivers or other guarantees he or she may deem
necessary to protect the county and other utility users of the rights-of-way
and to assure compliance by the applicant with the terms of said encroachment
permit.
   (C)   The applicant and his or her employees, assigns, agents and
contractors shall not exceed or otherwise go beyond the county road rights-of-
way involved in the encroachment permit. Permission is not given to encroach
upon any privately owned property in the project area. Fences do not
necessarily define property lines or county road rights-of-ways.
   (D)   The applicant shall agree in writing to waive any and all claims
against the county for liability for alleged damage to the applicant’s lines
caused by the county or caused by other utilities whose existing lines are
located within the vicinity of the applicant’s proposed new or replacement
line. The applicant shall also agree in writing to indemnify and hold the
county harmless for any damage the applicant may cause to other utilities whose
existing lines are located within the vicinity of the applicant’s proposed new
or replacement line.
   (E)   If the utility line or other utility equipment is not installed
according to the encroachment permit requirements and conditions and the line
or equipment becomes damaged, the permittee will be solely responsible for
repairs at its expense.
   (F)   Utilities who have ever been issued a Class 3 encroachment permit
shall include in their application a written and signed acknowledgment that
they will be responsible to relocate their utility lines and solely bear the
costs of such relocation in the event it ever becomes necessary in the future
for any county road rights-of-way to be realigned and/or relocated.
   (G)   The issuance of a Class 3 encroachment permit may be conditioned on
passing any additional testing requirements that the Supervisor, in his or her
discretion, may require.
   (H)   After receipt of the application for an encroachment permit, the
Supervisor shall review the application and shall, within a reasonable time,
either grant the same or decline it. At any time after the Supervisor’s
decision, the applicant may request that the Supervisor reconsider the
decision.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.06 CLASS 4 ANNUAL BLANKET ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.
   A Class 4 annual blanket encroachment permit may be obtained by completing
and submitting an application in a form which shall be adopted and provided by
the County Road Department.
   (A)   The encroachment permit application shall set forth and include:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The location of the proposed encroachment and/or the county road
rights-of-way, or portion(s) thereof, to be affected thereby;
      (3)   A description on a route map of the proposed encroachment,
including the purpose therefor, the type and scope of activities, the
dimensions thereof, the materials to be used, the times and dates thereof and
such other information as the Supervisor may deem pertinent. If haulage is
anticipated, the application shall be accompanied with a route map and shall
describe the haul tonnage, haul schedules and/or such other information as the
Supervisor may deem pertinent.
      (4)   Evidence of a satisfactory bond, guarantee or other financial
undertaking tendered by the applicant or by a third-party entity on behalf of
the applicant, guaranteeing the completion of any and all improvements and or
construction proposed therein in conformance with the specifications contained
in the application, and a written and signed acknowledgment that upon the
applicant’s failure to so perform, the county may complete the same to its
satisfaction and charge the costs thereof, including any administrative fees,
against the third-party bonding entity or other guarantor, and/or against the
applicant’s organization, and/or against the applicant personally, until paid
in full. Said costs may, at the Supervisor’s discretion, include any attorney
fees, litigation and other court costs necessarily incurred by the county to
recover the costs; and
      (5)   A statement that any persons or entities hired, contracted or
retained to perform any of the work allowed under the encroachment permit shall
be currently licensed contractors with the state.
   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee in the amount set forth in the most current fee schedule issued by the
Supervisor, which application fee shall accompany each such application.
   (C)   After receipt of the application for an encroachment permit, the
Supervisor shall review the application and shall, within a reasonable time,
either grant the same or decline it. At any time after the Supervisor’s
decision, the applicant may request that the Supervisor reconsider the
decision. The Supervisor is authorized to waive application fees for amended
applications if, in his or her opinion and at his or her sole discretion, the
amended application will not entail a significant amount of additional time for
review beyond that previously conducted.
   (D)   The applicant and his or her employees, assigns, agents and
contractors shall not exceed or otherwise go beyond the county road rights-of-
way involved in the encroachment permit. Permission is not given to encroach
upon any privately owned property in the project area. Fences do not
necessarily define property lines or county road rights-of-ways.
   (E)   Upon granting the application, the Supervisor may impose any
requirements, conditions, limits, bonds or other guarantees he or she may deem
necessary to protect the county or assure compliance by the applicant with the
terms of said encroachment permit, including liability insurance as required.
The encroachment permit shall not be issued until such bonds, guarantees or
assurances are received. Holders of Class 4 blanket encroachment permits may,
as directed by the Supervisor, be required to provide a liability policy, as
required by §
152.11 of this chapter, for the period covered by the permit.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.07 CLASS 5 ENCROACHMENT PERMIT.
   A Class 5 encroachment permit may be obtained by completing and submitting
an application in a form which shall be adopted and provided by the County Road
Department.
   (A)   The encroachment permit application shall set forth and include:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   The location of the proposed encroachment and/or the county road
rights-of-way or portion(s) thereof to be affected thereby;
      (3)   A description on a route map of the proposed encroachment,
including the purpose therefor, the type and scope of activities and such other
information as the Supervisor may deem pertinent. The application shall be
accompanied with a route map and shall describe the haul tonnage, haul
schedules, vehicle width, vehicle length, vehicle height and/or such other
information as the Supervisor may deem pertinent; and
      (4)   If the Supervisor requires it, evidence of a satisfactory bond,
guarantee or other financial undertaking tendered by the applicant, or by a
third-party entity on behalf of the applicant, guaranteeing the completion of
any and all improvements and or construction proposed therein in conformance
with the specifications contained in the application, and a written and signed
acknowledgment that upon the applicant’s failure to so perform, the county may
complete the same to its satisfaction and charge the costs thereof, including
any administrative fees, against the third-party bonding entity or other
guarantor, and/or against the applicant’s organization, and/or against the
applicant personally, until paid in full. Said recoverable costs may, at the
Supervisor’s discretion, include any attorney fees, litigation and other court
costs necessarily incurred by the county to recover the costs.
   (B)   The Supervisor shall review all applications with a view toward
eliminating or minimizing potential overlaps and may impose any additional
conditions, limits, bonds, insurance, waivers or other guarantees he or she may
deem necessary to protect the county and to assure compliance by the applicant
with the terms of said encroachment permit.
   (C)   The applicant and his or her employees, assigns, agents and
contractors shall not exceed or otherwise go beyond the County Road Rights-of-
Way involved in the encroachment permit. Permission is not given to encroach
upon any privately owned property in the project area. Fences do not
necessarily define property lines or county road rights-of-ways.
   (D)   The issuance of a Class 5 encroachment permit may be conditioned on
passing any additional requirements that the Supervisor, in his or her
discretion, may require.
   (E)   After receipt of the application for an encroachment permit, the
Supervisor shall review the application and shall, within a reasonable time,
either grant the same or decline it. At any time after the Supervisor’s
decision, the applicant may request that the Supervisor reconsider the
decision.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.08 EXCEPTION TO PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   No encroachment permit shall be required hereunder where the proposed
encroachment constitutes mere maintenance of county road rights-of-way as the
term maintenance is defined in §
152.01 of this chapter. All other aspects of this subchapter, including, but
not limited to, liability insurance, notice, fees and minimum construction
standards, shall apply to any encroachment of any county road rights-of-way.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.09 ENCROACHMENT DENIAL.
   (A)   This subchapter expressly authorizes the Supervisor to issue a denial
of any application for an encroachment on any county road rights-of-way if the
Supervisor, in his or her discretion, determines that the proposed
encroachment:
      (1)   Will create safety issues for the county;
      (2)   Will create unwarranted cost increases for the county;
      (3)   Will unreasonably or excessively interfere with traffic patterns,
or disrupt use of the subject county road rights-of-ways for an unreasonably
extended period;
      (4)   Will cause violations of county agreements with other agencies, or
cause degradation to county road rights-of-way or the servient estate(s)
crossed by those county road rights-of-way;
      (5)   Is not reasonably necessary to a legitimate activity or can be
avoided by other reasonable measures;
      (6)   Is otherwise detrimental to the county’s best interests; or
      (7)   Does not advance or benefit the county’s best interests.
   (B)   This express authorization includes the authority for the Supervisor,
in his or her sole discretion, to decline an encroachment permit application
outright. The Supervisor shall issue such denial in writing, and shall state
his or her findings with regard to the application and state his or her reasons
for denying the application, and shall date, sign and mail or hand deliver a
copy of such denial to the applicant and to the County Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   In a case where the Supervisor denies an encroachment permit for the
lot or lots in question as applied for, or in a case where the Supervisor
issues an encroachment permit with one or more conditions that the applicant
finds objectionable, then the applicant, within 30 days of the date of written
issuance or denial of the encroachment permit, may submit a written request to
the County Board of Commissioners for review of the Supervisor’s action. The
Board of Commissioners shall allow the applicant an opportunity to appear and
be heard at a public meeting, either specially called or during a regularly
scheduled Commission meeting, not later than 20 working days following the
filing of the applicant’s said request for review, and the Board shall render
its decision in writing not later than ten days following such meeting.
   (D)   Any encroachment permit, conditional encroachment or denial thereof
shall advise the applicant of his or her right to submit a written request to
the County Board of Commissioners for review of the Supervisor’s decision and
shall set forth the language of the preceding subsection.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.10 LETTERS OF ENCROACHMENT.
   (A)   This section governs the Supervisor and County Road Department’s role
with respect to any letter of encroachment as that term is defined in §
152.01 of this chapter.
   (B)   A letter of encroachment, or a denial thereof, means a tentative,
conditional written approval, or denial, by the Supervisor stating, for each
lot shown in a professionally prepared survey plat, whether or not that lot may
have an access to and from an existing county road rights-of-way or proposed
county road rights-of-way to be dedicated to the county, and if so, whether
more than one access will be allowed for each lot, and if so, how many.
   (C)   The Supervisor shall not begin to address whether or not to issue or
deny a letter of encroachment until after he or she, or his or her designee in
the County Road Department, receives a survey plat professionally prepared by a
licensed surveyor of a proposed subdivision that, in the judgment of the
Supervisor, adequately shows enough technical and location information to
enable the Supervisor to make an informed decision.
   (D)   For each proposed subdivision, the Supervisor shall be allowed a
maximum of 20 working days from the date of his or her receipt, or his or her
designee’s receipt, of all information that satisfies the requirements of
division (C) above before the Road Department issues a letter or letters of
encroachment, or a denial or denials thereof, for that subdivision.
   (E)   No subdivision application may be submitted to the County Planning and
Zoning Department until the applicant receives the appropriate letter(s) of
encroachment from the County Road Department that tentatively approve(s) access
to and from an existing or proposed county road rights-of-way to the lot or
lots in question.
   (F)   The County Executive Administrator, in consultation with the County
Zoning Administrator, County Planning and Zoning Department, the County Road
Department, the County Recorder and the County Surveyor, shall institute a day-
to-day practice to ensure coordinated compliance with the aforementioned
requirements for letters of encroachment.
   (G)   A letter of encroachment is not an actual road encroachment permit as
defined and governed herein, and a letter of encroachment is controlled by and
subject to the Supervisor’s subsequent approval or denial of an application for
an encroachment permit, as well as subject to the terms, conditions and
specifications of the approved road encroachment permit.
   (H)   A letter of encroachment does not determine the actual location of
each proposed access for a given lot, as that is controlled and subject to the
road encroachment permit application process and ultimate encroachment permit
and its terms, conditions and specifications; the letter of encroachment rather
merely determines whether and how many accesses shall be allowed for each
county road rights-of-way, or proposed county road rights-of-way, that fronts,
or may front, each proposed lot in question. A site plan shall be submitted
with the permit application where new access will be placed and dimensions to
where the access will be installed. If a variance from the original site plan
is desired, a new submittal to the County Road Department will be required.
   (I)   In a case where the Supervisor does not timely issue a letter of
encroachment, or in a case where the Supervisor timely issues a letter of
encroachment but tentatively denies access to and from an existing or proposed
county road rights-of-way and the lot or lots in question as applied for, or in
a case where the Supervisor issues a letter of encroachment with one or more
conditions that the applicant finds objectionable, then the applicant, within
30 days of the date of the letter’s written denial (or 30 days of the last date
that the Supervisor had to timely issue the letter), may submit a written
request to the County Board of Commissioners for review of the Supervisor’s
action or non-action. The Board of Commissioners shall allow the applicant an
opportunity to appear and be heard at a public meeting, either specially called
or during a regularly scheduled Commission meeting, not later than 20 working
days following the filing of the applicant’s said request for review, and the
Board shall render their decision in writing not later than ten days following
such meeting.
   (J)   Any letter of encroachment, conditional letter of encroachment or
denial thereof shall advise the applicant of his or her right to submit a
written request to the County Board of Commissioners for review of the
Supervisor’s decision and shall set forth the language of the preceding
subsection.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.11 BOND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Whenever a bond or guarantee is required hereunder, the same shall be
conditioned upon the complete reclamation and restoration of the site of the
encroachment. In each case, the bond or guarantee amounts shall be determined
by the Supervisor, but each bond or guarantee amount shall be not less than the
following:
      (1)   Hard surface road: $5,000 minimum per disturbance;
      (2)   Gravel surface road: $3,000 minimum per disturbance; and
      (3)   Dirt surface road: $3,000 minimum per disturbance.
   (B)   The bond or guarantee for construction, improvement, resurfacing and/
or realignment of county road rights-of-way due to encroachment may be
integrated with a project contract bond or special agreement.
   (C)   The Supervisor, as part of his or her review of each encroachment
permit application, shall determine the amount of the bond or guarantee
required, subject to the minimum amount requirements provided in division (A)
above, based upon the location, duration and extent of the proposed
encroachment together with all other pertinent factors.
   (D)   The Road Department shall condition the granting of a permit upon the
applicant’s delivery and the County Road Supervisor’s approval and receipt of
the bond or guarantee.
   (E)   Bonds or guarantees given pursuant to this subchapter shall remain in
force and effect for a period of three years from the completion date of any
project that encroaches on a county road rights-of-way, including, but not
limited to, projects to place utility lines, culverts and the like beneath the
surface of a county road rights-of-way and properly reclaim, restore and
resurface such county road rights-of-way afterwards.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.12 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The Supervisor is authorized to require, as a condition for the granting of
an encroachment permit hereunder, a policy of liability insurance to be
obtained by the applicant, naming the county as co-insured, insuring,
indemnifying and holding the county harmless against liability for property
damage and personal injury claims in an amount not less than $5,000,000 per
occurrence, unless a different amount is specified and approved by the
Supervisor, which liability claims may result from road conditions created by
the encroachment. When such insurance is required, no permit shall be issued
until the policy or a valid binder therefor has been delivered to the Road
Department. Such insurance policy shall remain in force and effect for so long
as is specified by the Supervisor, not to exceed five years after the
completion of the project.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.13 ENCROACHMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Once an applicant has obtained an encroachment permit, work and any
haulage may begin during the specified time. Said work shall progress in a
prompt and orderly fashion without unnecessary delays and shall be performed in
a good and professional manner in accordance with the plans, specifications and
conditions set forth in the encroachment permit.
   (B)   The encroachment must come to an end within the time set forth in the
permit unless an extension is requested in writing by the permittee and the
Supervisor in writing finds good cause to grant the permittee’s request. In the
event the permittee fails to complete the permitted work by the completion
date, the Supervisor shall either require a new encroachment permit to be
issued, with new permit fees paid, or determine that such failure constitutes
grounds for the forfeiture of the bond or guarantee.
   (C)   Excavation operations shall be conducted in such a manner to ensure
minimum interference or interruption of road traffic and inconvenience to
residents and businesses fronting on public roads. Suitable, adequate and
sufficient barricades as specified in the MUTCD shall be provided by the
permittee and used where necessary to prevent accidents. Barricades must be
placed until all excavators’ equipment is removed from the site, excavation is
backfilled and a proper temporary gravel surface is placed. From sunset to
sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined by acceptable
warning lights, lanterns, flares and other devices as specified in the MUTCD.
The County Sheriff’s Office Dispatch, State Highway Patrol, all cities and
towns within a ten-mile radius of the project and local fire departments shall
be notified by the permittee at least 24 hours in advance of any planned
excavation requiring road closures or detours.
   (D)   Where required by the Supervisor, haulage activities shall require
continuous dust control and maintenance of the haul route to assure the safety
of motorists and other users.
   (E)   Special signing shall be required as indicated by the MUTCD.
   (F)   Any damage to any county road rights-of-way shall be promptly reported
by the permittee to the Supervisor.
   (G)   All loads shall be legal under applicable state law, and drivers shall
strictly comply with all applicable vehicle and traffic laws.
   (H)   Unless otherwise agreed to by the Supervisor, all costs for dust
control maintenance, signing, repairs and preventive measures shall be borne by
the permittee.
   (I)   The permittee, its employees, contractors and associates shall be
bound by all conditions and agreements in effect between the county and other
governments, private agencies and individuals to the degree such matters are
set forth in the encroachment permit or are otherwise known to the permittee.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.14 EMERGENCY ENCROACHMENTS.
   (A)   The County Board of Commissioners recognizes that emergency conditions
may arise from time to time requiring an emergency encroachment upon a county
road rights-of-way.
   (B)   An applicant in such emergency conditions may proceed with the
emergency encroachment work, provided:
      (1)   The applicant shall notify the County Sheriff’s Office Dispatch at
once and make diligent efforts to notify the Supervisor as soon as possible
concerning the situation;
      (2)   The applicant shall complete and submit the required application
for an appropriate encroachment permit on the next working day following
commencement of the encroachment work;
      (3)   The encroachment work may continue if the application has been made
unless and until the Supervisor orders the applicant to cease further
encroachment work;
      (4)   The applicant will incur no penalty with the county if an
application for encroachment has been timely and properly made as required in
this section. Otherwise, all fees will be assessed at twice the normal amount;
and
      (5)   All emergency work shall strictly comply with all standards set
forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.15 NOTICE REGARDING MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   When any maintenance is necessary on or within a county road rights-
of-way, the entity intending to engage in the maintenance work shall notify the
Supervisor in writing not later than ten working days before starting the
maintenance work.
   (B)   Within five working days following receipt of a notice referenced in
division (A) above, the Supervisor shall notify the party of the amount of any
required bond, the level of any required liability insurance and the amount of
any required fees to be deposited. No maintenance work may commence until all
required fees have been paid and the applicant has met all other requirements.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.16 FEES.
   (A)   Fees required under this ordinance shall be determined and updated
from time to time by the Supervisor, upon review and approval by the Board of
County Commissioners, with fees to be fixed in an amount reasonably calculated
to compensate the county for costs and time incurred to inspect and review the
plans for the intended encroachment, the work in progress and the completed
project. The Supervisor shall prepare and distribute an updated schedule of
fees required under this subchapter and may amend the fee schedule from time to
time upon review and approval by the County Commission as needed to reflect
changing conditions.
   (B)   All applications, fees, bonds or guarantees, insurance policies and
other documents required by this subchapter shall be delivered to the County
Road Department office, presently located at 689 West 2630 South, Richfield,
Utah 84701.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.17 MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS GENERALLY.
   (A)   New construction shall be completed according to the plans and
specifications approved in connection with an encroachment permit issued
pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   All construction, maintenance and repairs performed in connection with
any encroachment project on a county road rights-of-way shall comply with one
or the other of the following standards, or some combination thereof, as
determined by the Supervisor at his or her discretion, for each encroachment
project. Either the minimum standards listed in the most current edition of the
Utah Department of Transportation’s (UDOT’s) Standard Drawings and
Specifications, or the standards set forth in §§
152.18 to
152.24 of this chapter, or some combination of the referenced UDOT standards
and standards in §§
152.18 to
152.24 of this chapter, again as determined by the Supervisor.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.18 PREPARATION MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   In instances of a high-use asphalt or gravel road, boring under the
roadway shall be required whenever possible. If the pavement, sidewalk,
driveway or other surface must be cut, it shall be cut vertically along the
lines forming the trench in such a manner as to prevent damage to the adjoining
pavement or hard surfacing.
   (B)   When trenching across a paved county roadway is required, T-patches
for the asphalt will be required as follows: Saw cut edge of existing pavement.
Provide cut through full depth of pavement and in a straight line. If the
pavement is cracked, broken or deteriorated, make a cut so the defective area
is removed. Remove existing pavement that was cut off. Saw cut additional one-
foot minimum of paved surface for T-patch prior to untreated base course and
paving. (See the T-patch detail in County Standards and Asphalt Paving Repair.)
Cut shall be made at a minimum of six inches past the trench for asphalt and
concrete. The portions to be removed shall be broken up in a manner that will
not cause damage to the pavement outside the limits of the T-patch area. Any
pavement damaged by operations outside the limits of the T-patch shall be
freshly cut and replaced. All waste material resulting from the excavation
shall be removed immediately from the site of work.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.19 BACKFILL MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   Material for backfill will be of a select nature. All broken concrete,
peat, decomposed vegetation or other similar matter will not be integrated into
the backfill materials but removed entirely from the site. All backfill will be
placed in layers of not over six inches loose measure in thickness. Compaction
will be accomplished by mechanical rollers, mechanical tampers or specified
means. Material for backfilling will have optimum moisture to ensure compaction
to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench
was dug. Jetting or internal vibrating methods of compacting sand fill or
similar methods of compacting sand or similar granular-free draining materials
will be permitted as specified in the County Road Specifications and Standards.
   (B)   The density (dry) of the backfill under pavements, sidewalks, curbs or
other structures will be not less than that existing prior to excavation. The
fill shall be restored and placed in a good condition, which will prevent
settling. (See the County Road Specifications and Standards.)
   (C)   Pipe culverts must have a minimum of 12 inches of cover. If suitable
cover cannot be achieved, use flowable fill to within four inches of the top of
pavement. A minimum of four inches of asphalt or four inches of Class AA(AE)
concrete at a minimum 4,000 psi is to be placed on top of flowable fill or
other suitable cover. See the County Road Specifications requirements.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.20 SURFACE RESTORATION MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   General. All road surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways or
other hard surfaces falling in the line of the excavation which must be removed
in performance of the work shall be restored in kind by the permittee, unless
otherwise directed by the Supervisor, in accordance with County Roadway
Specifications and Standards and other applicable regulations governing the
various types of surfaces involved.
   (B)   Protection of paved surfaces. In order to avoid unnecessary damage to
paved and graveled surfaces, track equipment shall use pavement pads when
operating on or crossing paved and graveled surfaces. All outriggers or
miscellaneous gear which may compress road surfaces shall have pad protection
at points of contact.
   (C)   Time. In traffic lanes of paved roads, the excavator shall provide
temporary gravel surfaces or cold mulch in good condition immediately after
backfill has been placed and shall complete permanent repairs on the road,
sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway and other surfaces within five days from the
date of completion of the backfill, except for periods when permanent paving
material is not available or an extension of time is granted by the Supervisor.
   (D)   Safety. The permittee shall maintain all construction or repairs at
acceptable safe standards until final repair is complete and accepted.
   (E)   Temporary repair. If temporary repair has been made on a paved road
with gravel and a permanent repair cannot be made within the time specified
above due to any of the above-mentioned conditions, then the permittee is
required to replace the gravel with cold mulch as soon as possible. The
permittee is required to monitor and maintain repairs at acceptable safe
standards until final repair is complete and accepted.
   (F)   Responsibility. The permittee shall be responsible for maintenance
costs of trenched areas across the road until the road is overlayed or
reconstructed.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.21 CONCRETE OR ASPHALT ROAD SURFACE RESTORATION MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   Temporary grade surfaces. Where excavations are made in paved areas,
the surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface. Gravel shall be
placed deep enough to provide a minimum of six inches below the bottom of the
asphalt or concrete surface. Normally, this will require six inches of gravel
for asphalt surfaces, 12 inches of gravel for concrete and a concrete base for
asphalt wearing surfaces. Gravel shall be placed in the trench at the time it
is backfilled. Temporary gravel surface shall be maintained by blading,
sprinkling, rolling and adding gravel to maintain a safe, uniform surface
satisfactory to the Supervisor until the final surface is laid. Excess material
shall be removed from the premises immediately. Material for use on temporary
gravel surfaces shall be obtained from sound, tough, durable gravel or rock
meeting the requirements for grading outlined in the County Road Specifications
for untreated base course.
   (B)   Asphalt (HMA) surfaces. The exposed edges of existing pavement shall
be primed with Type MC-1 asphalt material or better. The Supervisor shall
approve the type, grade and mixture of the asphalt to be used for road surface
replacement. The thickness shall be equal to the adjacent surface thickness but
not less than three inches. The complete surface shall not deviate more than
one-half inch between old and new work. Refer to the County Specifications for
additional mix requirements.
   (C)   Concrete surfaces. The sub-base for concrete surfaces shall be
sprinkled with clean water just before placing the concrete. Joints and
surfaces shall be made to match the original surfaces. The thickness of
concrete shall be equal to the adjacent concrete, but in no case less than six
inches thick. The Supervisor will approve the mixing, cement, water content,
proportion, placement and curing of the concrete. In no case shall the concrete
have less compressive strength than four pounds per square inch at the end of
28 days, and the classification shall be Class AA(AE).
   (D)   Maintenance. The maintenance of all concrete surfaces shall be the
responsibility of the permittee. If the concrete structure is not maintained
and interferes with the normal maintenance of the road, it will be removed at
the permittee’s expense.
   (E)   Concrete base, asphalt wearing surfaces. This type of surfacing shall
be constructed as described above.
   (F)   Gravel surfaces. Trenches excavated through gravel surfaces, such as
gravel roads, shoulders and unpaved driveways, shall have six inches of road
base gravel restored and maintained. The requirements for the road base can be
found below and in the County Standards and Specifications. The Permittee is
responsible for the maintenance of trenches across the road for one-year
minimum, and all materials and compaction shall comply with County Road
Specifications.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.22 RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   An excavator shall not interfere with any existing utility without the
written consent of the owner of the utility. If it becomes necessary to
relocate an existing utility, it shall be done by the utility’s owner unless
the owner otherwise directs. No utility, whether owned by a governmental entity
or by a private enterprise, may be moved and/or removed to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work shall be borne by the permittee or an
expressly written agreement is made whereby the utility owner and the excavator
make other arrangements relating to such costs. The permittee shall take
reasonable means to support and protect all conduits, poles, wires or other
apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and shall do
everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or
across the work. In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus
should be damaged (and for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasement or
devices are to be considered as part of a substructure), they shall be repaired
by the agency or person owning them, but the utility owner shall be reimbursed
for the expense of such repairs by the permittee. It is the intent of this
section that the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to
substructures, and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such
substructure damage, and such assumption of liability, shall be deemed a
contractual obligation which the permittee accepts upon acceptance of an
excavation permit. By state law, the permittee is required to be aware of the
existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same
against damage. The permittee shall contact Blue Stakes of Utah 8-1-1 to have
utilities in the area located before any work begins.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.23 JETTING AND BORING MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   The permittee or contractor shall not perform jetting or boring operations
of any kind without the express permission of the Supervisor, and any damage to
road surfaces or structures due to jetting or boring operations shall be
repaired to the satisfaction of the Supervisor. In cases where the Supervisor
has to perform such repairs, the Supervisor may, at his or her discretion,
charge the expenses for such to the permittee, contractor or bonding company,
or any combination thereof. Any damage to utility lines or other utility
structures due to jetting or boring shall be repaired to the satisfaction of
the utility.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.24 STREET INTERSECTION AND DRIVEWAY APPROACH SPACING MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   Unsignalized driveways. Five hundred feet or more should be provided
between full-movement unsignalized accesses, but this minimum distance
requirement may be waived if that is the only way to provide at least one such
access per each residential lot.
   (B)   Number of approaches. Residential lots shall not have more than one
driveway approach unless approved by the County Road Supervisor. For the
purposes of this division (B), circular driveways are considered as having two
access points and thus require County Road Supervisor approval.
   (C)   Proximity and width. No residential driveway shall be planned right
next to another driveway nor be more than 32 feet in width unless approved by
the County Road Supervisor. In no event shall the combined width of such
driveways exceed 48 feet or 50% of the entire lot frontage, whichever is less.
   (D)   Corner lots. On corner lots, driveways must be placed no closer to the
centerline of the intersection than 250 feet. The Road Supervisor may waive
this requirement if the frontage proposed is the only way to access the
property.
   (E)   Commercial lots and developments. Commercial lots or developments are
not limited to one access per lot and should be addressed on a case-by-case
basis, but not to exceed the access frontage requirements listed in the
following divisions. Additional accesses must be approved by the county upon
completion of a circulation plan or traffic impact study provided to the county
indicating that more than one access is required to adequately handle the
development’s traffic volumes and further indicating that the additional access
will not be detrimental to traffic flow on the adjacent street network.
Circular driveways are considered as having two access points and are subject
to the requirements of division (B) above.
   (F)   Multiple accesses. When more than one driveway access is allowed for a
property, then driveway accesses shall be in accordance with division (H)
below. Not more than two driveway accesses shall be installed per parcel. All
driveway layouts and exceptions shall be approved by county road personnel.
   (G)   Street intersection separation distances. The following are the
county’s required street intersection separation distances based on the
functional class of the roadway facility.
Type Distance
Type                               Distance
   Arterial
Minimum right-in/right-out         250 ft.
Minimum signal spacing             1,320 ft.
Minimum unsignalized full movement 500 ft.
   Commercial Local
Minimum right-in/right-out         200 ft.
Minimum signal spacing             1,320 ft.
Minimum unsignalized full movement 400 ft.
   Industrial Local
Minimum right-in/right-out         250 ft.
Minimum signal spacing             2,650 ft.
Minimum unsignalized full movement 500 ft.
   Major Collector
Minimum right-in/right-out         250 ft.
Minimum signal spacing             1,320 ft.
Minimum unsignalized full movement 250 ft.
   Minor Collector
Minimum right-in/right-out         250 ft.
Minimum signal spacing             1,320 ft.
Minimum unsignalized full movement 250 ft.
   Private
Minimum signal spacing             1,320 ft.
Minimum unsignalized full movement 250 ft.
   Residential Local
Minimum signal spacing             1,320 ft.
Minimum unsignalized full movement 250 ft.
 
   (H)   Driveway access separation distances. The following are the county’s
required driveway access separation distances based on functional class, but
these minimum distance requirements may be waived if that is the only way to
provide at least one driveway access per each residential lot.
Type Distance
Type                       Distance
   Arterial
Minimum full movement      660 ft.
Minimum right-in/right-out 330 ft.
   Commercial Local
Minimum full movement      400 ft.
Minimum right-in/right-out 200 ft.
   Industrial Local
Minimum full movement      500 ft.
Minimum right-in/right-out 250 ft.
   Major Collector
Minimum full movement      250 ft.
Minimum right-in/right-out 125 ft.
   Minor Collector
Minimum full movement      125 ft.
   Private
Minimum full movement      75 ft.
   Residential Local
Minimum full movement      75 ft.
 
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.25 NON-PERMITTED ENCROACHMENT UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to make or cause an encroachment, as defined
in §
152.01 of this chapter, upon any county road rights-of-way without first
obtaining an encroachment permit from the Supervisor as required by this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.26 NON-PERMITTED OBSTRUCTION UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any obstruction, as defined
in §
152.01 of this chapter, upon any county road rights-of-way other than for
emergencies.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.27 PARKING IN UNDESIGNATED AREAS WITHOUT PERMIT UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person without an encroachment permit, as defined in
§
152.01 of this chapter, to cause or permit a vehicle to be parked within a
county road rights-of-way, including on roadway shoulders within a county road
rights-of-way, unless such parking occurs in designated parking areas, as
defined in §
152.01 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.28 CATTLE GUARDS.
   (A)   Any person or entity desiring to install a cattle guard on a county
road rights-of-way must file a detailed application and request for a Class 1
encroachment permit with the County Road Department. The application shall
identify the county road rights-of-way involved and the exact location of the
proposed installation, and the application shall provide designs, drawings,
plans and specifications for the same. After reviewing the application, the
Supervisor shall, within a reasonable time, either grant the same or decline
it, and if he or she declines the application, he or she shall return it to the
applicant with an attached written statement of the reasons for the decision.
The Supervisor is authorized to waive application fees for amended applications
if, in his or her opinion and at his or her sole discretion, the amended
application will not require the Supervisor to spend significant additional
time reviewing it. In cases where the Supervisor grants the application and
issues the desired encroachment permit, he or she may impose any conditions,
limits, bonds or other guarantees he or she deems necessary to protect the
county and assure the applicant’s compliance with the encroachment permit’s
terms and conditions.
   (B)   The applicant shall supply all installation materials and comply with
all material design specifications that the Supervisor may require, including,
but not limited to, concrete work, bases, re-bar, wings, fence posts and gates
and the like, as the Supervisor deems necessary. See the County Standards and
Specifications for more information.
   (C)   The applicant shall be solely responsible to install a side gate that
adequately connects any adjacent fences to the cattle guard. The minimum gate
width shall be ten feet, as shown in cattle guard standard drawings.
   (D)   The applicant shall supply the necessary labor to construct and
install the cattle guard according to current specification requirements and
the encroachment permit’s terms and conditions using materials and components
provided by the applicant at the permitted site. In no event, however, does the
county assume liability to the applicant for the applicant’s performance of the
construction.
   (E)   Upon completion of the installation, the Supervisor shall inspect the
same and, upon his or her approval and acceptance, the County Road Department
will assume responsibility for future maintenance of the unit as long as the
county road rights-of-way is part of the county road system, or until the
Supervisor deems the cattle guard is no longer functional and in need of
replacement, in which case the applicant/permittee shall be solely responsible
for replacing the cattle guard.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.29 INJUNCTION.
   The Supervisor may request the County Attorney to commence a legal action in
a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain an injunction against any person or
legal entity violating this subchapter.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 152.30 LIABILITY, LOSS OR DAMAGES.
   Any applicant for an encroachment on a county road rights-of-way shall
indemnify the county from any and all liability, loss or damage the county may
suffer as a result of claims, demands, costs or judgments arising from such
encroachment.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
VACATION OF COUNTY ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND UTILITY EASEMENTS
§ 152.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROPRIATE COUNTY LAND USE AUTHORITY. For any process of vacating a county
road rights-of-way or county utility easement, either a county department or
office, or the County Planning and Zoning Commission, or the County Board of
Commissioners, according to which of these has the lawful authority to act at a
given stage in the process of considering and deciding on any petition, case,
transaction, decision or operation.
   CONDEMNATION OR THREAT OF CONDEMNATION. The county’s acquisition of a real
property interest through an eminent domain proceeding, or the county’s
deciding that it will authorize the use of condemnation authority to acquire
the real property or casement interest through an eminent domain proceeding.
   COUNTY or THE COUNTY. Sevier County, Utah.
   COUNTY ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The corridor width for any county street,
highway, trail, route or road, or any segment thereof, together with all of its
appurtenant shoulders, culverts, drains and turnarounds and the like, and any
additional corridor width that constitutes the county’s rights-of-way therefor,
plus any and all other rights-of-way acquired by the county in or appurtenant
to the corridor width, all of which the county has acquired by any legal means,
including, but not limited to, conveyance, approval and recording of a
subdivision plat, construction with county resources, prescriptive use or
dedication by public use.
   COUNTY UTILITY EASEMENT. The corridor width of any county rights-of-way, or
any segment thereof, through which a utility provides by means of overhead,
surface and/or underground pipelines, ditches, wires, channels, cables or
conduits any and all public services to supply or transport gas, oil, water,
sewer, other wastewater, electricity, telecommunications, television/radio
signals and fiber optics, which rights-of-way the county has acquired by any
legal means, including, but not limited to, conveyance, approval and recording
of a subdivision plat, or means of dedication, construction with county
resources, prescriptive use or dedication by public use.
   DEDICATED RIGHTS-OF-WAY. For any given county road rights-of-way or county
utility easement, in addition to its meaning under controlling state statutory
and case law, means that a duly recorded plat, survey or related document has
been developed which contains a legal description of a county road rights-of-
way or county utility easement and which names the county as the rights-of-way
owner. Under controlling state law, a road may be dedicated to the county for
public motorized travel by, for example, mere continuous public use for the
required number of years or by construction with public funds. Therefore, the
lack of a duly recorded plat, survey or related dedicated rights-of-way
document for any given county road rights-of-way of county utility easement
does not render the county’s rights-of-way for that road invalid.
   EXISTING COUNTY ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any county road rights-of-way that is
recognized and approved in an ordinance passed by the County Board of
Commissioners as part of the county road system.
   EXISTING COUNTY UTILITY EASEMENT. Any county utility easement that is
recognized and approved in an ordinance passed by the County Board of
Commissioners.
   HIGHEST OFFER. All material terms of the best bona fide offer to purchase a
real property interest received by the county, including purchase price,
conditions and terms of performance. HIGHEST OFFER does not mean the terms and
conditions of an agreement to exchange real property or an interest in real
property for other real property or an interest in real property.
   INTERESTED PERSON OR ENTITY.
      (1)   Each verified private, business or governmental owner of record of
land that is:
         (a)   Adjacent to the county road rights-of-way or county utility
easement between the two nearest public intersections;
         (b)   Accessed exclusively by the county road rights-of-way or county
utility easement; or
         (c)   Located within 300 feet of the county road rights-of-way or
county utility easement.
      (2)   A utility who provides through the county utility easement public
services to supply or transport gas, oil, water, sewer, other wastewater,
electricity, telecommunications, television/radio signals and fiber optics
public services; or
      (3)   The county.
   LEGISLATIVE BODY. The County Board of Commissioners.
   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The County Planning and Zoning Commission.
   PURPORTED COUNTY ROAD RIGHTS-OF-WAY or PURPORTED COUNTY UTILITY EASEMENT. A
road rights-of-way or utility easement to which the county’s current or
historical claim is doubtful and uncertain, and therefore, the county wishes to
invoke the vacating procedure provided in this subchapter to remove any vestige
of a claim or interest by the county to such.
   REAL PROPERTY. Land and any improvements thereon.
   REAL PROPERTY INTEREST. A fee title ownership interest in real property, an
estate for life ownership interest in real property, a term of years ownership
interest in real property, a leasehold interest in real property or an easement
or rights-of-way interest across, over or through real property.
   SERVIENT ESTATE.
      (1)   In addition to its meaning under controlling state statutory and
case law, the corridor width of real estate and the title ownership thereof
across and over which, or through which, a county road rights-of-way or county
utility easement passes. Owners of SERVIENT ESTATE land may include private
individuals and entities, federal governmental entities and state or local
governmental entities. The SERVIENT ESTATE land is subject to a valid county
road rights-of-way interest or county utility easement interest.
      (2)   In some cases, the county may own both the rights-of-way interest
and the SERVIENT ESTATE interest with respect to a given county road rights-of-
way or county utility easement, or any segment thereof, and in such cases, the
county, at its sole discretion, may convey away one such interest without
conveying away the other such interest, as the county may determine on a case-
by-case basis.
   SUPERVISOR. The County Road Department Supervisor or agent whom the
Supervisor expressly authorizes to exercise the functions of the Supervisor
under this subchapter. This term does not permit reliance upon apparent
authority, apparent agency or actions by county road employees in general.
   UTILITY. Any entity who provides, through overhead and/or underground
pipelines, channels, cables or conduits, public services to supply or transport
gas, oil, water, electricity, telecommunications, television/radio signals and
fiber optics. UTILITY also means an entity who provides sewer and other
wastewater services.
   VACATE, VACATED, VACATING or VACATION. Refers to an action by the
legislative body to vacate, abolish, abandon, narrow, change, amend or
otherwise modify the county’s rights-of-way interest in a county road rights-
of-way or county utility easement, or any segment thereof.
(Ord. 2023-4-2, passed 4-24-2023)
§ 152.46 AUTHORITY TO VACATE INTEREST; RESULTS OF VACATION.
   (A)   The legislative body has the inherent authority to enact ordinances
pursuant to the manner provided herein to vacate part or all of any county road
rights-of-way, county utility easement, purported county road rights-of-way or
purported county utility easement, as defined in §
152.45 of this chapter, when the legislative body makes the determinations set
forth in §
152.50(B)(2) of this chapter.
   (B)   All county road rights-of-way and county utility easements, as defined
herein, and all segments thereof, once acquired by any legal means, shall
continue permanently and indefinitely until some or all segments thereof are
formally vacated by written ordinance of the legislative body, or by decree of
a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   Any formal act to vacate a county road rights-of-way or county utility
easement shall be effective only as against the particular segment or segments
thereof to which the ordinance or court decree expressly applies.
(Ord. 2023-4-2, passed 4-24-2023)
§ 152.47 DISCRETION WHETHER TO REQUIRE COMPENSATION.
   (A)   (1)   The legislative body may, in its sole discretion, require
monetary compensation when the county conveys away a real property interest in
connection with the vacating of a county road rights-of-way or county utility
easement, or any segment thereof.
      (2)   (a)   Any conveyance for compensation done pursuant to division (A)
(1) above may, in the legislative body’s sole discretion, convey only the
servient estate interest while retaining the rights-of-way interest, or may
convey only the rights-of-way interest while retaining the servient estate
interest, with respect to any county road rights-of-way or county utility
easement or any segment thereof.
         (b)   Any servient estate land that is conveyed away by the county to
another person or entity pursuant to division (A)(1) above will still be
subject to the corresponding county road rights-of-way or county utility
easement rights-of-way interest that passes across and over, or through, such
servient estate land unless the legislative body also expressly vacates the
county’s corresponding rights-of-way interest in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter.
      (3)   When exercising its discretion to convey away a real property
interest pursuant to division (A)(1) above, the legislative body may, in its
sole discretion, decide what price, if any, shall be paid to the county by the
conveyee of such land as well as other conditions and requirements for such
conveyance.
   (B)   When a real property interest to be conveyed away by the county was
originally acquired by the county through condemnation or threat of
condemnation, the county may not sell the real property interest on the open
market at a private or public sale unless:
      (1)   (a)   For real property, the county gives in writing the rights of
first refusal for the highest offer to the original grantor if, since the date
of the original transfer to the county, the original grantor has owned real
property adjacent to the transferred real property; or
         (b)   For an easement, the county gives in writing the rights of first
refusal for the highest offer to:
            1.   If the original grantor owns the servient estate subject to
the casement, the original grantor; or
            2.   If a subsequent bona fide purchaser owns the servient estate
subject to the easement, the subsequent bona fide purchaser.
      (2)   The original grantor or subsequent bona fide purchaser described in
division (B)(1) above:
         (a)   Expressly waives in writing the right of first refusal on the
offer; or
         (b)   Fails to accept in writing the offer within 90 days after the
day on which the original
grantor or subsequent bona fide purchaser receives notification by registered
mail to the original grantor’s or subsequent bona fide purchaser’s last known
address.
      (3)   The county is not involved in the rezoning of the property to be
sold or the acquisition of additional property to enhance the value of the
property being sold.
   (C)   (1)   If the original grantor or subsequent bona fide purchaser has
not waived the right of first refusal pursuant to division (B)(2)(a) above, an
original grantor or subsequent bona fide purchaser may assign the right of
first refusal to another person or entity.
      (2)   The assignment of a right of first refusal pursuant to division (C)
(1) above does not extend the 90-day time for acceptance of an offer as
described in division (B)(2)(b) above.
(Ord. 2023-4-2, passed 4-24-2023)
§ 152.48 RELATION TO SUBDIVISION VACATIONS AND AMENDMENTS.
   A petition for a subdivision vacation or amendment under §§
153.020 through
153.036 that involves vacating, or amending, part or all of any county road
rights-of-way or county utility easement will not be approved unless:
   (A)   A separate written petition to vacate part or all of a county road
rights-of-way or county utility easement is filed, processed and approved in
accordance with the requirements of this subchapter; or
   (B)   The appropriate county land use authority signs the amended plat
certifying that no county road rights-of-way and county utility easement has
been vacated.
(Ord. 2023-4-2, passed 4-24-2023)
§ 152.49 VACATION BY PETITION.
   (A)   Any interested person or entity as defined herein, including the
county itself, may petition to vacate some or all of a county road rights-of-
way or county utility easement by submitting a written, dated and signed
petition and any associated fees to the County Road Department.
   (B)   A written, dated and signed petition to vacate a county road rights-
of-way or county utility easement, or any segment thereof, shall include:
      (1)   For each county road rights-of-way or segment thereof sought to be
vacated:
         (a)   The road’s name and its corresponding county road number;
         (b)   A description of each segment of the road, if vacating less than
the entire road is desired, stated in sufficient detail to allow identification
of each segment in question; and
         (c)   A map depicting, with reasonable accuracy and specificity, the
location of the road or road segment.
      (2)   For each county utility easement or segment thereof sought to be
vacated:
         (a)   The easement’s name and any county identifying number or
classification;
         (b)   A description of each segment of the utility easement, if
vacating less than the entire easement is desired, stated in sufficient detail
to allow identification of each segment in question; and
         (c)   A map depicting, with reasonable accuracy and specificity, the
location of the county utility easement or segment thereof.
      (3)   The name and address of each interested person or entity as defined
herein;
      (4)   Proof of written notice to all interested persons or entities who
are utilities as defined herein; and
      (5)   The signature of each interested person or entity named in the
petition who consents to the proposed vacation.
(Ord. 2023-4-2, passed 4-24-2023)
§ 152.50 PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS; PUBIC HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   Any written, dated and signed petition received by the County
Road Department to vacate some or all of a county road rights-of-way or county
utility easement shall first be reviewed by the Supervisor for compliance with
the requirements of §
152.49 of this chapter. Once the Supervisor determines such compliance to his
or her satisfaction after working with the petitioner(s) as the Supervisor
deems necessary, the County Road Department shall transfer the original of the
petition to the Planning and Zoning Commission, and at the same time, shall
send a copy thereof to the legislative authority.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing and
give notice of the date, place and time of the hearing as follows. Prior to the
public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall ensure that the notice
is:
         (a)   Mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing to each interested
person or entity as defined herein;
         (b)   1.   Posted on or near the segment or segments of the county
road rights-of-way or county utility easement under consideration to be vacated
for four consecutive weeks prior to the hearing, in a manner that is reasonably
calculated to alert the public; and
            2.   Provided, however, in cases where snowpack, flooding,
wildfire, other natural disaster or any other unexpected and disruptive event
temporarily makes it not feasible to post the notice at or near the segment or
segments under consideration to be vacated, then the Chairperson of the County
Planning and Zoning Commission, upon the Supervisor’s recommendation, may
approve that the notice be posted at a location or locations as near as
feasible to the segment or segments under consideration to be vacated.
         (c)   Posted in three other public places for four consecutive weeks
prior to the hearing;
         (d)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
once a week for four consecutive weeks prior to the hearing;
         (e)   Posted on the website of the county until the public hearing
concludes; and
         (f)   Published on the state’s Public Notice Website, created in
U.C.A. § 63A-16-601, until the public hearing concludes.
      (3)   At the Planning and Zoning Commission public hearing on the duly
noticed petition to vacate part or all of a county road rights-of-way or county
utility easement, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine whether:
         (a)   Good cause exists for the vacation; and
         (b)   Neither the public interest nor any person will be materially
injured by the proposed vacation.
      (4)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall then prepare a written
recommendation on the petition to vacate part or all of a county road rights-
of-way or county utility easement, together with any recommended terms and
conditions for such, and shall deliver the same to the legislative authority.
   (B)   (1)   For any written recommendation received by the legislative
authority from the Planning and Zoning Commission concerning a petition to
vacate part or all of a county road rights-of-way or county utility easement,
the legislative authority shall hold a public hearing and give notice of the
date, place and time of the hearing as follows. Prior to the public hearing,
the legislative authority shall ensure that the notice is:
         (a)   Mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing to each interested
person or entity as defined herein;
         (b)   1.   Posted on or near the segment or segments of county road
rights-of-way or county utility easement under consideration to be vacated for
four consecutive weeks prior to the hearing in a manner that is reasonably
calculated to alert the public; and
            2.   Provided, however, in cases where snowpack, flooding,
wildfire, other natural disaster or any other unexpected and disruptive event
temporarily makes it not feasible to post the notice at or near the segment or
segments under consideration to be vacated, then the Chairperson of the
legislative authority, upon the Supervisor’s recommendation, may authorize that
the notice be posted at a location or locations as near as feasible to the
segment or segments under consideration to be vacated.
         (c)   Posted in three other public places for four consecutive weeks
prior to the hearing;
         (d)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
once a week for four consecutive weeks prior to the hearing;
         (e)   Posted on the website of the county until the public hearing
concludes; and
         (f)   Published on the state’s Public Notice Website, created in
U.C.A. § 63A-16-601, until the public hearing concludes.
      (2)   At the public hearing, before the legislative authority on the duly
noticed petition to vacate part or all of a county road rights-of-way or county
utility easement, the legislative authority shall determine whether:
         (a)   Good cause exists for granting the petition in whole or in part;
and
         (b)   Neither the public interest nor any person will be materially
injured by the proposed vacation.
      (3)   If the legislative authority makes favorable determinations
pursuant to divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(2)(b) above and determines to grant the
petition in whole or in part, the legislative authority shall then prepare and
adopt an appropriate written ordinance to vacate consistent with its
determination on the petition, together with an explanation of any terms or
conditions for such.
   (C)   If the legislative body adopts an ordinance vacating some or all of a
county road rights-of-way or county utility easement, the legislative body
shall ensure that one or both of the following is recorded in the office of the
County Recorder:
      (1)   A plat reflecting the vacation and/or the ordinance of vacation;
and
      (2)   A legal description of the county road rights-of-way or county
utility easement, or segments thereof, to be vacated.
   (D)   Regardless of how the legislative authority decides on the petition to
vacate, the legislative authority may charge and bill the petitioner(s) a
reasonable fee to compensate the county for administrative costs, including
costs for county employee time spent, costs for establishing, serving and
mailing public hearing notices and any costs which the county may choose to
incur, including, but not limited to, professional surveys, engineering, legal
costs and the like, incurred in the reviewing and processing of the petition to
vacate, both at the County Road Department level, the Planning and Zoning
Commission level and the legislative authority level.
(Ord. 2023-4-2, passed 4-24-2023)
§ 152.51 FEES.
   (A)   (1)   At the discretion of the supervisor, each petition to vacate a
county road rights-of-way or county utility easement, or any segment thereof,
shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable petition fee in the amount set forth in
the most current fee schedule issued by the Supervisor pursuant to the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   Other fees and charges, including, but not limited to, liability
and indemnity insurance policies and performance bonds, for the matters
referenced in division (B) below may be charged by the Supervisor against the
applicant as the process required by this subchapter proceeds, with timely
collection of such charges up front being required of the applicant as a
condition for proceeding forward in the process.
   (B)   (1)   Fees required under this section shall be determined and updated
from time to time by the Supervisor, upon periodic review and approval by the
Board of County Commissioners, with fees to be fixed in an amount reasonably
calculated to compensate the county for costs and time incurred in inspecting
and reviewing the petition to vacate, along with all of the documentation
required to be submitted in with the petition and during the process of
reviewing and acting on the petition, including, but not limited to, costs for
security, liability insurance and indemnity and performance bonding, costs for
legal review, costs of complying with all of the notice requirements of this
subchapter and costs of engineers, construction personnel and other qualified
consultants deemed necessary by the Supervisor to review and advise regarding
the feasibility and technical aspects of any proposed road or utility easement
vacating.
      (2)   The Supervisor shall prepare and distribute an updated schedule of
fees required under this subchapter and may amend the fee schedule from time to
time upon review and approval by the County Commission, as needed to reflect
changing conditions.
   (C)   All petitions, fees, bonds or guarantees, insurance policies and other
documents required by this subchapter shall be delivered to the County Road
Department office, presently located at 689 West 2630 South, Richfield, Utah
84701.
(Ord. 2023-4-2, passed 4-24-2023)
§ 152.52 EFFECT OF ROAD VACATING ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Upon the proper recording in the County Recorder’s office of an
ordinance or court decree that vacates a county road rights-of-way or county
utility easement, or any segment thereof:
      (1)   (a)   Subject to the provisions of division (A)(1)(b) below, in
cases where the county vacates its rights-of-way interest in a given road
segment or utility corridor segment and does not have a real property interest
in the underlying servient estate, one-half of the width of the vacated segment
shall be assessed by the County Assessor to each of the adjoining landowners
for property tax purposes.
         (b)   However, notwithstanding the provisions of division (A)(1)(a)
above, should a property description of an owner of record extend into the
vacated segment or segments of a county road rights-of-way or county utility
easement, that portion of the vacated segment or segments shall be assessed by
the County Assessor to such record owner, and the remainder of the vacated
segment or segments shall be assessed as otherwise provided in division (A)(1)
(a) above.
      (2)   (a)   Except in cases to which division (A)(2)(b) below applies,
when the county legislative authority vacates a county road rights-of-way or
county utility easement, any rights-of-way interest of the state is also
vacated.
         (b)   However, notwithstanding the provisions of division (A)(2)(a)
above, in cases where the county legislative authority vacates any county road
rights-of-way or segment that is claimed by the county or the state as a
rights-of-way across federal public land, title to that rights-of-way interest
shall revert to the state without compensation to the county.
   (B)   Each of the following is not a vacation or abandonment by the county
of a county road rights-of-way or county utility easement, nor any segment
thereof:
      (1)   A temporary closure;
      (2)   The erection of a barrier or sign on a county road rights-of-way or
county utility easement, or any segment thereof; and
      (3)   Any other actions by individuals and entities that interrupt or
appear to interrupt the public’s continuous use of a county road rights-of-way
and county utility easement once established as belonging to the county, even
if the interruption is allowed to continue unabated.
   (C)   The action of the legislative body to vacate part or all of a county
road rights-of-way or county utility easement may not be construed to impair:
      (1)   Any rights-of-way or easement of any parcel or lot owner;
      (2)   The rights of a culinary water authority or sanitary sewer
authority; or
      (3)   The rights of a public utility easement that is not a county
utility easement, except to the extent:
         (a)   Such easement is not a protected utility easement as defined in
U.C.A. § 54-3-27; and
         (b)   Such easement is included within the corridor of a county road
rights-of-way or county utility easement and the notice to vacate the county
road rights-of-way or county utility easement also contains a notice to vacate
such easement.
   (D)   The legislative authority may not adopt an ordinance to vacate a
county road rights-of-way or county utility easement unless the ordinance
expressly identifies and preserves any easements owned by a culinary water
authority and sanitary sewer authority for existing facilities located within
the public county road rights-of-way or county utility easement.
(Ord. 2023-4-2, passed 4-24-2023)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   As set out in §
152.25 of this chapter, any person who makes or causes an encroachment, as
defined herein, upon any county road rights-of-way who fails to first obtain an
encroachment permit from the Supervisor as required by this chapter shall be
guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. An emergency encroachment is exempted from
this prohibition, but only if done in compliance with division (B)(3) below and
§
152.14 of this chapter.
      (2)   Any person who, after obtaining an encroachment permit under this
chapter, shall fail to comply with and fulfill the permit’s terms and
conditions shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
      (3)   Any person who does emergency encroachment work on a county road
rights-of-way and fails to make application for an encroachment permit on the
first working day following commencement thereof, as required under §
152.14 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
      (4)   Any officers, directors and trustees of any private or public
entity who engages agents, general contractors or subcontractors for a project
that requires encroachment of a county road rights-of-way, and who permits such
agents, general contractors or subcontractors to violate any provision of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
   (C)   As set out in §
152.26 of this chapter, any person who causes or permits an obstruction, as
defined herein, shall be subject to the following enforcement procedures, to be
carried out at the option of the County Attorney:
      (1)   Prosecute the violator for a Class B misdemeanor pursuant to U.C.A.
§ 72-7-303; and
      (2)   Bring a civil enforcement action against the violator pursuant to
U.C.A. §§ 76-10-803, 76-10-806 or 72-7-104 to have the obstruction abated, pay
for damages and pay the county’s litigation costs and any costs to have the
obstruction removed.
   (D)   (1)   Any person who causes or permits a violation of §
152.27 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
      (2)   Any officers, directors and trustees of any private or public
entity who engages agents, general contractors or subcontractors for a project
that involves parking a vehicle within a county road rights-of-way, including
on roadway shoulders within a county road rights-of-way, and who permits such
agents, general contractors or subcontractors to violate §
152.27 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2023-4-1, passed 4-10-2023)
CHAPTER 153: SUBDIVISION
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Intent and purpose
   
153.002   Scope
   
153.003   Exemptions
   
153.004   Permits
   
153.005   Fees
   
153.006   Definitions
Procedure
   
153.020   Signed documentation of closest municipality rejection of an
annexation request
   
153.021   General subdivision procedure
   
153.022   Preliminary approval of the Planning Commission and an improvements
agreement required prior to final approval of the land use authority
   
153.023   Approval of land use authority
   
153.024   Limited residential subdivision
   
153.025   Designation of administrative land use authority
   
153.026   Powers and duties of the administrative land use authority
   
153.027   Limited residential subdivision procedure
   
153.028   Approval of the land use authority and an improvements agreement
required prior to final plat
   
153.029   Approval of land use authority
   
153.030   Appeals of limited residential subdivision
   
153.031   Application for designation as a small subdivision
   
153.032   Action on applications for small subdivision approval
   
153.033   Small subdivision application concept plan/preliminary design
checklist
   
153.034   Drawing requirements
   
153.035   Time limits for final approval and recording of subdivisions
   
153.036   Small subdivision additional standards
Concept Plan
   
153.050   Procedures and requirements for submission
   
153.051   Review procedure - concept plan
Preliminary Design Plan
   
153.065   Submission requirements
   
153.066   Drawing requirements
   
153.067   Supporting documents required
   
153.068   Summary statement of proposal
   
153.069   Review procedure - preliminary design plan
   
153.070   Planning Commission approval
Final Plat
   
153.085   Submission requirements
   
153.086   Plat requirements
   
153.087   Drawing requirements
   
153.088   Phase development
   
153.089   Monuments
   
153.090   Survey certification
   
153.091   Supporting documents
   
153.092   Revised summary statement of proposal
   
153.093   Land use authority review and improvements agreement and compliance
with this chapter required for approval
   
153.094   Recording final plat
   
153.095   Amending a recorded subdivision plat
   
153.096   Minor amendments to a recorded subdivision plat
   
153.097   File of recorded subdivisions
Design Standards
   
153.110   Design standards
   
153.111   General standards
   
153.112   Lots
   
153.113   Street requirements
   
153.114   Street names
   
153.115   Curvature and alignment
   
153.116   Frontage on major highways
   
153.117   Roadbed construction standards for paved roadways for public streets
   
153.118   Street grades
   
153.119   Sidewalks, curbs and gutters
   
153.120   Block standards
   
153.121   Pedestrian crosswalks
   
153.122   Lot size standards
   
153.123   Easement standards
   
153.124   Utilities to be underground
   
153.125   Alleys
   
153.126   Sanitary sewage disposal - general requirements
   
153.127   Sanitary sewer mains, laterals and house connections - future
   
153.128   Test procedures
   
153.129   Water in sufficient quantity to be an obligation of subdivider
   
153.130   Culinary water system
   
153.131   Culinary/fire protection water storage facility
   
153.132   Storm drainage and floodplains
   
153.133   Irrigation systems
   
153.134   Fire protection
Financial Responsibility
   
153.145   Guarantee
   
153.146   Performance bonds
   
153.147   Deposit in escrow
   
153.148   Default
   
153.149   Phased development
   
153.150   Guarantee for one year
   
153.151   Acceptance and release of surety
Cluster Subdivisions and Open Space
   
153.165   Cluster subdivision standards
   
153.166   Unit density calculation and density bonus
   
153.167   Open space
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter and the intent of the county in the
adoption of the ordinance incorporated in this chapter is to promote the
health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the present and future
inhabitants of the county.
   (B)   This chapter will accomplish this purpose by:
      (1)   Providing policies, standards, requirements and procedures to
regulate and control the design improvement of all subdivisions;
      (2)   Assisting in the implementation of the objectives, policies and
programs of the General Plan by ensuring that all proposed subdivisions,
together with provisions for their design and improvement, are consistent with
the General Plan and all applicable specific plans;
      (3)   Preserving and protecting, to the maximum extent possible, unique
and valuable natural resources and amenities, including topographic and
geologic features, natural watercourses, fish and wildlife habitats, historical
and cultural places and scenic vistas and attractions; and improving the
public’s access to and enjoyment of such resources and amenities through the
dedication or continuance of appropriate public easements;
      (4)   Preserving and protecting the special environmental quality and
aesthetic character of all hillsides and mountainous areas; preventing
detrimental impacts on the soil mantle, vegetative cover and other
environmental factors; reducing the hazards to life and property from fire,
flood, erosion, sedimentation and soil slippage; and relating the amount of
grading within a subdivision to the slope of the natural terrain;
      (5)   Encouraging quality clustering of housing developments where
subdivisions are permitted in hillside and mountainous areas, minimizing
grading, preserving the natural terrain and enlarging the open space;
      (6)   Relating land use intensity and population density to existing
developments, street capacity and traffic access, the slope of the natural
terrain, the availability and capacity of public facilities and utilities and
open spaces;
      (7)   Providing lots of sufficient size and appropriate design for the
purposes for which they are to be used;
      (8)   Providing streets of adequate capacity and design for the traffic
that will utilize them, and ensuring maximum safety for pedestrians and users
of vehicles;
      (9)   Ensuring adequate access to each building site;
      (10)   Providing sidewalks, pedestrian ways and equestrian and hiking
trails for the safety, convenience and enjoyment of residents of new
developments;
      (11)   Providing adequate systems of water drainage, street lighting and
other utilities needed for public health, safety and convenience;
      (12)   Providing adequate sites for public facilities needed to serve
residents of new developments;
      (13)   Ensuring that costs of providing land for streets, alleys,
pedestrian ways, easements and other rights-of-way and for the improvements
where needed to serve new developments are the responsibility of borne by the
subdivider(s);
      (14)   Preventing land which is actually or potentially dangerous by
reason of flood hazard, inundation, inadequate access, inadequate water supply
or fire protection, insufficient sewerage facilities or hazardous geological
conditions from being subdivided for any use or in any manner tending to create
an increased detriment to the public health, safety or welfare; and
      (15)   Ensuring that, as possible, land is subdivided in a manner that
will promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare and the
physical, social and economic development of the area in conformance with this
chapter and the General Plan.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.002 SCOPE.
   (A)   No person shall subdivide any tract of land except in compliance with
this chapter. No person shall sell or exchange or offer to sell or exchange any
parcel of land which is a part of a subdivision of a larger tract of land, nor
offer for recording any deed conveying such a parcel of land, or any interest
in, unless such subdivision has been created in accordance with the provisions
of this land use code.
   (B)   No lot within a subsection created and recorded prior to the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or approved by the land use
authority and recorded in the County Recorder’s Office under the provisions of
this chapter shall be further divided, rearranged, added to or reduced in area,
nor shall any boundaries of any lot be altered in any manner so as to create or
form a lot, without first obtaining the approval of the land use authority.
   (C)   Restricted lots are prohibited.
   (D)   No division of land that leaves a remainder parcel of less than the
required size for a legal lot shall be allowed for development purposes in any
zone.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.003 EXEMPTIONS.
   Any land divided for any purpose into two or more parts shall be subject to
the following provisions and regulations, except the following, which are
exempt:
   (A)   A bona fide actual division or partition of agricultural land for
agricultural purposes; a bona fide AG split must meet U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter
2, Part 5, Farmland Assessment Act;
   (B)   A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining properties adjusting
their mutual boundary if:
      (1)   No new lot is created; and
      (2)   The adjustment does not result in a violation of applicable zoning
ordinances.
   (C)   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record, revising the
legal description of more
than one contiguous parcel of property into one legal description encompassing
all such parcels of property;
   (D)   The legitimate bona fide division or partition of land for the purpose
of sitting, on one or more of the resulting separate parcels, an unmanned
facility appurtenant to a pipeline owned or operated by a gas corporation,
interstate pipeline company or intrastate pipeline company; and
   (E)   A lot subdivided under U.C.A. § 17-27a-605(4) exemption; however,
before issuance of a building permit on such lot, the following shall be
provided to the county:
      (1)   A site plan showing the location of the proposed building in
relation to parcel boundaries prepared by a surveyor licensed in the state, to
ensure compliance with safety setback and lot size requirements of Chapter 154;
      (2)   Proof of purchase and transfer of culinary water as required by §
154.217;
      (3)   Evidence of legal access to the property that complies with §
153.112(E); and
      (4)   Evidence of wastewater permit approval for the parcel from the
State Health Department.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.004 PERMITS.
   The Building Official shall not grant a permit, or any officer of the county
grant any license or permit, for the use of any land or the construction or
alteration of any building or structure on a lot which would be in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter,
Chapter 154 or on a lot in a subdivision created by judicial decree, until a
subdivision plat has been recorded or approved as required by this chapter. Any
license or permit issued in conflict with such provisions shall be null and
void.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.005 FEES.
   At the time of filing an application for approval at any step or stage of
the subdivision process, a non-refundable fee must be submitted, payable to the
county, in accordance with the current applicable fee schedule as adopted by
the Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.006 DEFINITIONS.
   Refer to Chapter 154 for land use related definitions.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
PROCEDURE
§ 153.020 SIGNED DOCUMENTATION OF CLOSEST MUNICIPALITY REJECTION OF AN
ANNEXATION REQUEST.
   All subdivision applications to the county require documentation of the
closest adjacent municipality showing the municipalities’ rejection of an
annexation request, and upon the recommendation of the County Planning
Commission, other municipalities may also be required to reject an annexation
request by the subdivider before acceptance of any subdivision application by
the county.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.021 GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The procedure by which required writings and material shall be
submitted, reviewed and approved or disapproved by the Planning Commission and
land use authority shall be as follows.
      (1)   Should the applicant desire a concept plan review, the applicant
shall submit a concept plan to the Development Review Committee for review. At
this meeting, staff will provide information on accessing applicable land use
ordinances, a complete list of standards required for the project, preliminary
and final application checklists and feedback on the concept plan.
      (2)   The applicant shall then prepare and submit a complete application
for preliminary review. An applicant may elect to submit the preliminary and
final plat concurrently. Any application found to be incomplete shall be
returned to the applicant.
      (3)   Staff shall review a complete preliminary application within 15
calendar days of submittal and a final plat within 20 calendar days of
submittal.
      (4)   Any filing and review fees required for any stage of the
subdivision procedure shall be submitted together with all contents required in
this code.
      (4)   After staff has completed a review, staff shall provide any
corrections to the applicant. If no corrections are required, the application
shall be forwarded for review by the Planning Commission or land use authority,
as determined by the county code. Incomplete submittals or resubmittals that do
not address all corrections shall not be placed on the agenda docket for the
Planning Commission or the land use authority.
      (5)   In instances where corrections are required, the resubmittal
process shall follow the review cycles outlined in U.C.A. § 10-9a-604, as
amended. No more than four review cycles shall be permitted.
      (6)   Any approval or disapproval made by the Planning Commission shall
be in the form of written findings of fact and conclusions included in the
approved minutes of the meeting.
      (7)   Any approval or disapproval by the Planning Commission described in
this chapter may be appealed as outlined in §
153.030.
      (8)   No excavation or alteration of the terrain within a proposed
subdivision may be undertaken prior to approval of the final plat by the land
use authority, approval or disapproval in conformity with the procedures set
forth in this chapter. Excavation or alteration of the land prior to approval
of the final plat may be cause for disapproval of the proposed subdivision.
      (9)   Receipt of any document for the purposes of official Planning
Commission action shall be deemed to occur only at regularly scheduled meetings
of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Steps in the procedure are as follows.
      (1)   Step 1: Submit concept plan (optional). Subdividers may submit a
concept plan to the Development Review Committee consisting of a representative
of the Building and Zoning Department, Health Department, County Fire
Department, Road Department and any other department the concept plan may
benefit from by having a review prior to the submission of a preliminary plat
(preliminary design plan). The concept plan shall enable the subdivider and the
Development Review Committee to have an informal review of a proposed
subdivision for general scope and conditions which might affect said
subdivision. The concept plan shall be reviewed by the Development Review
Committee under guidelines set forth in §§
153.050 and
150.051. There is no approval of a concept plan required or given. After
reviewing and discussing the concept plan, the Development Review Committee
will advise the applicant of the specific changes or additions, if any, that
are needed in the layout, and the character and extent of required improvements
and reservations which it will require as a prerequisite to the approval of the
preliminary plat. The Development Review Committee will grant the applicant the
right to move forward with authorization to prepare and submit a preliminary
plan.
      (2)   Step 2: Submit preliminary design plan. Subdividers shall submit a
preliminary design plan. The preliminary design plan shall provide design
solutions for problems identified in the review process. Submission
requirements and time required for review and notification are included in §§
153.065 through
153.070. Approval of the preliminary design plan shall be valid for 12 months.
Thereafter, approval of the preliminary design plan will have expired unless a
final plat has been submitted to the land use authority, or an extension has
been granted by the land use authority.
      (3)   Step 3: Submit final plat. Once a preliminary design plan has been
approved by the Planning Commission, the subdivider shall submit a final plat
and supporting documents. The final plat shall be reviewed by the land use
authority. Appropriate action shall be taken under the process outlined in §§
153.085 through
153.097. Once approved by the land use authority, the final plat may be
recorded, and lots may then be sold.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.022 PRELIMINARY APPROVAL OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND AN IMPROVEMENTS
AGREEMENT REQUIRED PRIOR TO FINAL APPROVAL OF THE LAND USE AUTHORITY.
   The land use authority shall not approve any subdivision or authorize for
recording any subdivision which has not previously received preliminary
approval by the Planning Commission, nor shall it approve and authorize such
subdivision for recording unless an improvement agreement with regard to the
subject subdivision has been signed by all appropriate parties. The
improvements agreement shall then also be recorded.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.023 APPROVAL OF LAND USE AUTHORITY.
   The land use authority shall grant approval for any subdivision only after a
subdivider has complied with the process outlined in this chapter. Intermediate
approval at each phase of the process shall not be construed to mean final
approval of the subdivision.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.024 LIMITED RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION.
   All subdivision applications to the county for limited residential
subdivision require an alternative process for subdivision approval.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.025 DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY.
   The County Zoning Administrator is designated as the administrative land use
authority as defined by §
154.003. However, in instances where a final plat is reviewed concurrently with
a preliminary plan, the Planning Commission may act as the land use authority
for both the preliminary and final plat. In instances where the approval is
concurrent with a legislative action, such as a zone change, text amendment or
General Plan amendment, the County Commission may act as the land use
authority.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.026 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The land use authority shall have the powers and duties described in
the County Land Use, Development and Management Act (“Act”), as currently set
forth in U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 27a, as amended, or as that Act may be
amended.
   (B)   Subject to and in accordance with the Act and this chapter, the land
use authority has the duty and power, in addition to any other powers and
duties provided by the Act or this chapter, to:
      (1)   Give notice of and hold a public hearing for any proposal to
vacate, alter or amend a platted street;
      (2)   Consider, approve or disapprove an application and proposed plat
for the subdivision of unincorporated land;
      (3)   Consider, approve or disapprove an application for the proposed
subdivision of unincorporated land into ten or less lots without a plat;
      (4)   With or without a petition, consider and resolve any proposed
vacation, alteration or amendment of a subdivision plat, any portion of a
subdivision plat or any street, lot or alley contained in a subdivision plat
except to the extent that any action on these matters is required to be taken
by the County Commission;
      (5)   Refuse to approve or renew any plat, subdivision plan or dedication
of any street or other ground, if restrictions, covenants or similar binding
agreements running with the land prohibit or unreasonably restrict reasonably
sited and designed solar collectors, clotheslines or other energy devices based
on renewable sources from being installed on buildings or erected on lots
within the subdivision;
      (6)   Exercise such other powers and duties as may be delegated to it by
the County Commission; and
      (7)   The procedure by which required writings and material shall be
submitted, reviewed and approved or disapproved by the Planning Commission
shall be in accordance with §
153.021.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.027 LIMITED RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Review; notice initial review.
      (1)   After receiving an application for preliminary subdivision plan or
final plat review, the land use authority shall determine whether the
application is complete or not. If the land use authority finds the application
is not complete, the land use authority shall inform the applicant in writing
of the missing items. The application shall not be reviewed until the
application is complete.
      (2)   Once the land use authority finds the application is complete, the
land use authority shall distribute copies of the plans to the following
officials and reviewing agencies for the information and recommendation of such
officials, divisions and agencies: the County Engineer, Building Services
Division, the Water Utility, the Operations Division, the Fire Department, the
Police Department and the County Attorney; the school district and the United
States Postal Service; each company or agency furnishing culinary water,
sanitary sewer or storm sewer, if such services are proposed to be provided by
other than the county; and each company or agency furnishing electric, gas,
telephone, cable services or secondary water.
      (3)   The land use authority shall consider all comments received,
complete an initial review of the subdivision preliminary plan and provide
comments and corrections to the applicant. In the case of limited residential
subdivisions in areas that do not contain geologic hazards, such review shall
be completed and provided to the applicant within 15 business days of the date
the application was complete.
      (4)   If after the initial review the land use authority determines that
no major changes are required to be made to the submittal, the land use
authority shall schedule the proposed subdivision for review.
      (5)   If the land use authority determines revisions are required to be
made to the proposed preliminary subdivision plan to meet minimum requirements
and criteria for preliminary subdivision plan approval, and if such revisions
may result in major changes to the proposed preliminary subdivision plan, the
subdivider shall make such changes prior to the preliminary plat subdivision
plan being scheduled for review by the decision maker.
   (B)   Concept plan. There is no requirement for concept plan review or
approval. An applicant may request a concept review as outlined in §
153.021. The review shall not be binding on the county or entitle any part of
the concept plan.
   (C)   Review. Upon receipt of all required writings, fees and materials for
any specific stage of the subdivision procedure, the land use authority shall
docket the subdivider’s application for review. Incomplete submittals shall not
be placed on the agenda docketed for Planning Commission review, if applicable.
      (1)   Any approval or disapproval made by the land use authority shall be
in the form of written findings of fact and conclusions included in the
approved minutes of the meeting.
      (2)   Any approval or disapproval by the land use authority described in
this chapter may be appealed as outlined in §
153.030.
      (3)   No excavation or alteration of the terrain within a proposed
subdivision may be undertaken prior to approval of the final plat by the County
Commission, approval or disapproval in conformity with the procedures set forth
in this chapter; excavation or alteration of the land prior to approval of the
final plat may be cause for disapproval of the proposed subdivision.
      (4)   Receipt of any document for the purposes of official land use
authority action shall be deemed to occur only at regularly scheduled meetings
of the land use authority.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.028 APPROVAL OF THE LAND USE AUTHORITY AND AN IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT
REQUIRED PRIOR TO FINAL PLAT.
   The land use authority shall not approve any subdivision or authorize for
recording any subdivision which has not previously been reviewed and approved
by the land use authority unless an improvement agreement with regard to the
subject subdivision has been signed by all appropriate parties. The
improvements agreement shall then also be recorded.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.029 APPROVAL OF LAND USE AUTHORITY.
   The land use authority shall grant approval for any subdivision only after a
subdivider has complied with the process outlined in this chapter. Intermediate
approval at each phase of the process shall not be construed to mean an
approval of the subdivision for submission to the Board of County
Commissioners.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.030 APPEALS OF LIMITED RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION.
   (A)   (1)   The applicant can appeal the municipality’s requirement under
the statutory criteria for residential roadway width in excess of 32 feet to a
panel of technical experts.
      (2)   Those experts include:
         (a)   One licensed engineer designated by the municipality;
         (b)   One licensed engineer designated by the land use applicant; and
         (c)   One licensed engineer agreed upon and designated by the two
designated engineers.
   (B)   The applicant must pay 50% of the total cost of the panel and the
municipality’s published appeal fee. The county pays the other 50%.
   (C)   The panel’s decision is final, unless the county or applicant petition
for District Court review within 30 days after the final written decision is
issued.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.031 APPLICATION FOR DESIGNATION AS A SMALL SUBDIVISION.
   The owner or agent on behalf of the owner of a tract or parcel of land
proposed to be divided into four or less building sites, tracts or lots shall
apply to the land use authority for designation of development as a small
subdivision, if such division meets the requirements for a small subdivision as
outlined in §
153.026. Such application shall include a legal description of the tract and of
the proposed lots and the vicinity plan indicating the relation of the lots to
existing roads.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.032 ACTION ON APPLICATIONS FOR SMALL SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.
   (A)   A preliminary design plan approved by the Planning Commission and
final design plan approved by the land use authority shall be required for all
small subdivisions. Final approval by the land use authority and recording of
the final plat will be authorization for the subdivider to sell lots within the
subdivision. The land use authority may combine the preliminary and final
design plans for approval in the same meeting.
   (B)   The Planning Commission and land use authority may recommend on-site
and off-site improvements, facilities and amenities, and provided 100% by the
applicant for small subdivision approval determined necessary by the Planning
Commission and land use authority and accompanied by a finding of the Planning
Commission and land use authority that such on-site and off-site improvements,
facilities and amenities are required to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the subdivision, or the existing residents of the
county, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Road improvements, grading and hard-surfacing, bridges, culverts,
road signs and lighting;
      (2)   Flood control areas and facilities;
      (3)   Culinary water facilities;
      (4)   Sanitary sewer facilities;
      (5)   Park, trail, open space areas and facilities;
      (6)   Fire protection facilities, including fire hydrants and water
storage facilities;
      (7)   Irrigation facilities;
      (8)   Electrical power, telephone and other utility facilities; and
      (9)   Fencing and livestock guards.
   (C)   To be classified as a small subdivision, the subdivision must meet the
following conditions:
      (1)   The subdivision consists of four lots or less;
      (2)   The subdivision does not require the dedication of any land for
street or other public purposes within the subdivision (does not include
dedication of land to widen existing county rights-of-way);
      (3)   The subdivision is not traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed
street as shown on the General Plan;
      (4)   Each of the lots in the subdivision meets the frontage, width and
area requirements of Chapter 154;
      (5)   Is not within 1,000 feet of another small subdivision if the
property is owned by the same person as outlined in U.C.A. § 17-27a-605;
      (6)   There is no dispute, whether actual or implied by conflicting
records of title or surveys, as to the ownership of the land within the
proposed subdivision; and
      (7)   Each lot in the subdivision has been or will be provided with
improvements as required by this chapter and the County Road Department. Cost
of improvements will be at the expense of the property owner.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.033 SMALL SUBDIVISION APPLICATION CONCEPT PLAN/PRELIMINARY DESIGN
CHECKLIST.
   An applicant must submit nine copies of the following to the Building/
Planning and Zoning Department, no later than 14 days prior to the next
scheduled Planning and Zoning meeting:
   (A)   Summary statement of application, inserted after land use application
with statements on the following issues:
      (1)   Proposed name of subdivision;
      (2)   Name and address of person(s) developing this subdivision;
      (3)   Total development area and number of proposed dwelling units;
      (4)   Description of water system;
      (5)   Description of sewer or sanitary system;
      (6)   Description of method of financing improvements;
      (7)   Written statement of the intent of the property owner, including
feasibility, design criteria and overall impact of the subdivision;
      (8)   Description of geologic hazards;
      (9)   Location, function, ownership and manner of maintenance of common
open space or non-buildable area not otherwise reserved or dedicated for public
use, if applicable; and
      (10)   Description of fire protection provided (fire hydrants, fire
sprinklers and the like).
   (B)   Municipal annexation request letter (the nearest municipality must
reject your annexation and written documentation must be included);
   (C)   A vicinity plan. A drawing on a map of the location of your
subdivision. (This is necessary so that the members of the Planning Commission
can easily identify where this property is located. Include known roads or
landmarks so that the property can be found.);
   (D)   A document for future roadway improvements. Documentation recorded
with the property stating that the property in the small subdivision or any
portion abutting an existing county road is subject to exactions by the county
for any future roadway improvements (U.C.A. § 17-27a-507). The documentation
should also state that the cost of the improvements will be at the expense of
the property owner, for the owner’s portion;
   (E)   Perimeter outline drawing of proposed plan area including the
following:
      (1)   Lot and street layout with dimensions on all lots to the nearest
foot;
      (2)   Lots and blocks numbered consecutively;
      (3)   Locations and identifications of all existing and proposed public
and private easements;
      (4)   Existing street names;
      (5)   Location of trees over six inches in diameter;
      (6)   Location of well (if necessary) and 100-foot radius well protection
zone drawn around the well;
      (7)   Access from the county road;
      (8)   Adjacent property and owners; and
      (9)   True north, township, range and quarter section.
   (F)   A description of each lot survey plat required. Three plats, two 24-
inch by 36-inch and one 18-inch by 18-inch), are required at the time of the
meeting. Required signatures on the plat must include land use authority, one
County Clerk and one County Recorder signature spaces;
   (G)   Setback requirements met. Drawings must show the setback requirements
for buildings/structures; setbacks will be measured from the center of roadway,
minimum of 63 feet from center of roadway;
   (H)   An affidavit (certificate for clear title) that the applicant is the
owner, the equitable owner or authorized by the owner in writing to make an
application or the land proposed to be subdivided;
   (I)   Documentation of water rights, change order applied for or actual
water rights for this property (Water Rights Division, 2031 Industrial Park
Road, Richfield Utah 84701 (435) 896-2557);
   (J)   Letter of feasibility for sewage disposal from the Central Utah Health
Department indicating a septic system will work in this area (Central Utah
Health Department, 70 Westview Drive, Richfield, Utah 84701 (435) 896-5451);
   (K)   Access/encroachment letter, from the County Road Department and/or the
State Department of Transportation, providing access to the subdivision off of
the county or state rights-of-way, this may include dedication of property for
rights-of-way;
   (L)   A letter from the Soil Conservation District or other capable agency
regarding soil suitability for the proposed subdivision (Natural Resources
Conservation Service, located in the USDA building, 340 North 600 East,
Richfield, Utah 84701); and
   (M)   The substance of all other covenants, grants of easement or
restrictions to be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and structures.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.034 DRAWING REQUIREMENTS.
   The final plat drawing shall have the following standards.
   (A)   The plat shall be prepared, and certification made as to its accuracy
by a registered land surveyor licensed to do such work in the state. A
professional execution of the plat shall be made in every detail. A poorly
drawn or illegible plat is sufficient cause for its rejection.
   (B)   The plat shall be delineated in permanent ink, Mylar and electronic
form (PDF).
   (C)   Bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary lines
shall be indicated outside the boundary line, not inside with the lot
dimensions. When the plat is bounded by an irregular shoreline or a body of
water, the bearings and distances of a closing meander traverse should be given
and a notation made that the plat includes all land to the water’s edge, or
otherwise.
   (D)   If a plat is revised, a copy of the old plat shall be provided for
comparison purposes. All surveys shall be tied into the state coordinate
system.
   (E)   All blocks and all lots within each block shall be consecutively
numbered.
   (F)   (1)   On curved boundaries and all the curves in the plat, sufficient
data shall be given to enable the re-establishment of the curves on the ground.
      (2)   This curve data shall include the following for circular curves:
         (a)   Radius of curve;
         (b)   Central angle;
         (c)   Tangent; and
         (d)   Arc length.
   (G)   Excepted parcels shall be marked “not included in this subdivision”
and the boundary completely indicated by bearings and distances.
   (H)   All streets, walkways and alleys shall be designated as such, and
streets shall be named; bearings and dimensions must be given.
   (I)   All easements shall be designated as such, and bearings and dimensions
given.
   (J)   All lands within the boundaries of the plat shall be accounted for
either as lots, walkways, streets, alleys or as excepted parcels.
   (K)   All dimensions of irregularly shaped lots shall be indicated in each
lot.
   (L)   All bearings and lengths shall be given for all lot lines, except that
bearings and lengths need not be given for interior lot lines where the
bearings and lengths are the same as those of both end lot lines.
   (M)   Parcels not contiguous shall not be included in one plat, nor shall
more than one plat be made on the same sheet. Contiguous parcels owned by
different parties may be embraced in one plat, provided all owners join in
dedication and acknowledgment.
   (N)   Lengths shall be shown to hundredths of a foot, and angles and
bearings shall be shown to seconds of an arc.
   (O)   The information on the plat shall include:
      (1)   Name of subdivision, astronomic north arrow and basis thereof and
date;
      (2)   Name and address of the owner or owners of record (names must be
printed on plat);
      (3)   Total acreage of subdivision; total number of lots;
      (4)   Township, range, section (and quarter section, if portion);
      (5)   Graphic scale;
      (6)   Any additional information required by local ordinance or by state
law; and
      (7)   (a)   For existing roads and streets:
            1.   A surveyed and labeled depiction of their location on the map,
distinguishing them as existing; and
            2.   A signed and notarized note by the owner containing the
following or substantially similar language: “For any existing highways,
streets and roads in the said plat, I [or we] acknowledge that the same are
perpetual public rights-of-way and that I [or we] will not cause the same to be
gated, blocked or otherwise restricted.”
         (b)   For proposed roads and streets:
            1.   A surveyed and labeled depiction of their location on the map,
distinguishing them as proposed;
            2.   A note entitled “Description of Proposed Roadways,” or
substantially similar language, and containing a legal description of the
proposed roads and streets; and
            3.   A signed and notarized note entitled “Owners Certificate of
Dedication” or substantially similar language, and containing the following or
substantially similar language: “I [or we], the owner [or owners], do hereby
certify that I [we] have caused to be surveyed, subdivided and platted into
lots and streets as shown by the plat and any certificate hereto annexed, the
hereon described [Title] Subdivision located in [name of jurisdiction], Sevier
County, State of Utah. I [we] do hereby dedicate for the perpetual use of the
public, a tract of land to be used as public roads and streets and quit-claim
any interest in said tract of land, more particularly described by the hereon
Description of Proposed Roadways and shown on this plat. For any existing roads
in the said plat, I [or we] acknowledge that the same are perpetual public
rights-of-way and that I [or we] will not cause the same to be gated, blocked
or otherwise restricted.”
   (P)   Signatures required on the plat:
      (1)   County Planning Commission approval and acceptance: One line for
the Chairperson and one line for member with dates;
      (2)   County land use authority approval and acceptance;
      (3)   Owner(s) of record signatures which are notarized;
      (4)   County Clerk: One signature line and box space for the County Clerk
seal with date;
      (5)   County Recorder: One line for signature and date; and
      (6)   Other signatures are required to fulfill the purposes of this
chapter and the Utah Code Annotated.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.035 TIME LIMITS FOR FINAL APPROVAL AND RECORDING OF SUBDIVISIONS.
   The following time limits will be imposed on any application for a
subdivision.
   (A)   A small subdivision application must be completed through the Planning
Commission within 24 months from the date the subdivision was first on the
Planning Commission agenda; otherwise, the subdivision application will have
lapsed, and a new application (with new fees) will have to be made.
   (B)   During the approval process, the Planning Commission has the right to
recommend that road improvements are complete before the small subdivision
application is approved.
   (C)   Once final approval is given by the land use authority for small
subdivisions, the subdivision plat must be recorded within three months of the
meeting it was approved; otherwise, the application will have lapsed, and a new
application made.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.036 SMALL SUBDIVISION ADDITIONAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   A private drive is considered a driveway that is used to access no
more than four building lots in a small subdivision. If the drive is used to
access more than four lots or has the potential to be used as a future
collector street, then the drive/roadway will need to be designed with
easements meeting the county road standards, determined by the County Road
Department.
   (B)   Requirements for road standards as identified in controlling county
transportation plans and ordinances.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
CONCEPT PLAN
§ 153.050 PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMISSION.
   (A)   Should the subdivider desire to have a concept plan review, the
subdivider shall submit ten hard copies and one electronic copy (PDF) of a
concept plan to the Development Review Committee, at which point, within 15
days after the request, the county will schedule a meeting to review the
concept plan and give initial feedback.
   (B)   The plan shall include the following items:
      (1)   Municipal annexation request form;
      (2)   The proposed name of the subdivision;
      (3)   A vicinity plan;
      (4)   A proposed lot and street layout, indicating general scaled
dimensions of lots to the nearest foot;
      (5)   (a)   A description of the type of water system proposed; also,
documentation of water rights and of historic water use; and
         (b)   When private wells and on-site adsorption sewage disposal
systems are proposed, a description of how each proposed lot will conform to
the standard protection radius around the well-head (refer to §
153.126).
      (6)   A description of the type of sewer or sanitary waste system
proposed;
      (7)   A description of the method of financing improvements and a
statement concerning the timing of improvement installation, specifically
improvements that are to be installed following the recording of the final plat
(refer to §§
153.147 and
153.148);
      (8)   The acreage of the entire tract proposed for the subdivision,
including plans for maintenance and ownership of remaining non-buildable lands
as required in Chapter 154 (refer to §§
153.165 through
153.167);
      (9)   Geologic hazards within the tract; and
      (10)   Letters of feasibility from the appropriate health officers of the
proposed water and sewerage systems, including irrigation, canals and ditches,
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter, the local health officer
and the State Department of Environmental Quality, Central Utah District.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.051 REVIEW PROCEDURE - CONCEPT PLAN.
   (A)   The Development Review Committee shall, upon receipt of the complete
submission, distribute copies of the plan to government departments and other
agencies as in the opinion of the Committee who may contribute to a decision in
the best interests of the public.
   (B)   The Development Review Committee shall review the concept plan
submittals and determine compliance with the General Plan,
Chapter 154, this chapter and other regulations of the county.
   (C)   The Development Review Committee shall notify the subdivider of the
concept plan; review findings, including questionable design or engineering
feasibility; inadequacy of submittals; noncompliance with local regulations;
and the need for other information which may assist the Planning Commission to
evaluate the proposed subdivision.
   (D)   The review of the concept plan shall not constitute an absolute
disapproval of the proposed subdivision, but rather shall operate in such a
manner as to give the subdivider guidance as to the requirements and
constraints for subdivision within the county.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
PRELIMINARY DESIGN PLAN
§ 153.065 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   Ten copies of all drawings in a PDF format and other informational material
required by this chapter shall be submitted to the Planning Commission by the
subdivider 14 days prior to the next regularly scheduled available Planning
Commission meeting.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.066 DRAWING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The accuracy of the location of alignments, boundaries and monuments
shall be certified by a registered land surveyor licensed to do such work in
the state. A professional execution of the design plan shall be made in every
detail. A poorly drawn or illegible design plan is sufficient cause for
rejection.
   (B)   The following data shall be submitted as part of the preliminary
design plan submission:
      (1)   A drawing showing perimeter outline of the proposed subdivision,
accesses, abutting subdivision outlines and names and other relevant
information within the logical planning area of the subdivision as determined
by the Planning Commission or its authorized representative;
      (2)   A traverse map of the monumented (see §
153.089) perimeter of the proposed subdivision. The traverse shall have an
error of closure of not greater than one part in 10,000. Survey tie into a
legal corner or other permanent marker established by the county is required;
      (3)   The existing contours at two-foot intervals for predominant ground
slopes within the tract between level and 5% grade and five-foot contours for
predominant ground slopes within the tract over 5% grade. Elevations shall be
based on National Geodetic Survey sea level data. In cases of predominantly
level topography throughout a subdivision, one-foot interval contours may be
required;
      (4)   Lot and street layout;
      (5)   Dimensions of all lots to the nearest foot (which may be scaled
values); except small subdivisions which will not have a final map, the drawing
scale and accuracy shall be as required for final plats in §§
153.085 through
153.097;
      (6)   Total acreage of entire proposed subdivision;
      (7)   Lots and blocks numbered consecutively;
      (8)   Locations and identification of all existing and proposed public
and private easements;
      (9)   Existing and proposed street names; proposed names must receive
approval of the Planning Commission;
      (10)   Street profiles to show proposed grades;
      (11)   The plat shall be drawn to a scale not less than one inch equals
100 feet, and shall indicate the basis of bearings; true north point; name of
subdivisions; name of county; name of municipality; township, range, section
and quarter section; block and lot number of the property under consideration;
      (12)   General location in the subdivision area of trees over six inches
in diameter, measured at four and one-half feet above the ground. In cases of
heavily wooded areas, indication of the outline of the wooded area and location
of trees which are to remain. It is the intent of this requirement to determine
the approximate location of trees for design evaluation rather than to require
unnecessary surveying of exact tree location;
      (13)   An affidavit (certificate for clear title) that the applicant is
the owner, the equitable owner or authorized by the owner in writing to make an
application for the land proposed to be subdivided;
      (14)   Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds,
schools or other public uses exclusive of single-family dwelling; and
      (15)   Location, function, ownership and manner of maintenance of common
open space or non-buildable areas not otherwise reserved or dedicated for
public use.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.067 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED.
   Ten copies of the following shall accompany and be a part of the submission:
   (A)   A sewage disposal report or mode of sewage treatment when on-lot
sewage treatment is proposed;
   (B)   A vicinity plan;
   (C)   A map at a suitable scale showing the following:
      (1)   Proposed stormwater drainage systems (Note: Detailed design of
drainage structures is not required for preliminary design);
      (2)   Approximate boundaries of areas subject to inundation or stormwater
overflows of an intensity estimated to occur with a return frequency of once
every 100 years;
      (3)   A composite utilities easement plan showing location, size and
proposed use of all easements. All utilities must be constructed within
approved easements and extended to property lines of all lots within the
subdivision; and
      (4)   When private wells and on-site adsorption sewage disposal systems
are proposed, a plan showing the proposed location of each well and disposal
system following the required standard protection radius for each well (refer
to §
153.126);
   (D)   The substance of all other covenants, grants of easements or
restrictions to be imposed upon the use of the land, buildings and structures;
   (E)   A letter from Soil Conservation District or other capable agency
regarding soil suitability for proposed subdivision;
   (F)   Geologic maps and investigation reports regarding area suitability for
the proposed development; and
   (G)   A letter from each utility company involved, addressed to the Planning
Commission, stating that it has reviewed the plan and is setting forth its
comments concerning the extent of services, the design of utility easements to
every lot within the subdivision; the plan approved by the utility company
shall be returned, initialed by the company, to the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.068 SUMMARY STATEMENT OF PROPOSAL.
   (A)   From the supporting documents, a summary statement shall be prepared
by the developer subdivider and submitted in a cover letter with the
preliminary design plan submittals.
   (B)   The summary statement shall include:
      (1)   Total development area and number of proposed dwelling units;
      (2)   Total number of off-street parking spaces;
      (3)   Estimated number of gallons per day of water requirements where
distribution system is utilized;
      (4)   Estimated number of gallons per day of sewage to be treated by a
sewage treatment facility;
      (5)   Estimated construction cost and proposed method of financing of the
streets and related facilities, water distribution system, sewage collection
system, storm drainage facilities and such other utilities as may be necessary;
and
      (6)   Survey notes of subdivision perimeter survey, and copies of all
monument records.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.069 REVIEW PROCEDURE - PRELIMINARY DESIGN PLAN.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may, upon receipt of the complete submission,
distribute copies of the plan provided by the subdivider to the Planning
Commission staff for review and other agencies as follows:
      (1)   Interested governmental departments of the county;
      (2)   Distribution to the following agencies shall require delivery by
certified mail;
      (3)   The school district in which the property proposed for subdivision
is located; and
      (4)   (a)   Other agencies which may contribute to design solutions to
problems which may be encountered by the subdivision in question.
         (b)   Examples of such agencies include:
            1.   Cities and towns near proposed subdivision;
            2.   Any affected water quality control agency;
            3.   Any affected utility or special district or irrigation
company;
            4.   The State Division of Forestry, Fire and State Lands, where
applicable (such as for mountain subdivisions and in heavily wooded areas);
            5.   The six County Associations of Governments Planning Office;
            6.   The Soil Conservation District Board within which the
subdivision is located, for review and recommendations regarding soil
suitability, flooding problems and erosion control;
            7.   The local health officer and the Central Utah Public Health
Department for their review of the sewage disposal reports, for review of
adequacy of existing or proposed sewage treatment works to be built to handle
estimated effluent and for a report on the quality and quantity of the proposed
water supply to serve the proposed subdivision;
            8.   The State Engineer for review of water rights, historic use
and estimated water yield to supply the proposed development, if the water
supply is not to be furnished from a public water system approved by the State
Department of Environmental Quality, Central Utah District; and
            9.   The State Geological Survey.
   (B)   Failure of any of the above agencies to respond to the Planning
Commission with comments concerning the subdivision within 14 days from the
time the application was submitted to the county shall be construed as
indicating that such agency or department has no concern with the proposed
subdivision.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall consider the application for preliminary
design plan approval within 15 days from the time a complete application is
submitted.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.070 PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall recommend approval only to those
preliminary design plans which the Commission finds to be developed in
accordance with the intent, standards and criteria specified in this chapter
and other regulations of the county.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall determine from a review of the
preliminary design plan whether the soil, slope, vegetation and the drainage
characteristics of the site are such as to require substantial cutting,
clearing, grading and other earth moving operations in the construction of the
subdivision, or otherwise entails an erosion hazard, and, if so, the Planning
Commission shall require the subdivider to provide soil erosion and
sedimentation control plans and specifications. Such control plans and
specifications shall be prepared by a person trained and qualified in such
matters, as is determined by the Planning Commission using the county
conservation standards, with the costs of preparation of such plans and
specifications being borne by the subdivider.
   (C)   When public facilities are to be constructed within the boundaries of
a proposed subdivision to achieve community standards established in the
General Plan of the county, the subdivider shall reserve a site appropriate in
area and location for such public facility, such site shall be reserved by the
subdivider, for a period of not less than one year from the date of preliminary
design plan approval, to provide the appropriate public agency an opportunity
to purchase the site. A determination by the Planning Commission to require
such a reservation by the subdivider shall be made in writing and shall state
the reasons for said requirement.
   (D)   After an applicant submits a complete application and staff has
completed a review and found that the application meets all standards,
specifications and requirements for approval, the application shall be
forwarded to the Planning Commission or land use authority for approval. The
Planning Commission or land use authority shall approve, disapprove or approve
with conditions the preliminary design plan, and notify the subdivider of such
action, or may postpone action to allow the subdivider time to provide material
or additional information needed by the Planning Commission, to then determine
appropriate action.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
FINAL PLAT
§ 153.085 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An electronic copy and one hard copy of all materials required by this
chapter shall be submitted to the land use authority by the subdivider or his
or her authorized representative.
   (B)   Materials required for final plat approval shall be submitted within
12 months of the date a preliminary plat has been approved by the Planning
Commission. No final plat submission can be accepted which has exceeded this
time lapse period, unless otherwise provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.086 PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The final plat submission shall conform in all major respects to the
preliminary plat as previously reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission
and shall incorporate all modifications required in its review.
   (B)   The land use authority may approve a final plat which has been
modified to reflect improvements in design or changes which have occurred in
its natural surroundings and environment since the time of the preliminary plat
review and approval.
   (C)   One copy of the application form for review of a final plat and all
required supporting documents shall be submitted.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.087 DRAWING REQUIREMENTS.
   The final plat drawing shall have the following standards.
   (A)   The plat shall be prepared, and certification made as to its accuracy
by a registered land surveyor licensed to do such work in the state. A
professional execution of the plat shall be made in every detail. A poorly
drawn or illegible plat is sufficient cause for its rejection.
   (B)   The plat shall be delineated in permanent ink, Mylar and electronic
form (PDF).
   (C)   Bearings, distances and curve data of all perimeter boundary lines
shall be indicated outside the boundary line, not inside with the lot
dimensions. When the plat is bounded by an irregular shoreline or a body of
water, the bearings and distances of a closing meander traverse should be given
and a notation made that the plat includes all land to the water’s edge, or
otherwise.
   (D)   If a plat is revised, a copy of the old plat shall be provided for
comparison purposes. All surveys shall be tied into the state coordinate
system.
   (E)   All blocks and all lots within each block shall be consecutively
numbered.
   (F)   On curved boundaries and all the curves in the plat, sufficient data
shall be given to enable the re-establishment of the curves on the ground. This
curve data shall include the following for circular curves:
      (1)   Radius of curve;
      (2)   Central angle;
      (3)   Tangent; and
      (4)   Arc length.
   (G)   Excepted parcels shall be marked “not included in this subdivision”
and the boundary completely indicated by bearings and distances.
   (H)   All streets, walkways and alleys shall be designated as such and
streets shall be named; bearings and dimensions must be given.
   (I)   All easements shall be designated as such and bearings and dimensions
given.
   (J)   All lands within the boundaries of the plat shall be accounted for
either as lots, walkways, streets, alleys or as excepted parcels.
   (K)   All dimensions of irregularly shaped lots shall be indicated in each
lot.
   (L)   All bearings and lengths shall be given for all lot lines, except that
bearings and lengths need not be given for interior lot lines where the
bearings and lengths are the same as those of both end lot lines.
   (M)   Parcels not contiguous shall not be included in one plat, nor shall
more than one plat be made on the same sheet. Contiguous parcels owned by
different parties may be embraced in one plat, provided all owners join in
dedication and acknowledgment.
   (N)   Lengths shall be shown to hundredths of a foot, and angles and
bearings shall be shown to seconds of an arc.
   (O)   The information on the plat shall include:
      (1)   Name of subdivision, astronomic north arrow and basis thereof and
date;
      (2)   Name and address of the owner or owners of record (names must be
printed on plat);
      (3)   Total acreage of subdivision; total number of lots;
      (4)   Township, range, section (and quarter section, if portion);
      (5)   Graphic scale;
      (6)   Any additional information required by local ordinance or by state
law; and
      (7)   (a)   For existing roads and streets;
            1.   A surveyed and labeled depiction of their location on the map,
distinguishing them as existing; and
            2.   A signed and notarized note by the owner containing the
following or substantially similar language: “For any existing highways,
streets and roads in the said plat, I [or we] acknowledge that the same are
perpetual public rights-of-way and that I [or we] will not cause the same to be
gated, blocked or otherwise restricted.”
         (b)   For proposed roads and streets:
            1.   A surveyed and labeled depiction of their location on the map,
distinguishing them as proposed;
            2.   A note entitled “Description of Proposed Roadways,” or
substantially similar language, and containing a legal description of the
proposed roads and streets; and
            3.   A signed and notarized note entitled “Owners Certificate of
Dedication” or substantially similar language, and containing the following or
substantially similar language: “I [or we], the owner [or owners], do hereby
certify that I [we] have caused to be surveyed, subdivided and platted into
lots and streets as shown by the plat and any certificate hereto annexed, the
hereon described [Title] Subdivision located in [name of jurisdiction], Sevier
County, State of Utah. I [we] do hereby dedicate for the perpetual use of the
public, a tract of land to be used as public roads and streets and quit-claim
any interest in said tract of land, more particularly described by the hereon
Description of Proposed Roadways and shown on this plat. For any existing roads
in the said plat, I [or we] acknowledge that the same are perpetual public
rights-of-way and that I [or we] will not cause the same to be gated, blocked
or otherwise restricted.”
   (P)   Signatures required on the plat:
      (1)   Land use authority approval and acceptance: One line for signature
of land use authority and date;
      (2)   County Planning Commission approval and acceptance: Two lines for
signature of Chairperson and date;
      (3)   County Attorney’s approval;
      (4)   Owner(s) of record signatures which are notarized; and
      (5)   Other signatures are required to fulfill the purposes of this
chapter and Utah Code Annotated.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.088 PHASE DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The final platting of subdivisions containing more than 25 lots shall
be done in phases, except as provided in division (C) below. Each phase shall
consist of the number of lots which can be completely developed with both off-
site and on-site improvements within a two-year period, or 25 lots, whichever
is larger. Off-site improvements are construed to be those improvements
required by this chapter. On-site improvements shall be construed to mean the
construction or placement of the dwelling and its appurtenant improvements on
each lot. The development of the subdivision shall be in an orderly manner and
in such a way that the phases will be contiguous, the required improvements
will continue and all of the off-site improvements will be made available for
the full, effective and practical use and enjoyment thereof by the lessees or
grantees of any of the land subdivided within the time hereinafter specified.
   (B)   When the off-site improvements have been 100% completed within the
boundaries of the recorded plat and approved by a civil engineer licensed by
the state, and on-site improvements are 70% completed, the subdivider may
submit the next phase of the proposed development in accordance with the rules
and regulations of this chapter. Cost of the engineer will be paid by the
subdivider.
   (C)   A final plat including more than 25 lots will be accepted only upon
the submission of qualified evidence indicating that the financial ability of
the subdivider is such that the on-site and off-site improvements for all lots
in such a final plat will be completed within two years of such approval.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.089 MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Permanent reference monuments, as approved by a professional land
surveyor, shall be set on the external boundary of the subdivision, and at all
street center line intersections, and all beginning and end points of curves,
to provide line of sight control for re-establishing the survey. Cost of the
work done by the professional land surveyor will be paid by the subdivider.
   (B)   Block and lot monuments shall be set.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.090 SURVEY CERTIFICATION.
   The surveyor making a plat shall certify on the plat that it conforms to
these survey regulations and to all applicable state laws and that the
monuments described in it have been placed as described. He or she shall affix
his or her name and seal.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.091 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS.
   The following documents shall be submitted with the final plat drawing, and
be considered a part of the submission:
   (A)   Drawings showing layout, profile and detail design of: All utilities
and easements, plus statements from utility companies (water, sewer, electric,
gas, telephone and the like) as applicable, that the service will be provided
to every lot of the development;
   (B)   Plan, profile and typical cross-section drawings of roads, bridges,
culverts, sewers and other drainage structures;
   (C)   Grading and drainage plan. The proposed grading plan shall be
indicated by solid-line contours superimposed on dashed-line contours of
existing topography for the area of the final plat. Such contours shall be at
two-foot intervals for predominant ground slopes within the tract between level
and 5% grade, and five-foot contours for predominant ground slopes within the
tract over 5% grade. In case of predominantly level topography throughout a
subdivision, one-foot contour intervals may be required;
   (D)   Erosion control plan, where required, to be submitted as a result of
preliminary design plan review;
   (E)   An exact copy of a certificate of a title insurance company or
attorney’s opinion, which shall set forth the names of all property owners
included in the plat and shall include a list of all mortgages, judgments,
liens, easements, contracts and agreements of record in the county which shall
affect the property covered by such plats. If the opinion of title discloses
such encumbrances, then, at the option of the Board of County Commissioners,
the holders or owners of such mortgages, judgments, liens, easements, contracts
or agreements shall be required to join in and approve the application before
the plat shall be acted upon by the Planning Commission;
   (F)   Where a portion of an existing easement is contiguous to a proposed
easement or right-of-way of a new subdivision, proof of the dedication of the
existing easement or right-of-way acceptable to the Planning Commission must be
submitted;
   (G)   Where the subdivider is to dedicate land for schools, roads, parks or
other public purposes, a letter of intent is required from the public agency
receiving the dedication and stating how applicable improvement standards will
be met. When land within a subdivision is to be purchased by a public agency
for public use, a letter of intention to purchase shall be required;
   (H)   When a new street will intersect with a state highway or will cross a
railroad, a copy of the state highway permit or railroad crossing permit shall
be permitted. Rear yard or side yard setbacks abutting railroad tracks shall be
a minimum of 40 feet, unless an earthen berm or other sound barrier is provided
along the property line adjacent to the railroad tracks;
   (I)   Where improvements are not to be completed prior to approval of the
final plat, cost estimates shall be submitted for construction of streets and
related facilities, water distribution system, sewage collection system,
floodplain protection, storm drainage facilities and such other facilities as
may be required. In addition, the subdivider shall submit a proposal to satisfy
the requirements of §§
153.145 through
153.151;
   (J)   Copies of protective covenants, deed restrictions, trust agreements
and homeowner association articles and bylaws, including those required by the
land use authority, to govern the future use of each of water or sewer system,
re-subdivision, open space and other potential changes which might
significantly alter the subdivision as approved by the Board of County
Commissioners with regard to the criteria and standards of these regulations;
   (K)   Monument record; and
   (L)   All information required by FHA when subdivision will be submitted to
that agency for feasibility and approval under a federal program.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.092 REVISED SUMMARY STATEMENT OF PROPOSAL.
   A revised proposal summary statement shall be submitted to reflect any
changes made from the summary statement of the approved preliminary design
plan.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.093 LAND USE AUTHORITY REVIEW AND IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT AND COMPLIANCE
WITH THIS CHAPTER REQUIRED FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   After staff has completed a review of the application and found that
the application meets all requirements, or the fourth review cycle has been
completed as per U.C.A. § 10-9a-604, staff shall forward its recommendation to
the land use authority for final approval. The land use authority shall review
the final plat within 45 days. If the land use authority determines that the
final plat submission complies with the applicable requirements of this
chapter, it shall certify approval of the plat on the space provided; provided,
however, that the land use authority shall approve no final plat unless
accompanied by an improvements agreement. The subdivider shall provide an
adequate number of approved plans or prints marked for modification, together
with the official notification of the action, to be distributed as follows:
      (1)   One copy to Planning Commission files;
      (2)   One copy to the land use authority;
      (3)   One copy to subdivider;
      (4)   One copy to engineer and surveyor of subdivider;
      (5)   One copy to each utility company serving the subdivision; and
      (6)   One copy to the local health officer.
   (B)   Acceptance of dedication of proposed public lands or streets or street
rights-of-way in an approved plat can be made only by the land use authority.
Final plat approval by the land use authority will be deemed an acceptance of
dedication, unless streets and other public spaces are shown as “not intended
for dedication” or unless the land use authority expressly repudiates the
presumed dedication.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.094 RECORDING FINAL PLAT.
   After final plat approval is obtained, the applicant shall submit a Mylar
and recording fees for plat recordation. Once all plat signatures have been
obtained, the county shall record the plat.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.095 AMENDING A RECORDED SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (A)   (1)   An owner of land located within a recorded subdivision may apply
for a subdivision amendment to the land use authority.
      (2)   The application shall include a plat that:
         (a)   Represents only the portion of the subdivision that is proposed
to be amended;
         (b)   Includes a plat name distinguishing the amended plat from the
original plat;
         (c)   Describes the differences between the amended plat and the
original plat; and
         (d)   Includes references to the original plat.
   (B)   Notice by mail, email or other effective means shall be sent by the
land use authority to each adjoining property owner and affected entity that
provides a service to the property owners of the portion of the plat that is
being amended at least ten days prior to approval of the subdivision amendment
by the land use authority.
   (C)   The land use authority shall hold a public hearing within 45 days
after a complete application is submitted if:
      (1)   Any owner within the plat notifies the county of the owner’s
objection in writing within ten days of mailed notification; or
      (2)   A public hearing is required because all of the owners in the
subdivision have not signed the revised plat.
   (D)   The public hearing requirement of division (C) above does not apply,
and the land use authority may consider at a public meeting the application for
a subdivision amendment if:
      (1)   The amendment seeks to:
         (a)   Combine two or more lots owned by the applicant;
         (b)   Subdivide one or more lots owned by applicant, as long as it
does not violate the land use ordinance or development conditions;
         (c)   Adjust the borders between lots that are next to each other or
between a lot and a nearby piece of land, as long as the owners of both
properties agree, even if they are not in the same subdivision;
         (d)   On a lot owned by the applicant, make changes to internal lot
restrictions set by the county; or
         (e)   Change the plat in a way that does not impact the borders or
other features of lots in the subdivision that are not owned by the applicant
or designated as common area.
      (2)   Notification has been given to adjoining property owners as
required by division (B) above.
   (E)   The applicant shall include in his or her application:
      (1)   The name and address of each property owner in:
         (a)   The entire plat; or
         (b)   The portion of the plat described in the application.
      (2)   The signature of each owner who consents to the application.
   (F)   (1)   If owners of adjacent properties, where one or more are lots,
wish to exchange portions of those properties, they can do so through a lot
line adjustment, subject to approval by the land use authority as outlined in
division (F)(2) below.
      (2)   The land use authority will grant approval for a lot line
adjustment under division (F)(1) above if the title exchange does not violate
any land use ordinances.
      (3)   Upon approval of a lot line adjustment under division (F)(2) above,
the following apply.
         (a)   A notice of approval for the lot line adjustment must be
recorded with the County Recorder. This notice should:
            1.   Be approved by the land use authority; and
            2.   Include legal descriptions of both properties involved and the
properties resulting from the title exchange.
         (b)   A document conveying the title changes approved must be recorded
with the County Recorder.
      (4)   The recorded notice of approval (this division (F)) does not serve
as a property title conveyance and does not necessitate the recording of a
document for title conveyance.
   (G)   (1)   To alter the name of a recorded subdivision, an amended plat
reflecting that change can be recorded, following the procedures outlined in
this section and subject to division (G)(3) below.
      (2)   The surveyor responsible for the amended plat must certify that the
surveyor:
         (a)   Holds a license in accordance with U.C.A. Title 58, Chapter 22,
Professional Engineers and Professional Land Surveyors Licensing Act;
         (b)   1.   Has conducted a survey of the property described on the
plat in compliance with U.C.A. § 17-23-17, verifying all measurements; or
            2.   Has referred to a record of survey map depicting existing
property boundaries on the plat and confirmed the boundary locations.
         (c)   Has placed monuments as indicated on the plat.
      (3)   A landowner is prohibited from submitting for recording an amended
plat that assigns the same name to the subdivision described in the amended
plat as a subdivision already recorded in the County Recorder’s Office.
      (4)   Recording a declaration or any other document claiming to change
the name of a recorded plat, except as allowed in division (G)(1) above, is
considered void.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.096 MINOR AMENDMENTS TO A RECORDED SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   A recorded subdivision plat may be amended only to correct minor surveying
or drafting errors, or minor boundary line adjustment, with no creation of
additional lots. All other changes to a recorded plat shall be allowed only
upon compliance with the procedures outlined in this section. The land use
authority shall determine whether a recorded plat may be amended in accordance
with this section. If it is discovered that there is a minor survey or drafting
error in a recorded final plat, the subdivider shall be required to file a
final plat with an affidavit witnessed by two land surveyors paid at the
expense of the subdivider, concerning the change, which shall be approved by
the land use authority. If, however, the correction of the error results in
such major alterations that the corrected plat no longer meets the design
standards and criteria of these regulations, then the corrected plat shall
require full approval procedures and the recording of a corrected plat.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.097 FILE OF RECORDED SUBDIVISIONS.
   The county shall maintain a filing system of all subdivisions, which
includes copies of all maps, data and official subdivisions; also, a master
location map (or maps) referenced to the filing system for public use and
examination.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 153.110 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All subdivisions shall comply with the following standards of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.111 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The design and development of subdivisions shall preserve, as much as
possible, the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing topsoil and trees.
   (B)   Land subject to hazardous conditions, such as slides, mudflows, rock
falls, snow avalanches, possible mine subsidence, shallow water table, open
quarries, floods and polluted or non-potable water supply, shall be identified
and shall not be subdivided until the hazards have been eliminated or will be
eliminated by the subdivision and construction plans.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.112 LOTS.
   (A)   No single lot shall be divided by a municipal or county boundary line.
   (B)   A lot shall not be divided by a road, alley or other lot.
      (1)   For any application or proposal to establish a lot or parcel,
through which a Class D County Road crosses, the lot or parcel shall not be
approved by the county unless the owner first gives the County Road Supervisor
a signed and notarized written statement ensuring that the owner shall not
restrict in any way the public’s right to travel that Class D County Road.
      (2)   An existing County D Road shall not be closed or restricted in
order to establish or maintain any lot or parcel, unless and until the County
Board of Commissioners, after consultation with relevant departments, abandons
and vacates such road, or segment of road, pursuant to the provisions of §
153.113(R).
   (C)   No wedge-shaped lot shall be less than 30 feet in width at the front
property line, or the lot frontage required by
Chapter 154, whichever is larger.
   (D)   Lot lines, side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to street
lines, except where justified by the subdivider and approved by the Planning
Commission.
   (E)   All residential lots in subdivisions shall front on a public street.
Required frontage shall not be considered to be provided if vehicular access
across the street line is prohibited.
   (G)   In all zones which require a front yard, no obstruction to view in
excess of three feet in height shall be placed on any corner lot within a
triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them
at points 45 feet from the intersection of the street lines. All billboards
shall be located at least 100 feet from the point of intersection of any two
intersecting streets or highways.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.113 STREET REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Authorization. The County Commission is authorized to acquire any real
property or interests deemed necessary for temporary, present or reasonable
future county highway purposes by grant, bestowal, warranty, deed, gift,
agreement, exchange, purchase, condemnation or otherwise.
   (B)   Abandoning and vacating. Whenever the Board of County Commissioners,
after consultation with relevant departments, determines that any real property
or interest, acquired for county highway purposes, is no longer necessary for
such purpose, the Commission may, in accordance with division (R) below,
abandon and vacate such property as a public highway, street or road, after
which it may, after consultation with relevant departments, choose to lease,
sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of such real property or interest.
 
   (C)   Private roads/streets.
      (1)   No private roads or streets are to be maintained by the county. No
segment of road inside or outside of a subdivision will be accepted for
maintenance by the county, unless the road is appropriately dedicated to the
county as a right-of-way for public use and the county accepts that dedication.
      (2)   No road outside a subdivision will be accepted for maintenance by
the county without first deeding to the county a continuous 66-foot, or 82-foot
if classified as a major street, wide road right-of-way as outlined in
controlling the county transportation plans and ordinances.
   (D)   Street plan. The street layout shall conform to the county’s General
Plan, Transportation Master
Plan and to the street layout and circulation element of the closest municipal
General Plan.
   (E)   Through traffic. Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage through
traffic.
   (F)   Stub streets. Stub streets shall be provided where needed to connect
to adjacent subdivisions. Not more than six lots shall front on a stub street,
except where a temporary cul-de-sac turnaround is provided.
   (G)   Intersections. Intersections of minor streets with major streets shall
be kept to a minimum.
   (H)   Right-of-way width. Minimum right-of-way widths for public streets
shall be determined by resolution of the Board of County Commissioners, but
shall in no case be less than the following:
      (1)   Major collector: 100 feet;
      (2)   Minor collector street: 82 feet; and
      (3)   Minor street: 66 feet.
   (I)   Roadway width. Local streets shall have roadway widths but shall in no
case be less than
the following:
      (1)   Major collector: 56 feet;
      (2)   Minor collector: 28 feet; and
      (3)   Minor street or frontage road: 24 feet.
   (J)   Road shoulders. Where no curbs are required to be installed, a minimum
of ten-foot shoulders shall be provided on each side of the street.
   (K)   Half-streets. None are permitted, except if required to complete a
half-street already existing.
   (L)   Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets, including stub streets, shall be
permitted or required by the Planning Commission only to provide future access
to adjoining property, except for dead-end street systems in cluster
subdivisions, planned unit developments, condominium developments or similar
special projects.
   (M)   Cul-de-sac streets. Permanent cul-de-sac streets serving no more than
650 feet long, whichever is more restrictive, may be permitted and shall be
provided with a right-of-way at the turnaround of 50 feet radius or more, and
the face of curb or pavement edge radius shall be 40 feet or more. Cul-de-sac
streets intended to be only temporary must also satisfy the above requirements.
   (N)   Number of streets at intersection. No more than four streets shall
enter an intersection.
   (O)   Angle of street intersections. Streets shall intersect at 90 degrees,
except where otherwise approved as necessary by the Planning Commission.
   (P)   Centerlines of intersecting streets. The centerlines of two
subordinate streets meeting a through street from opposite sides shall extend
as a continuous line, or the centerlines shall be off-set at least 150 feet.
   (Q)    Restricted access roadways/gated communities. Restricted access
roadways/gated communities are allowed only under the following conditions.
      (1)   The development is located within the GRF-20S Zone.
      (2)   The roadway does not access any public lands.
      (3)   All property owners beyond the gate shall have access and are in
agreement in writing and on record with the county.
      (4)   A method of access shall be provided for all fire, health and
government agencies.
      (5)   The roadways beyond the gate or other restrictions shall not be
dedicated to the county and need not be maintained, repaired or improved to
county road specifications, as the county will not be responsible to maintain
these roadways.
      (6)   All other requirements of this chapter shall apply; however, the
subdivision plat language required under §§
153.034(O)(7)(b)3. and
153.087(O)(7)(b)3. may be modified as needed on a case-by-case basis, to
provide for cases of restricted address roadways/gated communities.
   (R)   Open to public. Except as provided in division (S) below, all public
highways, streets or roads once established shall continue to be open to public
use indefinitely until the same are formally abandoned or vacated pursuant to
U.C.A. § 72-3-108 as manifested by written order, resolution or ordinance
resolution of the County Board of Commissioners, or by court decree, and the
written order, resolution, ordinance or court decree has been duly recorded in
the County Recorder’s Office. (See U.C.A. § 72-5-105(1).)
   (S)   Temporary closure. The county, by and through its Board of
Commissioners, after consultation with relevant departments reviewing, may, in
its sole discretion, allow for the temporary closure of a public highway,
street or road, provided all relevant conditions and procedures of U.C.A. § 72-
5-105(3)—(7) are adhered to and followed. Any and all county approved temporary
closures shall be carried out on the ground only by the County Road Supervisor,
or done by a third-party only according to the Supervisor’s express written
consent, approval and statement of conditions.
   (T)   Gating or closing. It is unlawful to gate or otherwise close a public
highway, street or road that has not been formally abandoned or vacated, nor
formally approved for temporary closure pursuant to division (S) above and the
referenced Utah Code Annotated section.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.114 STREET NAMES.
   Streets shall have the names of existing streets which are in alignment.
Creation of names for new streets shall be approved by the GIS addressing
process. There shall be no duplication of street names within the areas. All
street names must be approved by the Planning Commission after review by the
GIS Addressing Department.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.115 CURVATURE AND ALIGNMENT.
   (A)   Horizontal curves. To ensure adequate sight distances, street roadway
line connections shall be made by horizontal curves. The minimum centerline
radius for minor streets shall be 150 feet and of all other streets shall be
300 feet. On collector and major streets, a minimum tangent of 100 feet shall
be required between a curve and street intersection; a minimum tangent of 100
feet shall be required between reverse curves.
   (B)   Vertical curves. Vertical curve shall be used at all changes of grades
exceeding 1% and shall be designed to provide minimum sight distances of 200
feet for minor streets and 300 feet for all other streets, except that vertical
curves for major streets shall be as determined by the current specifications
of State Department of Transportation in compliance with AASHTO curve geometry.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.116 FRONTAGE ON MAJOR HIGHWAYS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, all buildings abutting
highways having a state or federal designation (except non-access highways)
shall be set back at least 50 feet from the highway right-of-way line, except
for small temporary fruit and vegetable stands.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.117 ROADBED CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR PAVED ROADWAYS FOR PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   Minimum roadbed grading and paving for minor, collector and major
streets shall be in accordance with AASHTO requirements, reviewed and approved
by the County Road Department before final approval by the land use authority.
The County Road Department must review and approve any reduction of such
roadway grading and paving for one-way street, mountain subdivisions or other
justifiable design or topographical reasons.
   (B)   Reduction of such roadway grading and paving may be approved by the
Planning Commission and land use authority for one-way street, mountain
subdivisions or other justifiable design or topographical reasons. Ten-foot
shoulders shall be provided where curbs are not installed.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.118 STREET GRADES.
   All street grades shall be designed as follows:
   (A)   Major and collector streets: Limited to a maximum grade of 10%.
Sustained grades shall be limited to 7%;
   (B)   Minor streets: Limited to a maximum grade of 12%. Sustained grades
shall be limited to 9%;
   (C)   Cul-de-sacs with a negative grade progressing toward the turnaround
shall be limited to a maximum grade of 6%. The cul-de-sac shall terminate with
a grade not to exceed 3% for the last 100 feet of traveled surface. The cul-de-
sac shall be limited to a maximum length of 650 feet and have adequate easement
for drainage;
   (D)   Street intersections shall have a vertical alignment such that the
grade shall not exceed 3% for a minimum distance of 50 feet each way from the
centerline of the intersection;
   (E)   Maximum grades: Approved only when accompanied by changes to a lesser
grade, and where the length of that portion of that road at maximum grade is
less than 600 feet;
   (G)   All changes in vertical alignment: Made by vertical curves with a
minimum length of 200 feet for minor streets and 300 feet for major streets
(see §
153.115); and
   (H)   Streets in mountainous terrain shall be designed at less than maximum
allowable slope in order that they can be safely negotiated, and that snow can
be removed during winter.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.119 SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS.
   (A)   Sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be provided on both sides of all
streets to be dedicated to the public in RA zones and in other zones as
otherwise requested by the Planning Commission and Board of County
Commissioners. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters may be required by the Board of
County Commissioners on existing streets bordering the subdivision.
   (B)   The following chart outlines the districts in which improvements are
to be made by the letter “I”:
 
Zoning District   A GRF-20S GRF-20R RA C I
Improvement
Curb and gutter                          I
Sidewalk                                 I
Street monuments  I I       I       I  I I
Street name signs I I       I       I  I I
Street paving     I         I       I  I I
 
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.120 BLOCK STANDARDS.
   Block lengths shall be reasonable as approved by the Planning Commission,
and in total design shall provide for convenient access and circulation for
emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.121 PEDESTRIAN CROSSWALKS.
   Where blocks exceed 1,000 feet in length, pedestrian rights-of-way of not
less than ten feet in width may be required by the Planning Commission through
blocks where needed for adequate pedestrian circulation. Walk improvements
(paving) of not less than five feet in width shall be placed within the rights-
of-way, when required by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.122 LOT SIZE STANDARDS.
   Density standards or minimum lot size requirements are specified by the
zoning ordinance. All lots shall conform to area requirements of the existing
zoning ordinance. (See
Chapter 154.)
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.123 EASEMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Easements shall follow lot lines and shall have a minimum total width
of the set back established in the specific zone, §
154.073, in abutting properties.
   (B)   Where front-line easements are required, a minimum of ten feet shall
be allocated as a utility easement. Perimeter easements shall be not less than
15 feet in width, extending throughout the peripheral area of the development,
if required by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   All easements shall be designed so as to provide efficient
installation of utilities or street planning. Special guying easements at
corners may be required. Public utility installations shall be so located as to
permit multiple installations within the easements. The developer shall
establish final utility grades prior to utility installations.
   (D)   There shall be no permanent structures located on or over easements
without written approval of the Zoning Administrator and the utility for which
the easement is provided.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.124 UTILITIES TO BE UNDERGROUND.
   Unless the Planning Commission and the land use authority determine, upon
application by the subdivider, supported by the recommendation of a civil
engineer licensed by the state, that it is not feasible to do so, all power
lines, telephone lines and other normally overhead utility lines shall be
placed underground by the subdivider. All utilities must be developed in
provided easements and shall extend to the property line of every lot within
the subdivision.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.125 ALLEYS.
   The Planning Commission may approve service access to the interior of blocks
where deemed to be in the public interest, in which case such alleys must have
a plan for maintenance and be indicated in the preliminary design plans and on
the final plat.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.126 SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Sanitary sewerage system required. Except as otherwise provided below,
the subdivider shall provide, or have provided, a piped sanitary sewerage
system to the property line of every lot in the subdivision. The sewerage
system shall meet the minimum standards and requirements of the state, Central
Utah Public Health Department and this chapter.
   (B)   On-lot sewage disposal system.
      (1)   Septic tanks and/or sealed vaults will be approved only when an
existing sanitary sewer system is more than 300 feet from the boundary of the
subdivision and shall be disapproved in any case unless approved in writing by
the state and Central Utah Public Health Department of Health. In order to
determine the adequacy of the soil involved to properly absorb sewage effluent
and to determine the minimum lot area required for such installations, an
interpretive map based on the National Cooperative Soil Survey showing the
suitability of the soil for septic tank fields or pits shall be submitted,
along with the results of percolation tests. The results of this data will be
reviewed by the state and Central Utah Public Health Department, in addition to
any other information available to them, for recommendation to the Planning
Commission.
      (2)   The following requirements shall be met.
         (a)   Land made, altered or filled with non-earth materials within the
last ten years shall not be divided into building sites which are to be served
by soil absorption waste disposal systems.
         (b)   Each subdivided lot to be served by an on-site absorption sewage
disposal system shall contain an adequate site for such a system. An adequate
site required a minimum depth of eight feet from the surface of the ground to
impermeable bedrock, and a minimum depth of six feet from the surface (based on
annual high-water level). Each site must also be at least 1,500 feet from any
shallow water supply well and 100 feet from any other well; at least 100 feet
from any stream or watercourse; and at least ten feet from any dwelling or
property line whichever is further or applicable.
         (c)   Soils having a percolation rate slower than or faster than
standards allowed by the state and Central Utah Public Health Department shall
not be divided into building sites to be served by soil absorption sewage
disposal systems.
         (d)   Land rated as having severe limitations for septic tank
absorption fields as defined by the County Soil Survey, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, shall not be divided into building
sites to be serviced by soil absorption sewage disposal systems unless each
such building site contains not less than 20,000 square feet of other soils
rated suitable for building construction and installation of an on-site soils
absorption sewage disposal system.
         (e)   1.   An applicant desiring to install soil absorption sewage
disposal facilities on the soils having severe limitations, as determined in
the preliminary plan review, shall:
               a.   Have additional on-site investigations made, including
percolation tests;
               b.   Obtain the certification of a soils scientist that specific
areas lying within these soils are suitable for the proposed soil absorption
sewage disposal system; and
               c.   Meet state and Central Utah Public Health Department
standards and regulations.
            2.   In addition, the local health officer shall find that the
proposed corrective measures have overcome the severe soil limitations.
         (f)   Other applicable standards adopted by the Board of County
Commissioners and State Health Department; and
         (g)   Shall follow all area requirements of existing zoning
ordinances.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.127 SANITARY SEWER MAINS, LATERALS AND HOUSE CONNECTIONS - FUTURE.
   Where local, county and regional plans indicate that construction or
extension of sanitary sewers may serve the subdivision area within a reasonable
time, the Planning Commission may require the installation and capping of
sanitary sewer mains and house connections by the subdivider, in addition to
the installation of temporary individual on-lot sanitary disposal systems by
the subdivider or lot purchaser. Whenever individual on-lot sanitary sewage
disposal systems are proposed, the subdivider shall either install such
facilities or required by deed restrictions or otherwise as a condition of the
sale of each lot or parcel within such subdivision that on-lot sanitary sewage
disposal facilities be installed by the purchaser of said lot at the time the
principal building is constructed, and no building permit shall be issued until
such installation is assured. In all other cases, sanitary disposal facilities
for sewage shall be provided for every lot or parcel by a complete community or
public sanitary system.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.128 TEST PROCEDURES.
   Tests of sanitary sewer mains, laterals and house connections shall be
conducted in accordance with the most recent U.S. Public Health Service
Publication edition, and with other local and state health requirements.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.129 WATER IN SUFFICIENT QUANTITY TO BE AN OBLIGATION OF SUBDIVIDER.
   (A)   The procurement of water, whether by purchase of water rights, water
shares, exchange or service agreement, shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider, and water shall be provided for each building lot for the exclusive
use of the subdivision in an amount sufficient to meet the following flow
standards:
      (1)   If connected to a public or private water company which provides
culinary water, a letter from the water company stating it will provide the
necessary culinary water connection to each dwelling or lot in the subdivision;
and
      (2)   If culinary water is to be provided from a well, one-acre foot
(0.0037cfs) of water is required for each dwelling unit or lot in the
subdivision. This water right must be in the name of the subdivision applicant
and assigned by the State Division of Water Rights to each subdivision lot.
   (B)   For Planning Commission preliminary design plan approval of a minor
subdivision or final plat approval by the land use authority for major
subdivisions, the above-listed water rights must be approved by the Planning
Commission and land use authority and the following documentation provided to
the Planning Commission and land use authority:
      (1)   Documentation from the State Division of Water Rights showing that
a change order application has been made with the State Division of Water
Rights, changing the appropriate amount of water, to the appropriate
subdivision lot(s) in the applicant’s name;
      (2)   Letter from the public or private water company indicating its
ability to provide culinary water to the subdivision lot(s); and
      (3)   Letter from the irrigation or canal company indicating the
irrigation water is owned by the applicant and that it is available for the
subdivision lot(s).
   (C)   The land use authority final approval of both major and small
subdivisions, where the culinary water for a subdivision is from a culinary
well, the approved water change order or final water right approval from the
State Division of Water Rights must be completed, and a copy provided. The
final change order must be in the subdivision applicant’s name and assigned to
each subdivision lot.
   (D)   The above standards are in addition to the requirements of the Central
Utah Board of Health.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.130 CULINARY WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The culinary water system in any subdivision shall extend to the
property line of every lot and shall be capable of delivering the flows
required by §
153.129.
   (B)   Any water system for a subdivision where culinary water will be pumped
from one well and serve more than one dwelling unit, or lot, or proposing any
system other than one well per dwelling unit, or lot, must be engineered by a
professional engineer. The subdivision applicant must provide engineered and
stamped plans for the proposed water system from a professional engineer
qualified to engineer water systems and licensed in the state. The design must
include a storage tank, water lines and, where necessary, fire hydrants as per
§§
153.131 and
153.134. These engineered plans must be approved by the Planning Commission and
meet all requirements of the State Department of Environmental Quality.
   (C)   Any water system that exceeds the number of connections for a private
system, according to the State Department of Environmental Quality rules, thus
becomes a public water system and must meet all requirements for a public
system.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.131 CULINARY/FIRE PROTECTION WATER STORAGE FACILITY.
   The culinary/fire protection water storage facility shall have a storage
capacity as required for fire protection by the International Fire Code, NFPA
22 and meet all regulations of the State Division of Environmental Quality.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.132 STORM DRAINAGE AND FLOODPLAINS.
   (A)   Drainage system. Complete drainage system for the entire subdivision
area shall be designed by a professional engineer, licensed in the state and
qualified to perform such work and shall be shown graphically. All existing
drainage features which are to be incorporated in the design shall be so
identified. If the final plat is to be presented in sections, a general
drainage plan for the entire shall be presented with the first section, and
appropriate development stages for the drainage system for each section
indicated.
   (B)   Design. The drainage and floodplain systems shall be designed to:
      (1)   Permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
      (2)   Ensure adequate drainage of all low points; and
      (3)   Ensure applications of the following regulations regarding
development in designated floodplains.
         (a)   Construction of buildings shall not be permitted in a designated
floodway with a return frequency more often than a 100-year storm.
         (b)   Building construction may occur in that portion of the designed
floodway where the return frequency is between 100 years and a maximum probable
storm, provided all usable floor space is constructed above the designated
maximum probable flood level.
         (c)   Where floodway velocities are generally determined to be under
five feet per second and maximum flood depth will not exceed three feet, such
uses as cultivated agriculture, nurseries, parks and recreation facilities and
accessory parking may be permitted.
         (d)   Any use of land is prohibited where flooding would create a
public health hazard or problem. This includes shallow wells, uncased deep
wells, sanitary landfills, septic tank and on-lot sewage disposal systems, not
completely protected from inundation.
         (e)   Recreational vehicles and similar uses shall not be permitted in
any designated floodway.
         (f)   Any contemplated floodplain encroachment or channeling shall be
thoroughly analyzed and its effect on steam flow determined before such
encroachment is undertaken and must be approved by the Planning Commission,
before accomplishment.
         (g)   No lot one acre or less in area shall include floodlands. All
lots more than one acre shall contain not less than 40,000 square feet of land
which is at an elevation at least two feet above the elevation of the 100-year
recurrence interval flood, or, where such data is not available, five feet
above the elevation of the maximum flood of record.
   (C)   Drainage system plans.
      (1)   The drainage system shall be designed to consider the drainage
basin as a whole and shall accommodate not only runoff for the subdivision area
but also, where applicable, the system shall be designed to accommodate the
runoff from those areas adjacent to and “upstream” from the subdivision itself,
as well as its effects on land downstream.
      (2)   All proposed surface-drainage structures shall be indicated on the
plans.
      (3)   All appropriate designs, details and dimensions needed to clearly
explain proposed construction materials and elevations shall be included in the
drainage plans.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.133 IRRIGATION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Where an existing irrigation system consisting of open ditches is
located on or adjacent to or within 100 feet of a proposed subdivision,
complete plans for relocation or covering, or other safety precautions, shall
be submitted with an application for preliminary approval of a plat.
   (B)   In all subdivisions in which the smallest lot is less than one acre,
all irrigation systems shall be underground.
   (C)   All pressure irrigation systems in or within 100 feet of a proposed
subdivision shall be identified, and otherwise color-coded as to pipe and valve
color to meet state standards and regulations.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.134 FIRE PROTECTION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may authorize alternative fire protection in
place of fire hydrants when hydrants are not feasible, and the applicant
demonstrates that the proposed method is sufficient. Engineering certification
may be required.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require additional fire protection or
policies when, because of the location, type of natural features or other
factors contributing to fire danger, other precautions are deemed necessary.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
§ 153.145 GUARANTEE.
   (A)   Before actual installation of the improvements required by this
chapter, as outlined in §
153.119 and before final plat requiring approval by the land use authority, the
subdivider shall guarantee the installation thereof by one, or a combination of
one or more, of the methods specified below, in an amount equal to the cost of
the improvements as estimated by the subdivider’s engineer and approved by the
county.
   (B)   The guarantee employed shall be approved as to method and form by the
land use authority and the County Attorney. The Board of County Commissioners
may prescribe, by administrative rule or regulation, forms and procedures to
ensure the orderly, regular and efficient processing of applications for the
approval of a proposed subdivision and the strict compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.146 PERFORMANCE BONDS.
   The subdivider shall furnish and file with the County Clerk a corporate
surety bond in an amount equal to the cost of the required improvements as
estimated by the subdivider’s engineer and approved by the county, to assure
the actual construction of such improvements within a period of one year
immediately following the approval of the final plat and subdivision by the
land use authority, which bond shall be approved by the land use authority and
the County Attorney.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.147 DEPOSIT IN ESCROW.
   The subdivider shall deposit in escrow, with an escrow holder approved by
the land use authority, an amount of money equal to the cost of improvements
required as estimated by the subdivider’s engineer and approved by the county
under an escrow agreement conditioned for the installation of said improvements
within one year from the approval of the final plat and subdivision. The escrow
agreement shall be approved by the land use authority and the County Attorney
and shall be filed with the County Recorder.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.148 DEFAULT.
   In the event the subdivider defaults or fails or neglects to satisfactorily
install required improvements within one year from the date of approval of the
final plat, the county may declare the bond or escrow deposit forfeited, and
may install or cause the required improvements to be installed, using the
proceeds from the collection of the bond or escrow deposit to defray the
expense thereof.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.149 PHASED DEVELOPMENT.
   Whenever the subdivider develops a subdivision in portions, such development
shall be in an orderly manner and in such a way that the required improvements
will be continuous and all said improvements will be made available for full,
effective and practical use thereof by lessee or grantee of any of the
subdivided lands within the time hereinbefore specified.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.150 GUARANTEE FOR ONE YEAR.
   (A)   The subdivider or contractor, upon submission of his or her plans,
shall deposit with the County Clerk a fee in the amount required by the land
use authority to cover engineering review and inspection of the above
improvements.
   (B)   The subdivider shall warrant and guarantee that the improvements
provided for in this chapter, and every part thereof, will remain in good
condition for a period of one year after the date of conditional acceptance by
the land use authority and agree to make all repairs to and maintain the
improvements and every part thereof in good condition during that period at no
cost to the county. It is further agreed and understood that identifying
necessity for repairs and maintenance of the work rests with a civil engineer
licensed by the state, whose decision upon the matter shall be final and
binding upon the subdivider, and the guarantee stipulated shall extend to and
include, but shall not be limited to, the entire street, subgrade, base and
surface and all pipes, joints, valves, backfill and compaction as well as the
working surface, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other accessories that are, or
may be affected by the construction operations.
   (C)   Whenever, in the judgment of the county, said work shall be in need of
repairs, maintenance or rebuilding, he or she shall cause a written notice to
be served to the subdivider. Upon receipt of such written notice, the
subdivider shall undertake and complete the repairs, maintenance or rebuilding
as required by the above-stated written notice. The cost of such repairs,
maintenance or rebuilding shall be paid by the subdivider. But if the
subdivider fails to complete such repairs, maintenance or rebuilding as are
required by written notice, within a reasonable time from the date when such
notice was received (not to exceed six months), the county may initiate any and
all legal actions necessary to compel compliance with the requirements of the
written notice.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 153.151 ACCEPTANCE AND RELEASE OF SURETY.
   (A)   Conditional acceptance of all the improvements shall be in writing
from the land use authority, after written approval has been received from the
county.
   (B)   Final inspection by the county shall be made one year after all work
has been completed and before the release of the improvement bond or escrow
deposit. All defects shall be corrected before acceptance by the land use
authority.
   (C)   Final acceptance shall be in writing by the land use authority, after
written approval is received from a civil engineer licensed by the state.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
CLUSTER SUBDIVISIONS AND OPEN SPACE
§ 153.165 CLUSTER SUBDIVISION STANDARDS.
   The purpose of a cluster development is for maximum design flexibility,
separate residential uses from agricultural uses and serve to preserve the
rural and agricultural character of the county to the maximum extent possible,
while still permitting new residential uses.
   (A)   Clustering of residential development shall be done in such a way that
the following apply.
      (1)   Unbuilt areas of the property are maintained by any one or
combination of the following:
         (a)   Creation of a homeowner association with approved covenants;
         (b)   A deed restriction following procedures outlined in §
153.167; and
         (c)   Alternate option approved by the County Planning Commission and
land use authority.
      (2)   No building, structure or fence shall be placed on greater than the
percentage of built area for any zone.
      (3)   Minimum setbacks are reserved.
      (4)   Traditional access through the property to public lands shall be
maintained in accordance with the General Plan.
      (5)   The area surrounding and included in the development are not
adversely affected by the design.
      (6)   All lots in cluster subdivisions shall be served by an internal
access road with limited access to existing county roads.
   (B)   Cluster subdivisions shall follow all procedures in this chapter.
   (C)   The following rules should apply in cluster subdivisions.
      (1)   The density permitted in cluster subdivisions will be as specified
in each individual zone.
      (2)   All parcels in a cluster subdivision except the residual parcel
should be grouped together and contiguous.
      (3)   The open space that is created through clustering should allow for
agricultural lands to continue to be farmed, stormwater to be channelized or
detained by grass swales and ponding areas and preserve open spaces that
provide natural habitat areas.
      (4)   If open space of the cluster development is to be used for
agriculture, a buffer between residential and agricultural uses may be
necessary.
      (5)   Where development exists adjacent to proposed development, an
attempt should be made to interconnect development and open space.
      (6)   The location of buildings in clustering should follow the following
criteria for site selection.
         (a)   Buildings should be built on least fertile soils.
         (b)   Buildings should not occur on wetlands, buffers, transition
areas, floodplains or areas with steep slopes.
         (c)   Buildings should be clustered in the least visible portions of
the site, such as the edges of fields.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.166 UNIT DENSITY CALCULATION AND DENSITY BONUS.
   (A)   The maximum number of units developed shall be determined by the
amount of land proposed for development divided by the lot acreage required in
the zone.
   (B)   Existing homes owned by the same property owner as the land being
developed are to be considered a unit in the unit calculation method.
   (C)   For every increment of 20 acres of contiguous open space in a
subdivision development, one bonus lot shall be added to the maximum number of
units calculated in all zones, excluding GRF-20S.
   (D)   For every increment of 40 acres of contiguous open space in a GRF-20S
subdivision development, one bonus lot shall be added to the maximum number of
units calculated.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.167 OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   A deed restriction must be filed on the property remaining in open
space stating use of the land will be limited to the uses permitted in §
154.073, until such time as any of the following occur:
      (1)   Zoning classification change;
      (2)   Annexation by a municipality; or
      (3)   Other jurisdictional transfer.
   (B)   Areas or spaces designated as open space by §
153.165 shall not be developed or used except as follows, subject to the
regulations of the zoning district in which the development is located:
      (1)   Agriculture, forestry and fisheries;
      (2)   Game preserves, wildlife sanctuaries and the like; and
      (3)   Non-commercial recreational structures and uses.
   (C)   No required yard or other open space around existing building, or
which is hereafter provided around any building, for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or
open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open
space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing the yard or open space on
the lot whereon a building is to be erected or established.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent or
employee, who violates or causes the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished as provided by law.
   (B)   In addition, the county, by action of the Board of County
Commissioners or the County Attorney, with or without express action of the
Board of County Commissioners, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or
other appropriate civil action or actions to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove
acts or uses in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-2, passed 5-13-2024)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Title
   
154.002   Purpose
   
154.003   Definitions
Administration
   
154.015   Amending the zoning ordinance
   
154.016   Notice to nearby entities of predevelopment activity
   
154.017   Public hearings required before amending - notice
   
154.018   Permits, licenses - county officials compliance
   
154.019   Permits, licenses - citizen compliance
Planning Commission
   
154.030   Created - appointment - terms
   
154.031   Vacancies - removal
   
154.032   Chairperson - rules
   
154.033   Powers - duties
   
154.034   Office of Zoning Administrator
   
154.035   General plan - method of adopting
   
154.036   General plan - method of amending
   
154.037   General plan - effect on public uses
   
154.038   Zoning ordinance preparation
Board of Adjustment
   
154.050   Created - regulations - meetings
   
154.051   Organization - procedure
   
154.052   Appeals - power of Board
   
154.053   Variances
   
154.054   Notice of hearing
   
154.055   Decision
   
154.056   Appeal
Zoning Districts Established
   
154.070   Zoning established
   
154.071   Zones designated
   
154.072   Zoning purposes
   
154.073   Table of development standards
   
154.074   Map
   
154.075   Regulations
   
154.076   Annexations
   
154.077   Boundaries of zones
   
154.078   Purpose of the PUD Planned Unit Development Zone
   
154.079   General requirements
   
154.080   PUD review process
   
154.081   Criteria for PUD approval
   
154.082   Brooklyn Zone (BZ)
Nonconforming Uses
   
154.095   Nonconforming uses
   
154.096   Repairs
   
154.097   Discontinuance
   
154.098   Reclassification
   
154.099   Nonconforming lots of record
Temporary Uses
   
154.110   Purpose
   
154.111   Application
   
154.112   Considerations
   
154.113   Conditions
   
154.114   Resubmittals - appeals
   
154.115   Termination
   
154.116   Expiration - extensions
Conditional Uses
   
154.130   Purpose
   
154.131   Required permit
   
154.132   Application - required documents
   
154.133   Application - review process
   
154.134   Standards of review
   
154.135   Modification - revocation
   
154.136   Violation
   
154.137   Building permit
   
154.138   Appeal
   
154.139   Expiration - extensions
   
154.140   Recording of conditional use permits
   
154.141   Table of uses
Recreational Dwellings
   
154.155   Purpose
   
154.156   Recreational vehicles
   
154.157   Permanent recreational dwellings
   
154.158   Violations
Agricultural Protection Area
   
154.170   Definitions
   
154.171   Proposal for creation of agricultural protection area
   
154.172   Area requirements
   
154.173   Notice and public hearing requirements for Planning Commission,
Advisory Board and County Commission
   
154.174   Review of proposal
   
154.175   Public hearing
   
154.176   Evaluation criteria
   
154.177   Adding land to an agricultural protection area
   
154.178   Removing land from an agricultural protection area
   
154.179   Review of agricultural protection areas
   
154.180   Protection of land in agricultural protection area
Wildland Fire Protection Requirements
   
154.195   Objective
   
154.196   Fuel modification
   
154.197   Required defensible space
   
154.198   Spark arresters
   
154.199   Liquefied petroleum gas installations
   
154.200   Storage of firewood and combustible material
Supplementary Provisions
   
154.215   Effect of chapter
   
154.216   Required utilities
   
154.217   Water in sufficient quantity
   
154.218   Parking
   
154.219   Commercial truck parking
   
154.220   Mobile homes
   
154.221   Manufactured homes
   
154.222   Accessory and internal dwelling units or structures
   
154.223   Farm labor dwellings
   
154.224   Short-term rentals
   
154.225   All excavations
Group Homes
   
154.240   Youth home defined
   
154.241   Authorization
   
154.242   Application - contents
   
154.243   Application - fee
   
154.244   Application - Planning Commission review - recommendation
   
154.245   Public hearing
   
154.246   Use permit
   
154.247   Conditions
   
154.248   Continuation of use
   
154.249   Violations
   
154.250   General requirements for residential facilities for elderly persons
   
154.251   Permit process
   
154.252   Termination of permit
   
154.253   Definitions for residential facilities for persons with a disability
   
154.254   General requirements
Enforcement
   
154.265   Permits required
   
154.266   Powers and duties of an enforcement officer
   
154.267   Civil enforcement
   
154.268   Stay order
   
154.269   Building permits required
   
154.270   Reconsideration/revocation of approval, permits and licenses
   
154.271   Violation - notice to correct
   
154.272   Appeal
Internal Accessory Dwelling Unit
   
154.285   Purpose
   
154.286   Definitions
   
154.287   Allowed zones
   
154.288   Number of residence
   
154.289   Setbacks
   
154.290   Parking requirements
   
154.291   Owner occupancy
   
154.292   IADU design standards
   
154.293   Affidavit and notice of internal accessory dwelling unit
   
154.294   Variances
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations (Located in I-A Zones)
   
154.305   Definitions
   
154.306   Comprehensive nutrient management plan
   
154.307   Conditional use permit required
   
154.308   Regulations
   
154.309   Appeals
   
154.310   Permits and fees
 
   
154.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE.
   This title shall be known as and shall be entitled the “Sevier County Zoning
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE.
   The zones, boundaries and regulations which apply within each of the zones
have been made in accordance with a General Plan designed:
   (A)   To promote the health, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the county;
   (B)   To encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and development of the
county;
   (C)   To secure safety from fire, floods, traffic hazards and other dangers;
   (D)   To secure economy in the cost of fire and police protection and other
governmental services;
   (E)   To lessen congestion in the streets and roads and reduce the waste of
excessive amounts of roads;
   (F)   To protect the tax base;
   (G)   To foster agriculture and industry, together with related uses;
   (H)   To stabilize and improve property values;
   (I)   To promote beauty along the highways and in the landscape; and
   (J)   To protect both urban and non-urban development.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.003 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms are hereby
defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future and the
future shall include the present; words in the singular number include the
plural and the plural number include the singular; the word LOT includes the
words “plot,” “tract” or “parcel;” the word BUILDING includes the word
“structure;” the word ERECTED means constructed, altered, moved or repaired;
the words “shall” and “must” are always mandatory; the word “district” is
synonymous with the word “zone.”
      (2)   All words not herein defined shall be construed as defined in the
statutory and common law of the state. If not defined therein, then as defined
in accordance with the most current version of Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary.
   (B)   Special provisions for lots divided by district boundaries. Where any
lot, existing at the effective date of this chapter, is located in two or more
districts in which different uses are permitted, or in which different use,
area, bulk, accessory off-street parking and loading or other regulations
apply, the provisions of this section shall apply.
      (1)   Use regulations. If more than 50% of the lot area is located in one
of two or more districts, the use regulations applicable to the district
containing the majority lot area shall apply to the entire lot, if consistent
with the land use designation on the Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   Property development regulations. If more than 50% of the lot area
is located in one of two or more districts, the property development
regulations applicable to the district containing the majority lot area shall
apply to the entire lot.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABUTTING PROPERTY. Property lying immediately adjacent to and sharing a
common property line with other property.
      ACCESS. A strip of land which is part of a lot and provides a way to
enter or exit a facility or property.
      ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A minor detached dwelling that is located on the
same lot as a principal dwelling and that is used incidentally to a primary
dwelling or the house as an accessory use.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE. A detached subordinate structure or a use
which is clearly incidental or subordinate to, and customarily found in
connection with, the principal structure or use to which it is related, and
which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use.
      ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY. The official, board, commission or
other body empowered to render a decision on a particular matter under this
chapter. As used in Chapter 153, an ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY means an
individual, board or commission, appointed or employed by a county, including
county staff or a county planning commission for review of limited residential
subdivision.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. An establishment that:
         (a)   Provides amusement or entertainment which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
         (b)   Features topless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or
female impersonators or similar entertainment;
         (c)   A book or video store having the substantial or significant
portion of its trade in books, magazines, periodicals or other materials which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or
         (d)   A theater used exclusively or primarily for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by persons 18 years of age or older on the
premises.
      AFFORDABLE HOUSING. A dwelling unit for which a household spends no more
than 30% of its gross income for housing costs. Rental housing costs include
contract rent and utilities. Owner occupied housing costs include mortgage
principal and interest, property taxes, insurance and, where applicable,
homeowner association fees.
      AGRICULTURAL PACKING AND WAREHOUSING. A facility used for storing,
sorting, cleaning, sacking or transshipment of agricultural products. Does not
include processing functions. SORTING AND CLEANING mean handling to the
generally minimum level of marketability.
      AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING. Cooking, dehydrating, refining, bottling,
canning or other treatment of agricultural products which changes the naturally
grown product for consumer use.
      AGRICULTURE. Use of land for the growing and harvesting of crops for sale
for profit, or used which are directly ancillary to the growing and harvesting
of crops, which is the exclusive or primary use of the lot, plot, parcel or
tract of land; including processing crops to the generally recognizable minimum
level of marketability; or the open range grazing of livestock; or irrigated
pasture for grazing or livestock. It shall not include livestock raising
activities other than what has been previously defined as AGRICULTURE; nor
shall it include retailing of goods on the premises, any agricultural industry
or business, such as fruit packing, plants, fur farms, animal hospitals or
similar uses. Also excluded from AGRICULTURE are mechanized industrial animal
farms, commercially operated greenhouses, commercial milk farms and commercial
dog kennels and commercial feeding of garbage to swine or other animals or
operating for the disposal of garbage, sewage and rubbish.
      AGRICULTURE PROTECTION AREA. [Reserved]
      AIR RIGHTS. The right to use space above ground level.
      AIRPORTS, HELIPORTS and LANDING FIELDS. Any area of land which is used or
intended for use for the landing and taking off of aircraft; and appurtenant
areas which are used or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport
facilities or right-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities
located thereon.
      ALTERATION, BUILDING. Any change in the structure which will increase the
number of dwelling units, the floor area or height of the structure.
      ALTERNATIVE POWER. Another source or means of supplying energy such as
solar, wind and the like that can be considered an equivalent substitute for
conventional commercial power.
      ANIMAL UNIT.
         (a)   A term used to establish an equivalent density for various
species of livestock. The following animals shall have the following ANIMAL
UNIT equivalents:
         (b)   Example:
 
Cattle/buffalo/horse                 1 animal unit    (1 animal per 1 AU)
Goat/sheep/llama                     0.2 animal unit  (5 goats per 1 AU)
Horse (34 inches or less at withers) 0.2 animal unit  (5 horses per 1 AU)
Mink and similar forbearing animals  0.02 animal unit (50 mink per AU)
Other livestock                      1 animal unit    (1 elk per AU)
Poultry                              0.02 animal unit (50 chicken per AU)
Swine/ostrich                        0.2 animal unit  (5 swine per 1 AU)
 
         (c)   Young animals shall not be counted until they are weaned. Horses
include mules and donkeys.
      ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION. Any projection that is not intended for
occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building
(i.e., awnings, canopies), but does not include signs.
      AREA. The aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross-section within given
boundaries.
      ARTIFICIAL LIGHT SOURCE. Any exterior source of light emanating from a
human-made device, including, but not limited to, incandescent, mercury vapor,
metal halide or sodium lamps, spotlights, flood lights, landscaping lights,
street lights, vehicular lights, construction or security lights.
      ASPHALT MIXING/BATCHING PLANTS/BORROW PITS. Asphalt or concrete batching
plant for producing asphalt or concrete products used in construction
activities on the same or nearby sites.
      AUTO/TRUCK REPAIR AND SERVICE (HOME-BASED BUSINESS). An auto repair and
service business that is located at the primary residence. Not to exceed two
employees.
      AUTO/TRUCK REPAIR, SALES AND SERVICE. A commercial establishment where
automobiles are repaired, sold or serviced.
      AUTO-WRECKING YARD. Any place where motor vehicles not in running
condition, or the parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being
restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for the
dismantling or storing of such motor vehicles for parts thereof.
      BARNS and other AG related structures. A building with no utilities that
is used for the storage of farm products or feed and usually for the housing of
farm animals or farm equipment.
      BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
      BASEMENT. Any floor level below the first story in a building, except
that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be
classified as a BASEMENT unless such floor level qualifies as a first story.
      BED AND BREAKFAST. A residence built expressly for, or converted to, rent
rooms to paying guests and to provide breakfast to paying guests on a short-
term (daily, weekly basis). The residential appearance of the structure is
maintained. Definition does not include hotel, motel or boarding house.
      BILLBOARD. See §§
150.35 through
150.47.
      BLIGHT. A condition of a site, structure or area that may cause nearby
buildings and/or areas to decline in attractiveness and/or utility. BLIGHT is
the term used to determine eligibility of proposed redevelopment project areas.
      BLOCK. A parcel of land entirely surrounded by streets, railroad rights-
of-way, parks or other public spaces or a combination thereof.
      BOARD OF APPEALS. An appointed board that hears appeals on variances and
exceptions.
      BOND. A certificate of debt issued by an entity, guaranteeing payment of
the original investment, plus interest, by a specified future date. Funds
raised through the sale of BONDS can be used for various public purposes.
      BROWNFIELD. An area with abandoned, idle or under-used industrial and
commercial facilities where expansion, redevelopment or reuse is complicated by
real or perceived environmental contamination.
      BUFFER. An area of land including landscaping, berms, walls, fences and
building setbacks which is located between land used of different character and
is intended to mitigate negative impacts of the more intense use of one land
use on another.
      BUILD-TO LINE. A zoning requirement that sets a line that a building
facade must be built to. The opposite of a setback. Usually required in order
to maintain a relatively uniform street view.
      BUILD-OUT. Development of land to its full potential or theoretical
capacity as permitted under current or proposed planning or zoning
designations.
      BUILDABLE AREA (also see BUILDING ENVELOPE).The portion of a lot
remaining after the setbacks have been provided.
      BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
      BUILDING CODE. The State Construction Code referenced in U.C.A. § 15a-1-
204(8).
      BUILDING ELEVATION. The entire side of a building, from ground level to
the roofline, as viewed perpendicular to the walls on that side of the
building.
      BUILDING ENVELOPE. The space remaining on a site for structures after all
building setbacks, height limit and bulk requirements have been met.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1362.jpg]
      BUILDING, HEIGHT. The vertical distance in feet to the peak of the roof
from average grade. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the HEIGHT
is measured from the average ground level.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1364.jpg]
      BUILDING LINE. The perimeter of that portion of a building or structure
nearest a property line, but excluding open steps, terraces, cornices and other
ornamental features projecting from the walls of the building or structure.
      BUILDING, MAIN (or PRINCIPAL BUILDING). The principal building or one of
the principal buildings upon a lot, or the building or one of the principal
buildings housing a principal use upon a lot.
      BUILDING OFFICIAL. The official or other person charged with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter and any other building-related
codes.
      BUILDING OR STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING. A building, structure or portion
thereof, which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter applicable
to the zone or district in which such building is situated, but which existed
prior to the effective date of the resolution codified in this chapter.
      BUILDING PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by a
governmental authority having jurisdiction, authorizing the construction of any
building. BUILDING PERMIT includes a tie-down permit for a structure or
building that does not require a BUILDING PERMIT, such as a mobile home, in
order to be occupied.
      BUILDING, PUBLIC. A building owned and operated or owned and intended to
be operated by a public agency of the United States, of the state or any of its
political subdivisions.
      CAMPGROUND. A privately or municipally owned site designed, designated,
maintained, intended or used for the purpose of supplying a location for major
recreational equipment/vehicles, open to the public for free or paying camping
purposes. CAMPGROUNDS are not intended to serve as residential areas or
facilities.
      CAMPING TRAILER. A canvas or folding structure mounted on wheels and
designed for temporary living and housekeeping purposes.
      CANOPY. A roofed structure supported by a building and/or supports
extending to the ground directly underneath the canopy, and providing a
protective shield for the area directly below.
      CAPITAL DRAINAGE FACILITIES. The planning of, engineering for,
acquisition of land for or the construction of drainage facilities necessary to
meet the level of service for new development.
      CAPITAL FACILITY COSTS. All costs directly associated with the
acquisition, design, engineering, site preparation, construction and placement
of a capital facility. It excludes operation and maintenance costs, and the
repair, replacement or renovation of existing capital facilities where the
capital facility improvement does not add capacity.
      CARPORT. A covered automobile parking space not completely enclosed by
walls or doors. A CARPORT shall be subject to all regulations described in this
chapter for a private garage.
      CARRYING CAPACITY.
         (a)   The level of land use, human activity or development for a
specific area that can be accommodated permanently without an irreversible
change in the quality of air, water, land or plant and animal habitats.
         (b)   The upper limits of development beyond which the quality of
human life, health, welfare, safety or community character within an area will
be impaired.
         (c)   The maximum level of development allowable under current zoning.
      CEMETERY/CREMATORIUMS. A burial place or grounds owned, operated and
maintained by a municipality with endowment care feasibility and disallowed for
private persons or entities in all county zones.
      CHANNELIZATION.
         (a) The straightening and/or deepening of a watercourse for purposes
of storm-runoff control or ease of navigation. CHANNELIZATION often includes
lining of stream banks with a retaining material like concrete.
         (b)   At the intersection of roadways, the directional separation of
traffic lanes through the use of curbs or raised islands that limit the paths
that vehicles may take through the intersection.
      CLINIC. An establishment where patients are not lodged overnight but
admitted for out-patient services.
      CLUB. Building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation,
association, person or persons for a social, educational or recreational
purpose.
      CLUSTERING. The grouping of structures, courts, cul-de-sacs or short
streets – more closely than in conventional residential plans – in order to
preserve agriculture, natural site amenities and open space.
      CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any authorized agent or employees of the county
whose duty is to assure code compliance.
      COLLECTOR STREET. See STREET, COLLECTOR.
      COMMERCIAL. A land use classification that permits facilities for the
buying and selling of commodities and services.
      COMMERCIAL DOG KENNEL. A place where five or more dogs over six months of
age and/or five or more cats over six months of age, irrespective of duration,
are boarded, bred, bought, sold, exhibited or trained for compensation, but not
including a pet shop, animal shelter veterinary clinic/hospital where boarding
is incidental to treatment.
      COMMERCIAL FEEDLOT. Any tract on which the principal use is the raising
of, or the concentrated feeding of, livestock, fowl or any other edible animals
for the sale of such animals or the sale of products derived from such animals.
Does not include dairies. Swine and mink operations are also not included or
allowed for COMMERCIAL FEEDLOTS.
      COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is not used solely for personal non-
business activities.
         (a)   The following factors will be considered when determining
commercial status:
            1.   Outside lettering designating a business of any kind;
            2.   Use of vehicle; and
            3.   Size of vehicle.
         (b)   The following types of vehicles shall be considered COMMERCIAL
for the purposes of this chapter, but shall not be the only types of vehicles
considered as COMMERCIAL: truck cab, semi-trailer, tow truck, stepvan,
construction vehicle, bus, trailer or utility trailer, a vehicle outfitted for
commercial purposes or a vehicle with three or more axles.
      COMMON OPEN SPACE. The land area in planned unit development (PUD)
reserved and set aside for agricultural or recreational use, landscaping, open
green areas, parking and driveway areas for the common use and enjoyment of the
residents of the PUD.
      COMPATIBILITY. Land uses that are congruous, similar and in harmony with
one another because they do not create or foster undesirable health, safety or
aesthetic effects arising from direct association of dissimilar, contradictory,
incongruous or discordant activities, including the impacts of intensity of
use, traffic, hours of operation, aesthetics, noise, vibration, smoke,
hazardous odors, radiation, function and other land use conditions.
      COMPOSTING FACILITY. A facility that is designed and used for
transforming, through biological decomposition, food, yard wastes and other
organic material into soil or fertilizer. This use does not include backyard
composting bins serving individual families.
      COMMUNITY CHARACTER. The image of a community or area as defined by
factors such as built environment, natural features and open space elements,
type of housing, architectural style, infrastructure and the type and quality
of public facilities and services.
      COMMUTE SHED. The area from which people may commute from their homes to
a specific workplace destination, given certain assumptions about maximum
travel time or distance.
      COMPLETE APPLICATION. A land use application under this chapter,
accompanied by required checklist information and associated fees, filled out
by an applicant, and where the authorized county officials have reviewed the
submitted information and deemed it complete.
      COMPLETE STREETS. Streets designed to accommodate all modes of travel and
enable safe access for all users. Pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists and bus
riders of all ages and abilities are able to safely move along and across a
COMPLETE STREET.
      CONCURRENCY. Installing or operating facilities and services needed to
meet the demands of new development simultaneously (or concurrently) with the
development.
      CONDEMNATION. The exercise by a public agency of the right of eminent
domain.
      CONDITION OF APPROVAL. A condition imposed as part of, or associated
with, the issuance of a valid local government development order.
      CONDITIONAL USE. A use which is permitted by this chapter, provided that
certain conditions specified in this chapter are met and that a permit for such
use is granted by the County Planning Commission.
      CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITY. A residential land use consisting of any
building or section thereof, residence, private home, boarding home, home for
the aged or any other residential structure, whether or not operated for
profit, which undertakes, for a period exceeding 24 hours, care, housing, food
service and one or more personal services for persons not related to the owner
or administrator by blood or marriage. In addition, the term shall include
rehabilitative home care development service housing, senior housing and adult
congregate living facilities for the physically impaired, mentally retarded,
developmentally disabled persons or persons 60 years of age or older.
      CONSTRUCTION. The placement, assembly, erection, substantial repair,
alteration or demolition of a building or structure on land, the placement of
concrete, asphalt, similar materials on land or grading or earthwork of land.
      CONTIGUOUS. Lands separated only by streets, easements, pipelines, power
lines, conduits, rights-of-way under ownership of the land owner of one of the
subject parcels, a property owners association or a governmental agency or a
public utility. For density purposes only, CONTIGUOUS means lots that share a
common border. (Lots that touch point-to-point, and lots which are separated by
waterways, streets or major easements are not considered contiguous for density
calculations.)
      CORRAL. A space, other than a building, used for the confinement of
animals.
      COTTAGE INDUSTRY. A small, individual owned business or concern that
functions without altering the residential character of the neighborhood, and
which does not create any negative impacts on the public health, safety and
general welfare of the adjacent property owners.
      COUNTY. Sevier County, Utah.
      COUNTY COMMISSION. The elected Board of County Commissioners of the
county (CC).
      COVENANT. A private legal restriction that places a burden on a parcel of
land in favor of another parcel. The restriction is recorded in the deed.
COVENANTS are most commonly used in the establishment of a subdivision to
restrict the use of all individual lots in the development to a certain type of
use (like single-family units), but may also be used to guarantee views and
solar access.
      CURB CUT. A ramp opening in a curb where vehicles or wheelchairs may
enter or leave the roadway.
      DAIRY. An area of land on which cows are kept for the purpose of
manufacturing, processing or producing dairy products in commercial quantities,
as well as the related buildings and equipment.
      DAY CARE CENTER. A building or structure where six or more children are
regularly cared for during the day for compensation for commercial use. Non-
commercial is considered home-based business.
      DEFENSIBLE SPACE.
         (a)   In firefighting and prevention, an area of non-combustible
surfaces separating urban and wild land areas.
         (b)   In urban areas, open spaces, entry points and pathways,
configured to provide maximum opportunities to rightful users and/or residents
to defend themselves against intruders and criminal activity.
      DENSITY. The ratio of the number of dwelling units per acre of land.
      DESIGN REVIEW. The comprehensive evaluation of a development and its
impact on neighboring properties and the area as a whole, from the standpoint
of site and landscape design, traffic, drainage, public safety and signs, in
accordance with a set of adopted criteria and standards. DESIGN REVIEW refers
to a system set up outside of the zoning ordinance, whereby projects are
reviewed against certain standards and criteria by the Planning Commission.
      DEVELOPABLE LAND. Land that is suitable as a location for structures and
that can be developed free of significant impact on natural resource areas.
      DEVELOPER. Any person, including a governmental agency, undertaking any
development.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, the construction of buildings, structures or
accessory structures; the construction of additions, or substantial alterations
to buildings, structures or accessory structures; roads; bridges; placement of
mobile homes; ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavating or drilling operations; and the deposition or extraction of earthen
materials.
      DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS. The right to develop land held by the landowner or by
a party other than the owner who has obtained the rights to develop.
      DISPOSITION, OFF-SITE. The off-premises transportation of excavated
material.
      DISPOSITION, ON-SITE. The on-premises use of extractive or excavated
material.
      DOMESTIC LIVESTOCK. Those fowl, cattle, dairy animals, swine, sheep,
goats and other animals, such as horses, which are kept or raised for use or
for pleasure as part of the overall agricultural operation and which are not
part of a commercial feedlot.
      DRAINAGE BASIN. A sub-area of a watershed which contributes stormwatwer
runoff to a watercourse tributary to the main receiving water.
      DRAINAGE SYSTEM. One or more artificial ditches, tile drains or similar
devices which collect surface runoff or groundwater and convey it to a point of
discharge.
      DRY CLEANER. An establishment which has as its sole purpose the cleaning
of fabrics with substantially non-aqueous organic solvents. Laundry
establishments with self-service, coin-operated dry-cleaning machines shall not
be classified as a DRY CLEANER.
      DWELLING. A building designed or used exclusively as the living quarters
of one or more families, but not including hotels, tourist cabins and boarding
houses.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be occupied
by one family, the structure having only one dwelling unit.
      DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms (including sleeping, eating,
cooking and sanitation facilities, but not more than one kitchen), which
constitutes an independent housekeeping unit, occupied or intended for
occupancy by one household on a long-term basis.
      EASEMENT. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and
for a specified purpose of any designated part of his or her property.
      EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. A public elementary or secondary school or a
private educational institution having a curriculum like that ordinarily given
in public schools.
      EMINENT DOMAIN. The right of a public entity to acquire private property
for public use upon the payment of just compensation.
      EMPOWERMENT ZONES. Areas designated by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development where businesses may be eligible for tax credits and other
financial incentives for hiring local residents.
      ENCROACHMENT. Any obstruction or protrusion into a right-of-way or
adjacent property, whether on the land or above it.
      ENGINEER. A person licensed and registered as a professional engineer in
the state.
      ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Services provided by public and private utilities
necessary for the exercise of the principal use or service of the principal
structure. These services include surface, underground or overhead gas,
electrical, steam, water, sanitary sewage, stormwater drainage and
communication systems and accessories thereto, such as poles, towers, wires,
mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals, sewer pipes, catch basins, water
storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, pumps, lift stations and hydrants, but not including buildings.
      FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage
or adoption living together in a dwelling unit. Guests in excess of two who pay
for meals or room shall be considered as borders. A common household shall be
deemed to exist if all members thereof have access to all parts of the
dwelling.
      FARM ANIMALS. Animals other than household pets that shall be permitted
to be kept and maintained for commercial production and sale and/or family food
production, education or education. FARM ANIMALS are identified as large (i.e.,
horses, cattle); medium (i.e., sheep, goats); or small (i.e., rabbits,
chickens).
      FARM LABOR DWELLING. A dwelling located on a farm for the purpose of
housing an employee of that farm operation and his or her family.
      FENCE. A tangible barrier or obstruction of any material, with the
purpose or intent, or having the effect of preventing passage or view across
the FENCE line. It includes hedges and walls.
      FLOOD. An overflow of water onto lands not normally covered by water.
FLOODS have two essential characteristics: the inundation of land is temporary,
and the land is adjacent to and inundated by overflow from a watercourse, lake
or other body of water. Terms associated with FLOODING include: FREQUENT, which
means flooding which occurs more than once every two years on the average; and
TEN-YEAR FLOOD ELEVATION, which means that flood elevation which has a ten in
100 probability of being equaled or exceeded in any calendar year.
      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
      FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, as well as the flood
hazard boundary map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
      FLOODPLAIN. The land area adjacent to the normal limits of a watercourse
or water body which is inundated during a flood event of specified magnitude or
return period.
      FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of
a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, excluding cellar and
basement floor areas not devoted to residential use, but including the area of
roofed terraces. All dimensions shall be measured from the exterior faces of
the exterior walls.
      FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR). The ratio of the gross floor area of all
structures on a lot to the lot area, excluding vertical core circulation areas
for multi-story structures.
      FOREST INDUSTRIES. A sector of the economy in which an aggregate of
establishments is engaged in the management of an extensive area of woodland,
often to produce products and benefits, such as timber, wildlife habitat, clean
water, biodiversity and recreation.
      FOREST PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT. Any material developed and derived from
forestry for direct consumption or commercial use, such as lumber, paper or
forage for livestock.
      FRONTAGE (see LOT WIDTH illustration). The width of the lot or parcel of
land measured at the front setback line.
      FUEL MODIFICATION. A method of modifying fuel load by reducing the amount
of non-fire-resistive vegetation or altering the type of vegetation to reduce
the fuel load.
      GARAGE. A building or portion thereof, other than a private storage
garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling,
storing or parking motor driven vehicles. The term
REPAIRING shall not include an automotive body repair shop or the rebuilding,
dismantling or storage of wrecked or junked vehicles.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. An enclosed space or accessory building for the storage
of one or more motor vehicles, provided that no business, occupation or service
is conducted for profit therein nor space therein for more than one car is
leased to a nonresident of the premises. A garage shall be considered part of a
dwelling if the garage and dwelling have a roof or wall in common or are
connected structurally by a physical connection, such as a wall, trellis or
solid fence.
      GENERAL PLAN. A plan adopted by the County Planning Commission which
shows the most appropriate use of land within the county.
      GRADE.
         (a)   Leveling or smoothing the contours of a property.
         (b)   The rate of rise or descent of a sloping surface, usually
expressed in degrees or a percentage calculated by the number of feet of rise
per 100 feet of horizontal distance (a 10% grade would mean a ten foot vertical
rise over 100 feet of horizontal distance).
         (c)   The lowest point of elevation within the area between the
building and a line five feet from the building.
      GRAVEL PIT. All sites where gravel or minerals will be extracted by an
open pit method; to all sites where such extracted earth products are
stockpiled; and to sites where overburden and leftover earth materials are
placed in waste dumps.
      GREENHOUSE/NURSERY. An enclosed structure enclosed and used for the
cultivation or protection of tender plants. If the product of the GREENHOUSE/
NURSERY is sold, a business license will be required by the county.
      GREENWAYS. Linear open spaces that link parks and neighborhoods within
the community, such as paths or trails.
      GROSS LAND AREA. The total area, including all public and private areas
within the legal boundaries of a particular parcel of land or project.
      GROUND FLOOR. A level of building, the floor of which is located not more
than two feet below nor more than six feet above the finished grade.
      GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA. Areas that support the natural process of
infiltration and percolation of rainwater from land areas or streams through
permeable soils into water-holding rocks that provide underground storage
(aquifers).
      GROUP HOME; GROUP CARE FACILITY. Any facility used to provide non-medical
residential care, day treatment, adult day care or foster family agency
services.
      HANDICAPPED SPACES. Parking spaces designed, marked and reserved for
exclusive use by persons properly registered as handicapped.
      HISTORIC PRESERVATION. The preservation of historically significant
structures and neighborhoods to facilitate restoration and rehabilitation of
the building(s) to a former condition.
      HOME OCCUPATION. A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted
within a dwelling unit for gain or support by a resident of the dwelling unit
pursuant to the limits of this code.
      HOSPITAL. Unless otherwise specified, the term HOSPITAL shall be deemed
to include sanitarium, sanatorium, preventorium, clinic, rest home, nursing
home, convalescent home and any other place for the diagnosis, treatment or
other care of ailments, and shall be deemed to be limited to places for the
diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments.
      HOTEL/MOTEL. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public, which shall provide additional services, including restaurants,
meeting rooms and recreational facilities, and may also provide other customary
accessory services.
      HOUSEHOLD. All those persons, related or unrelated, who occupy a single
housing unit.
      HOUSING UNIT. A house, an apartment, a mobile home or trailer, a group of
rooms or a single room that is occupied as a separate living quarters, or, if
vacant, is intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any area of land consisting of or covered by material
that prevents absorption of water into the ground.
      IMPROVED LAND. Land to which basic utilities, such as roads, sewers,
water lines and other public infrastructure facilities, have been added and/or
land upon which buildings or other structures have been erected.
      INCOMPATIBILITY OF LAND USE. Issues arising from the proximity or direct
association of contradictory, incongruous or discordant land uses or
activities, including the impacts of noise, vibration, smoke, odors, toxic
matter, radiation and similar environmental conditions.
      INDOOR RECREATION. A building or structure which contains sports or
recreation facilities, including, but not limited to, indoor swimming pools,
ice arenas, curling rinks, courts for racquet sports, exercise centers, martial
arts studios, gymnastics facilities, climbing walls, roller rinks, bowling
alleys, miniature golf, batting cages, billiard halls and minor retail sales
and services customarily associated with and accessory to such facilities.
      INFILL DEVELOPMENT. Development of vacant or underutilized land (usually
individual lots or leftover properties) within areas that are already largely
developed.
      INFRASTRUCTURE. Construction, such as, but not limited to, streets,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, fire hydrants, storm drainage facilities and water,
sewer and gas systems or parts thereof.
      INSTITUTIONAL USES.
         (a)   Publicly or privately owned and operated activities like
hospitals, convalescent hospitals, intermediate care facilities, nursing homes,
museums and schools and colleges;
         (b)   Churches and other religious organizations; and
         (c)   Other nonprofit welfare, educational or philanthropic activities
that cannot be considered residential, commercial or industrial uses.
      INTENSITY. The concentration of activity, such as a combination of the
number of people, cars, visitors, customers, hours of operation, outdoor
advertising and the like.
      INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. An accessory dwelling unit that is used
incidentally to a primary dwelling and is created:
         (a)   Within a primary dwelling;
         (b)   Within the footprint of the primary dwelling described in
division (a) above at the time the INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT is created;
and
         (c)   For the purpose of offering a long-term rental of 30 consecutive
days or longer.
      INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE (IBC). The current edition of the
International Building Code.
      JUNK YARD or AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. The use of premises for the open
storage of old, wrecked, non-operable, dilapidated automobiles, trucks,
tractors and other such vehicles and parts thereof; scrap building materials,
scrap contractor’s equipment, tanks, cases, cans, barrels, boxes, drums,
piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery, rags, paper excelsior, hair,
mattresses, beds or bedding or any other kind of scrap or waste material.
      KENNEL. A commercial establishment for the breeding, sale, grooming or
boarding of small animals and household pets not necessarily owned by the
occupants of the premises.
      LABORATORY. A building or group of buildings in which are located
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation,
but not including facilities for manufacture of products for sale.
      LAND USE. Any activity which is subject to the regulation of this county
which is conducted on, below and/or in the space above the surface of the earth
to a height of 500 feet within the boundaries of the county except those areas
subject to the zoning authority of the incorporated municipalities within the
county.
      LAND USE AUTHORITY. See ADMINISTRATIVE LAND USE AUTHORITY.
      LANDMARK.
         (a)   A building, site, object, structure or significant tree having
historical, architectural, social or cultural significance and marked for
preservation by the local, state or federal government.
         (b)   A visually prominent or outstanding structure or natural feature
that functions as a point of orientation or identification.
      LANDSCAPING. Any combination of living plants (such as grass, ground
cover, shrubs, vines, hedges or trees) or non-living landscape material (such
as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, walls, fences or decorative paving materials).
LANDSCAPING may include the preservation and incorporation of existing trees,
vegetation or ecosystems into site development.
      LEAPFROG DEVELOPMENT. New development separated from existing development
by substantial vacant land.
      LEGAL DESCRIPTION. A metes and bounds description of a parcel of land
filed in accordance with the requirements of the state and the county.
      LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS). An indicator of the extent or degree of service
provided by, or proposed to be provided by, a public facility or service based
on and related to the operational characteristics of the public facility or
service.
      LIGHT CUT OFF. A luminaire with elements, such as shields, reflectors or
refractor panels, which direct light and eliminate light spillover and glare.
      LIMITED RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivisions of land that the
applicant indicates on the application is intended to be occupied by two or
more single-family, two-family/duplex or single-family row house dwellings and
is located on land that is zoned to allow such use.
      LIVESTOCK RAISING. Breeding, raising and caring for animals that are used
for products. LIVESTOCK shall also include horses.
      LODGE. A building containing no more than 15 bedrooms for the temporary
occupancy of guests, without cooking facilities in each unit. Accessory
facilities may include any or all things customarily associated with LODGES.
      LOT. A parcel of land, as identified by having a single parcel
identification code number in the records of the County Assessor, and as
created under the subdivision laws of the state and the ordinances of the
county.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1366.jpg]
      LOT, AREA OF. The contiguous, not separated by public roadway, of a lot
between its front, rear and side lot lines. LOT AREA must meet the minimum lot
area requirements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1368.jpg]
      LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT. The adjustment of a lot line between two or more
existing parcels where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent
parcel and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not
thereby created.
      LOT, THROUGH (DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOTS). A lot having frontage on two
parallel or approximately parallel streets. The lots, for the purposes of this
chapter, shall have two street frontages and two front yards.
      LOT WIDTH. The distance across a lot or parcel of property measured along
a line parallel to the front lot line, or parallel to a straight line
connecting the ends of an arc which constitutes the front lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1370.jpg]
      LOT, WIDTH (FRONTAGE). The width of the lot or parcel of land measured at
the front setback line.
      LUMINAIRE. A complete lighting unit, consisting of a light source and all
necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. Residential structures that are constructed entirely
in a factory. These are regulated under the federal Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development and meet foundation standards of the IBC.
      MAP. The zone map of the county.
      METES AND BOUNDS. A system of describing or identifying land using
measures (METES) and direction (BOUNDS) from an identifiable point of reference
like a monument or other marker, the corner of intersecting streets or some
other permanent fixture.
      MEZZANINE. A low-ceilinged story between two main stories of a building.
A MEZZANINE shall be counted as one story if it covers more than one-third of
the area of the floor next below.
      MINERAL. A naturally occurring element or combination of elements;
metallic, non-metallic or mineral fuel that occur in the earth but shall not
include soil. Without limitation due to enumeration, the MINERALS of interest
include:
         (a)   METALLIC. Iron ore, copper, zinc, silver, gold, nickel, cerium,
chromite, columbium, magnesite, molybdenite, vanadium and zircon;
         (b)   MINERAL FUEL. Petroleum, natural gas, coal, peat and nuclear
fuel source materials; and
         (c)   NON-METALLIC. Stone, sand and gravel, clay talc, asbestos,
graphite and marble.
      MINERAL EXTRACTION. The excavation or recovery of metallic, non-metallic
or mineral fuels through processes and techniques, such as digging, drilling,
strip-mining, quarrying and underground methods, shall include the extraction
of topsoil when such activities are undertaken or proposed to be undertaken as
a distinct land use.
      MINING, DRILLING, DIGGING, QUARRYING and the like. All or part of the
process involved in the extraction and processing of mineral materials. Such
activities shall normally be divided into four distinct phases:
         (a)   Exploration: On-site, geologic examination from the surface of
an area by seismic core, rotary, percussion or other drilling or testing for
the purpose of searching for mineral deposits. Exploration includes associated
activities such as clearing and preparing sites or constructing roads for
drilling;
         (b)   Prospecting: Examination of an area for the purposes of
determining the quality and quantity of minerals other than by exploration, but
including the obtaining of samples by physical means;
         (c)   Operation: Mineral extraction and/or processing for commercial
purposes, including such operations as aggregate or ready mix plants; mixing of
asphalt; mining or drilling services; processing topsoil; washing, refining or
processing of metallic, non-metallic or mineral fuel materials; and
         (d)   Reclamation: Process by which an area physically or
environmentally affected by mineral extraction activities is rehabilitated to
either its original state or to a pre-agreed state of long-term environmental
stability.
      MITIGATION MEASURES. Measures that modify a project to reduce or
eliminate a significant environmental impact.
      MIXED USE. A group of different uses of land within a building for which
applications for development permits are sought.
      MOBILE HOME. Any structure manufactured or assembled prior to June 15,
1976, and/or originally designed to be capable of transportation by any motor
vehicle upon public highways which does not require substantial on-site
fabrication, which is intended for occupancy as a year-round residence.
      MOTOR HOME. A portable structure constructed as an integral part of a
self-propelled vehicle designed and used for temporary living and housekeeping
purposes, including converted school buses and vans.
      MULTI-FAMILY. The use of a structure designed for two or more dwelling
units which are attached, or the use of a lot for two or more dwelling units
excluding mobile homes.
      MUNICIPAL SERVICES. Services traditionally provided by local agencies,
including water and sewer, roads, parks, schools and police and fire
protection.
      NATURAL WATERWAYS. Those areas, varying in width, along streams, creeks,
gullies, springs or washes which are natural drainage channels as determined by
the Chief Building Official and in which areas no buildings shall be
constructed.
      NET ACREAGE. The portion of a site that can actually be built upon. The
following generally are not included in the NET ACREAGE of a site: public or
private road rights-of-way, public open space and floodways.
      NON-COMMENCEMENT. The failure to begin, or the discontinuation of,
construction activity that would make a material change in a structure as
evidenced by the cancellation, lapsing or revocation of a building permit; or
the failure to begin, or the discontinuation of, any other land use activity
that would make a material change in the use of land.
      NONCONFORMING LOT. A single lot, tract or parcel of land of record that
was conforming at the time of its creation, but which fails to meet the
requirements for area, width or depth under the current regulations of this
code.
      NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure that was lawfully established before
this code was adopted or amended, that does not conform to the property
development regulations of area, height, lot coverage, yard setbacks, lot
location, parking or other dimensional requirements for the zoning district in
which it is located.
      NONCONFORMING USE. A use that was lawfully established before this code
was adopted or amended which does not conform to the use regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
      NOTICE (OF HEARING). A legal document announcing the opportunity for the
public to present their views to an official representative or board of a
public agency concerning an official action pending before the agency.
      OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS. Improvements constructed outside of the boundaries
of the project which are required as a part of a development approval.
      OFFICES. A building, room or department wherein a business or service for
others is transacted, but not including the storage or sale of merchandise on
the premises.
      OPEN SPACE. Any parcel or area of land or water that is essentially
unimproved and devoted to an open space use for the purposes of:
         (a)   The preservation and/or conservation of natural resources;
         (b)   The managed production of resources;
         (c)   Outdoor recreation; or
         (d)   Public health and safety.
      OUTBUILDING. A detached accessory building constructed on a residential
lot housing a garage, accessory apartment or handicapped or elderly apartment.
      OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE. A commercial development which
provides fenced, secure, on-site storage of three or more recreational
vehicles, boats and all-terrain vehicles. All vehicles shall be currently
licensed and ready for highway use.
      OVERLAY. A land use designation on the General Plan land use map, or a
zoning designation on a zoning map, that modifies the basic underlying
designation in some specific manner.
      OWNER. Any person, association, partnership or corporation which has
dominion over, ultimate control of or title to real property.
      PARCEL OF LAND. A unit of land legally established property lines.
      PARKING LOT. An off-street, private or public area constructed at grade
which is used for the temporary parking of automobiles, motorcycles and trucks.
PARKING LOTS include access aisles, ramps, maneuvering and all vehicle use
areas.
      PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An area not in a street or alley, exclusive of
driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one vehicle and
connected with a street or alley by a driveway which affords ingress and egress
for a vehicle.
      PERMANENT FOUNDATION. A continuous perimeter stem wall constructed of
reinforced concrete or masonry set on approved footings and as required by the
International Building Code and Uniform Building Code.
      PERMITTED USE. An authorized use within a zoning district.
      PERSONAL SERVICES. Uses such as beauty shops, barber shops, dry cleaners,
mailing services, self-service laundromats and similar uses which provide
service to the public individually.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). A development in which the regulations of
the zone in which the development is situated to allow flexibility and
initiative in site and building design and location in accordance with an
approved plan and imposed general requirements. Detailed development standards
are established during the process of considering proposals and adopted by
ordinance upon project approval.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The County Planning Commission (PC).
      PLAT. A map or delineated representation of the subdivision of lands,
being a complete, exact representation of the subdivision and other
information.
      PRIMARY DWELLING. A single-family dwelling that is detached and is
occupied as the primary residence on the property.
      PRIMARY USE. A land use listed in the land use matrix which occupies the
greater portion of a lot or parcel or is the more intense use of two uses on a
lot or parcel.
      PRIME FARMLAND. Land that has the best combination of physical and
chemical characteristics for the production of crops as determined by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture.
      PRIVATE DRIVE. A non-dedicated thoroughfare or road used exclusively for
private access to and from private land or developments.
      PROCESS. A series of acts of changes proceeding one to the next; a method
of manufacturing or conditioning; or to submit something to a treatment or
preparation.
      PUBLIC USE. A use operated exclusively by a public body, or quasi-public
body, such use having the purpose of serving the public health, safety or
general welfare, and including uses, such as public schools, parks, playgrounds
and other recreational facilities, law enforcement and fire-rescue facilities,
administrative and service facilities and public utilities.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. An entity owning, operating, managing or controlling a
system or proposing construction of a system that is providing or proposing to
provide water or sewer service, electricity, natural or manufactured gas or any
similar gaseous substance, telephone, telegraph or other communication service
to the public for compensation.
      QUASI-PUBLIC USE. A use operated by a private nonprofit educational,
religious, recreational, charitable or philanthropic institution, such use
having the purpose primarily of serving the general public, such as churches,
private schools and universities, and similar uses.
      RECLAMATION. Increasing land use capability to be made suitable for
development, by changing the land’s character or environment through drainage,
fill or revegetation.
      RECREATION, COMMERCIAL. Recreation facilities operated as a business on
private or public property and open to the public for a fee, such as a golf
course, ski lift, tennis court and the like, and support facilities customarily
associated with the development.
      RECREATIONAL DWELLING. Cabins and other permanent structures built for
recreational use only and not to be used as a primary dwelling unit. Does not
include travel trailers, trailer, recreational vehicles and mobile homes,
unless permitted and connected to an approved septic system.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle such as a recreational trailer, camper
trailer, truck campers, travel trailer, camp car or other vehicle with or
without motive power, designed and/or constructed to travel on the public
thoroughfare in accordance with the provisions of the Utah Vehicle Code,
designed for the use of human habitation.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A land area under unified control designed and
intended to accommodate ten or more short-term, overnight parking of
recreational vehicles and not for permanent residential use. RV PARKS are
permitted in select zoning districts in the county through a conditional use
permit. Permitted RV PARKS in the county shall meet minimum criteria,
including, but not limited to: RV PARKS will provide facilities, including
restrooms, showers and a state approved waste disposal system. Areas in the
Agricultural Zone must have one public hearing at the CC level.
      RECYCLE CENTER. Any facility which is maintained and operated for the
purpose of receiving, collecting and processing source-separated recyclable
materials for resale or transfer. For the purposes of this definition,
PROCESSING shall mean the modification of materials by baling, crushing,
grinding, chipping or other means to prepare the materials for markets.
      REGIONAL CAMPS AND RESORTS. A temporary establishment of living
facilities, such as tents, cabins or RV spaces, in which someone lives or stays
for a period of time not to exceed 30 consecutive days. The number of living
facilities shall not exceed ten total.
      RELIGIOUS ACTIVITIES. Any daily, weekly or periodic activity associated
with or that occurs at a religious institution.
      RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A premises or site which is used primarily or
exclusively for religious worship and related religious ecclesiastical or
denominational organization or established place of worship, retreat, site,
camp or similar facilities owned or operated by a bona fide religious group for
religious activities shall be considered a RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.
      RESIDENTIAL. Land designated in the city or county General Plan and
zoning ordinance for buildings consisting primarily of dwelling units. May be
improved, vacant or unimproved land.
      RETAIL. The sale of consumer goods directly to the user of the product;
may include storage of goods sold in sufficient quantities to meet daily needs.
May include sale in large size packages used as pricing incentives.
      REZONING. An amendment to the map and/or text of a zoning ordinance to
effect a change in the nature, density or intensity of uses allowed in a zoning
district and/or on a designated parcel or land area.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land dedicated or deeded to the perpetual use of
the public.
      SALVAGE YARD. A solid waste disposal site or facility at which
salvageable materials are stored or sold or at which wrecking, dismantling or
demolition of salvageable materials are conducted. SALVAGE YARDS do not include
operations conducted by scrap metal, paper, fiber or plastic processors, or
small storage areas for equipment such as are normally found adjacent to
industrial and commercial establishments.
      SALVAGEABLE MATERIAL. Inoperable and/or unlicensed vehicles, machinery or
equipment, scrap metal or other junk or scrap materials which are of further
usefulness mainly as a raw material for reprocessing, or as imperfect stock
from which replacement or spare parts can be extracted.
      SANITARY LANDFILLS. Locations where trash, garbage, organic materials are
buried and maintained in accordance with local, state and federal regulations.
      SCREENING. Landscaping, berms, fences, walls or any combination thereof
used to block or significantly obscure, in a continuous manner, the view from
one area to another.
      SETBACK. The required minimum horizontal distance between any structure
and the related front, side or rear property lot line or base building line.
      SETBACK ENCROACHMENTS. All buildings and structures must be located at or
behind the required setbacks except as shown in the illustration below. No
building or structure can extend into a required easement or public right-of-
way.
      SERVICE STATION. Any land, building, structure or premises used for the
sale of fuel for motor vehicles or installing or repairing parts and
accessories, but not including the repairing or replacing of motors, bodies or
painting of motor vehicles and excluding public parking garages.
      SHOPPING CENTER. A multi-entity commercial complex under single ownership
or control which leases space to various commercial establishments.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A rental of a residential dwelling for periods of time
not to exceed 31 consecutive days.
      SHORT-TERM VACATION RENTALS (SHORT-TERM RENTAL). A residential unit, or
any portion of a residential unit, that the owner of record or the lessee of
the residential unit offers for occupancy for fewer than 30 consecutive days.
      SIGHT DISTANCE. The extent of unobstructed vision in a horizontal and
vertical plane.
      SIGHT DISTANCE TRIANGLE. An area formed by the curb lines or edges of the
roadway and a straight line from the driver’s eye on one street to an object on
the other street. (Distances for different roadway types are calculated by
AASHTO standards).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1372.jpg]
      SIGN. Any structure or natural object or part thereof or device attached
thereto or printed or represented thereon which is intended to attract
attention to any object, product, place, activity, person, institution,
organization or business, or which shall display or include any letter, word,
model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as or
which is in the nature of an announcement, direction or advertisement.
      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A freestanding residential building providing
complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
      SITE-RELATED IMPROVEMENTS. Road construction or road improvements at or
near the development site which are necessary to interface the development’s
external trips with the major road network system, or which are necessary to
interface the development’s internal trips with the major road network system
where a portion of the major road network system is included within the
development.
      SMALL SUBDIVISION. Contiguous property which is partitioned into four or
fewer lots usually qualifies as a minor land division.
      SPILLOVER LIGHT. Light that is distributed into areas where the
illumination is not needed or intended.
      SQUARE FOOTAGE. The gross constructed area of all buildings and
structures covered by a solid or screened roof and totally or partially
enclosed by walls or other material. Nonresidential outdoor areas covered or
uncovered which functionally extend the primary use, such as open seating and
open retail are included, except that uses which generally completely occur
outdoors, such as vehicle or monument sales, nurseries, gasoline sales, salvage
yards and outdoor storage are not included. Nonresidential canopies and
screened enclosures which functionally extend the primary use are included.
Decorative canopies or canopies designed to protect from weather are not
included.
      STABLE. A building in which domestic animals, such as horses, ponies and
cattle, are sheltered and fed, having stalls or compartments.
      STORMWATER DETENTION. Any storm drainage technique that retards or
detains runoff, like detention or retention basins, parking lot storage,
rooftop storage, porous pavement or dry wells.
      STORY, BUILDING. The part of a building between the surface of the floor
and the ceiling immediately above. The maximum height shall be 14 feet measured
from the finished floor to the finished ceiling. Attics and raised basements
shall not be included in calculations of a BUILDING STORY unless they are used
for residential or parking purposes.
      STREET. A public thoroughfare, or right-of-way, dedicated, deeded or
condemned for public use and which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property. The word STREET includes road, avenue or land, but does not
include alley.
      STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. Publicly owned land that contains both the street
and a strip of land on either side of the street with facilities, such as
sidewalks, sewers and storm drains.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
      STRUCTURE. All construction, including residences, commercial buildings,
freestanding walls, antennas, signs, towers, bridges, culverts or similar uses
which may require a building permit issued by the county.
      SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who
shall lay out, for the purpose of sale or building development, any subdivision
or part thereof as defined herein.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of land, whether improved or unimproved,
whether previously platted or not, into two or more contiguous lots for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership. The term shall
include any modification of legal boundaries for the purpose of redividing or
combining any lot(s) depicted on a record plat, or on a certified survey or
other map recorded pursuant to an affidavit of exemption or affidavit of
waiver. When appropriate to the text, the term refers to the process of
subdividing or the land proposed to be or which has been subdivided.
      SUBSTANDARD HOUSING. Residential dwellings that, because of their
physical condition, do not provide safe and sanitary housing.
      SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE IN LAND USE. Either:
         (a)   A change in land use or site design that increases the intensity
of land use;
         (b)   A change in land use or site design that creates or increases
incompatibility of adjacent land uses; or
         (c)   An increase in the total floor area of multiple-family dwellings
or nonresidential buildings which results in increased traffic.
      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, where the improvement creates additional enclosed
space that contains equipment or utilities relative to the primary structure,
the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has
been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose
of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either any
development for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or
local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary
to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic
Place.
      SWINE OPERATION. Any swine operation with a concentrated number of 300 or
more swine.
      TEMPORARY. A single period or an accumulation of periods not exceeding 90
consecutive days in any 365-day period unless further restricted.
      TOWNHOUSE. A dwelling unit located on an individual lot and attached by
at least one but no more than two party wall(s) along 50% of the maximum depth
of the unit, to one or more other dwelling units; has a continuous foundation;
each on its own lot, with said party wall(s) being centered on the common
property line(s) between adjacent lots.
      TRIP. A one-way movement of vehicular travel from an origin (one TRIP
end) to a destination (the other TRIP end).
      TRIP GENERATION. The attraction or production of trips caused by a given
type of land development.
      TRUCK, COMMERCIAL. Any combination of vehicles defined as a “truck” by
state statute.
      TRUCK ROUTE. A path of circulation required for all vehicles exceeding
set weight or axle limits; a TRUCK ROUTE follows major arterials through
commercial or industrial areas and avoids sensitive areas.
      UNDEVELOPABLE. Specific areas where topographic, geologic and/or soil
conditions indicate a significant danger to future occupants and a liability to
the city or county are designated as UNDEVELOPABLE by the county.
      UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP. The circumstances where special conditions, which
were not self-created, affect a particular property and make strict conformity
with restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height or density
unnecessarily burdensome or unreasonable in light of considering the purposes
of this chapter.
      USE, ACCESSORY. A permitted use that is customarily associated with the
principal use and clearly incidental to the principal use and is subordinate in
area, extent or purpose to and serves only the principal use.
      USE, NONCONFORMING. (See NONCONFORMING USE.)
      USE, PERMITTED. Any use lawfully occupying land or buildings as
authorized in the zone regulations and for which no conditional use permit is
required.
      USE, PRINCIPAL. The specific purpose for which land or a building is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained. The term PERMITTED USE or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
      UTILITY. A government or franchised provider of water, sewer, electric,
gas, phone, cable television or similar service.
      UTILITY DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES. Any electrical distribution lines,
natural gas distribution lines, minor gas regulator stations, cable television
lines, telegraph and telephone lines and gathering lines or other minor service
facilities. This use is not required to be located on a building lot or to
comply with the minimum lot size requirement for the district in which it is
located, but no buildings are allowed, and the use is limited to the following
sizes:
         (a)   Gas lines less than 12 inches; and
         (b)   Electric lines of less than 115,000 volts.
      UTILITY STATION MINOR. Any company that owns or operates facilities
within the county for the generation, transmission or distribution of electric
energy for sale, for the production, storage, transmission or distribution,
otherwise than in enclosed portable containers, of natural or manufactured gas
or geothermal resources for sale for heat, light or power, or for the
furnishing of telephone service, sewerage facilities or water.
      VALID. A development order or other authorization which was legally
issued, and that has not expired, lapsed or been abandoned, revoked or
canceled; or is not subject to such by the passage of time or the conduct of
the owner or developer, and on which or for which all conditions of approval
are satisfied that must be satisfied by the terms or conditions of approval.
      VARIANCE. Relief from certain provisions of a zoning ordinance granted to
a property owner when, because of the particular physical surroundings, shape
or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a
particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience
or a desire to make a development project more profitable.
      VEHICULAR USE AREA.
         (a)   Either:
            1.   An area designed or used for off-street parking; or
            2.   An area used for loading, circulation, access, storage or
display of motor vehicles.
         (b)   Designated parking areas on public or private streets shall not
be considered a VEHICULAR USE AREA.
      VESTED RIGHT. A right that has become absolute and fixed and cannot be
denied by subsequent conditions or changes in regulations, unless it is taken
and paid for. There is no VESTED RIGHT to an existing zoning classification.
      VETERINARY CLINIC. A location for treatment of small or large animals.
Animals may be kept overnight or for short periods of time for treatment.
      VIEWSHED. The area within view from a defined observation point.
      WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONE. Minimum distance required by Central Utah
Public Health Department. (See Figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1374.jpg]
      WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, WATER SUPPLY FACILITY, WATER SYSTEM or WATER
FACILITY. Any or all works and auxiliaries for collection, treatment, storage
and distribution of water from the source or sources of supply to the consumer
or processing plants.
      WAREHOUSE. A building or premises in which goods, merchandise or
equipment are stored for eventual distribution.
      WHOLESALE. The sale of goods to a person or company who may sell products
to the ultimate consumer. Includes sale of products in bulk for further
repackaging.
      WORK. All required construction as shown on approved construction plans
and specifications for all facilities and features of any kind which are
required, related to the process of subdivision of land.
       XERISCAPING. Landscaping with slow-growing, drought tolerant plants to
conserve water and reduce yard trimmings.
      YARD. The open space between a lot line and the buildable area within
which no structure may be located, except as provided in this chapter.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1376.jpg]
      YARD, FRONT. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building
between the front line of the building and the front line of the lot and
extending the full width of the lot.
      YARD, REAR. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building
between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot and
extending the full width of the lot.
      YARD, SIDE. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the building
situated between the building and the sideline of the lot and extending from
the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line
shall be deemed a sideline.
      ZERO LOT LINE HOME. The use of a lot for one detached dwelling unit with
at least one wall, but not more than two walls or a portion thereof, located
directly adjacent to a side lot line, excluding a mobile home but including a
manufactured building.
      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. Designee of the Board of County Commissioners (ZA).
      ZONING ORDINANCE or ORDINANCE. The Zoning Ordinance of the county.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.015 AMENDING THE ZONING ORDINANCE.
   (A)   This chapter, including the map, may be amended, but all proposed
amendments shall be submitted first to: The Planning Commission for its
recommendations, which recommendations shall be submitted to the Board of
County Commissioners for the consideration of the Commission within 45 days.
   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of establishing and maintaining a sound, stable
and desirable development within the county, it is declared to be public policy
that amendments shall not be made to this chapter and map except to promote
more fully the objectives and purposes of this chapter or correct manifest
errors. Any person seeking an amendment to this chapter or map shall submit to
the County Zoning Administrator a written petition designating the change
desired, the reasons therefor and wherein the proposed amendment would further
serve the interest of the public and promote the objectives and purposes of the
chapter, together with appropriate fee outlined in fee schedule. The County
Zoning Administrator shall, in turn, transmit the petition to the Planning
Commission. Upon the receipt of the petition, the Planning Commission shall
call a public hearing before submitting recommendations to the Board of County
Commissioners.
      (2)   Before recommending an amendment to this chapter, it must be shown
that such amendment is:
         (a)   Reasonably necessary;
         (b)   Is in the interest of the public; and
         (c)   And is in harmony with the objectives and purposes of this
chapter.
   (C)   Failure on the part of the Planning Commission to make recommendations
within 45 days shall be deemed to constitute approval of such proposed
amendment unless a longer period is granted by the Board of County
Commissioners. The fee required shall not be returnable.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.016 NOTICE TO NEARBY ENTITIES OF PREDEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY.
   As used in this chapter, PREDEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY means a public hearing
concerning or consideration by the County Planning Commission or the Board of
County Commissioners of:
   (A)   A proposed change in zoning designation;
   (B)   A preliminary or final plat describing a multiple-unit residential
development or a commercial or industrial development;
   (C)   A proposed modification of the county’s General Plan; or
   (D)   The Planning Commission or legislative body, as the case may be, of
the county shall provide notice of predevelopment activity occurring in the
unincorporated county to the legislative body of:
      (1)   Each municipality whose boundaries are within 500 feet of the
property that is the subject of the predevelopment activity;
      (2)   The notice required by division (D)(1) above shall be published at
least seven days before the pre-development activity occurs.
      (3)   The County Planning Commission or Board of County Commissioners
meets the notice requirements of division (D)(1) above by mailing to each
appropriate legislative body, at least seven days before the pre-development
activity occurs, a copy of the Planning Commission or Board of County
Commissioners meeting agenda that contains information sufficient to enable a
reasonable reader to understand that pre-development activity is expected to
occur in the county and the location of the property that is the subject of the
pre-development activity.
      (4)   If notice given is not challenged under §§
154.265 through
154.272 within 30 days after the action for which notice is given, the notice
is considered adequate and proper.
      (5)   Challenges under shall follow procedures outlined in §§
154.265 through
154.272 (U.C.A. § 17-27a-701).
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.017 PUBLIC HEARINGS REQUIRED BEFORE AMENDING - NOTICE.
   Amendments to this chapter may be adopted only after a public hearing before
the Board of County Commissioners in which parties in interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice requirements shall adhere to the
regulations outlined in U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 27a, Part 2, as amended.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.018 PERMITS, LICENSES - COUNTY OFFICIALS COMPLIANCE.
   All departments, officials and employees of the county which are vested with
the duty or authority to issue permits and licenses shall conform to the
relevant provisions of this chapter and shall issue no permit or license for
use, building or purpose where the same would be in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter. Any such permit, or license, if issued in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter, shall be null and void.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.019 PERMITS, LICENSES - CITIZEN COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   A building permit shall be required for any and all improvements to
real property, including, but not limited to, construction, reconstruction,
repair, remodeling, alteration or addition to existing improvements. All
building permit applications submitted to the County Building Department shall
be reviewed in accordance with the most current International Building Code in
effect and subsequent amendments. Additionally, all building permit
applications shall be reviewed for compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. A building permit application may be approved only if the contents of
that application meet the standards of the most current International Building
Code in effect, and subsequent amendments thereto, and also, only if the
contents of that application meet the standards of this chapter and related
county ordinances.
   (B)   When excavation work is to be done, a permit and plan shall be
required if it is to affect public utilities not limited to and including
roadways and irrigation.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 154.030 CREATED - APPOINTMENT - TERMS.
   There is an appointed volunteer commission of seven members, to be known as
the County Planning Commission. Each of the seven members of the Commission
shall be a resident of the county. The term of appointed members of the
Commission shall be five years. A Planning Commissioner may be reappointed to
additional terms by the County Council.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.031 VACANCIES - REMOVAL.
   If a vacancy occurs, the Board of County Commissioners shall fill vacancies
in accordance with §
154.030. For the removal of a member for nonperformance of duty or misconduct,
a majority vote by the Board of County Commissioners shall be required.
Vacancies of the Planning Commission, for any other reason other than
expiration of terms, shall be filled for the remainder of the member’s
unexpired term. Planning Commission members are expected to attend at least 75%
of the scheduled meeting in a given year or be subject to removal for
nonperformance of duty.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.032 CHAIRPERSON - RULES.
   (A)   The County Planning Commission shall elect from its members a
Chairperson, whose term shall be for one year. The Planning Commission member
elected as the Chairperson cannot hold the position for more than two
consecutive years. The Commission may create and fill such other offices as it
deems necessary.
   (B)   The Chairperson of the Planning Commission shall be a voting member.
   (C)   The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings, which record
shall be open to inspection by the public at all reasonable times and in
accordance with state statute.
   (D)   The County Planning Commission is directed to make use of the expert
advice and information which may be furnished by appropriate federal, state,
county and municipal officials, departments and agencies.
   (E)   No meeting of the Planning Commission shall be called to order, or any
business be transacted, without a quorum consisting of at least four members of
the Planning Commission being present.
   (F)   Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. Any
member disqualified because of a conflict of interest shall not be considered
when determining whether a quorum is constituted. Members abstaining from vote,
however, shall count towards consideration of a quorum.
   (G)   All decisions and recommendations of the Planning Commission shall
require a majority vote of a quorum.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.033 POWERS - DUTIES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall be an advisory body to the County
Commission pertaining to the county’s General Plan and land management code
unless designated as the land use authority.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Prepare and recommend a General Plan and amendments to the General
Plan to the Board of County Commissioners as provided in this chapter;
      (2)   Recommend zoning ordinances and maps, and amendments to zoning
ordinances and maps, to the Board of County Commissioners as provided in this
chapter;
      (3)   Administer provisions of this chapter;
      (4)   Recommend subdivision regulations and amendments to those
regulations to the Board of County Commissioners as provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Recommend action for subdivision applications as provided in this
chapter;
      (6)   Advise the Board of County Commissioners on matters as the Board of
County Commissioners directs;
      (7)   Hear or decide any matters that the Board of County Commissioners
designates, including the approval or denial of, or recommendations to approve
or deny, conditional use permits;
      (8)   Exercise any other powers delegated to it by the Board of County
Commissioners; and
      (9)   Exercise any other powers that are necessary to enable it to
perform its functions.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.034 OFFICE OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The office of the Zoning Administrator was created within the county. The
Board of County Commissioners shall fill the office of Zoning Administrator and
shall appoint a Zoning Administrator. It is the responsibility of the Zoning
Administrator to ensure all processes, procedures and other provisions of this
chapter are consistently and equitably applied and to effect the general
administration and enforcement of this chapter and the land management code.
Add as administrative land use authority.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.035 GENERAL PLAN - METHOD OF ADOPTING.
   (A)   Following completion of all or part of the General Plan, the County
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing providing proper notice at
least 14 days in advance of the hearing. The Planning Commission may then make
recommendations and forward it to the Board of County Commissioners. The Board
of County Commissioners shall then provide reasonable notice of at least 14
days for a public hearing on the proposed General Plan.
   (B)   Following the public hearing the Board of County Commissioners may:
      (1)   Adopt the proposed General Plan;
      (2)   Amend the General Plan and adopt or reject the General Plan, as
amended; or
      (3)   Reject the proposed General Plan.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.036 GENERAL PLAN - METHOD OF AMENDING.
   (A)   The County Planning Commission may recommend amendment(s) to the plan
and every ten years consider a complete revision of the current General Plan.
The Planning Commission shall then hold a public hearing providing notice at
least 14 days in advance of the hearing on the proposed amendment(s) to the
General Plan. The amended plan will then be sent to the Board of County
Commissioners who then shall provide notice at least 14 days in advance of the
hearing on the proposed amendment(s) to the General Plan.
   (B)   Following the public hearing, the Board of County Commissioners may:
      (1)   Adopt the proposed amendments to the General Plan;
      (2)   Amend the proposed General Plan and adopt or reject the General
Plan, as amended; or
      (3)   Reject the proposed General Plan.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.037 GENERAL PLAN - EFFECT ON PUBLIC USES.
   No street, park or public right-of-way, ground, place or space, publicly
owned building or structure or public utility, whether publicly or privately
owned, may be constructed unless it conforms with the General Plan or it has
been considered by the Planning Commission; and after receiving the advice of
the Planning Commission and approval by the Board of County Commissioners for
an amendment(s) to the General Plan.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.038 ZONING ORDINANCE PREPARATION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall prepare and recommend a zoning ordinance
and maps to the County Commission for zoning all or part of the county.
   (B)   The County Commission shall then hold a public hearing on the proposed
zoning ordinance and maps after reasonable notice of at least 14 days.
   (C)   Following the public hearing the Board of County Commissioners may:
      (1)   Adopt the proposed zoning ordinance;
      (2)   Amend the zoning ordinance and adopt or reject the zoning
ordinance, as amended; or
      (3)   Reject the proposed zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 154.050 CREATED - REGULATIONS - MEETINGS.
   (A)   There is a Board of Adjustment of three members, to be known as the
County Board of Adjustment. Each of the three members of the Board shall be a
resident of the county. The members of the Board of Adjustment shall serve
without compensation, except that the Board of County Commissioners shall
provide for reimbursement of the members of the Board of Adjustment for actual
expenses incurred, upon presentation of proper receipts and vouchers. Terms for
the members of such a Board of Adjustment shall be of such length and so
arranged that the term of at least one member will expire each year. Any member
of the Board of Adjustment may be removed for cause by the Board of County
Commissioners upon written charges.
   (B)   Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as
in the case of original appointments. The Board of County Commissioners may
appoint alternate members, and in the event that any regular member is
temporarily unable to act owing to absence from the county, illness, interest
in a case before the Board or any other cause, his or her place may be taken
during such temporary disability by an alternate member designated for the
purpose.
   (C)   Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board, in its rules of procedure,
may specify. The Chairperson, or, in his or her absence, the acting
Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All
meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public. The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall
be immediately filed in the office of the Board of Adjustment and shall be a
public record.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.051 ORGANIZATION - PROCEDURE.
   The Board of Adjustment shall organize and elect a Chairperson. Meetings of
the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times
as the Board may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the
public, and the Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact and shall keep records of its official actions, all of which shall be
filed immediately in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. In
each appeal, the Board shall qualify itself as an authority to act upon the
matter and shall cite in the record the particular section or division of the
zoning resolution from which such authority is derived. The Board shall not act
upon matters not specifically delegated to it.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.052 APPEALS - POWER OF BOARD.
   (A)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken within ten days of a
decision by the land use authority by:
      (1)   An applicant or any other person or entity adversely affected by a
decision, administering or interpreting the zoning ordinance may appeal that
decision applying to the zoning ordinance by alleging that there is error in
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an official in the
administration or interpretation of the zoning ordinance; and
      (2)   Any officer, department, board or bureau of the county affected by
the grant or refusal of a building permit or by other decision of an
administrative officer or agency based on or made in the course of the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of the zoning resolution.
   (B)   Upon appeals, the Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers
established by the U.C.A. § 17-27a-707.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.053 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the
requirements of the zoning ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that
he, she or they own, lease or in which they hold some other beneficial interest
may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a variance from the terms of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance only if the application
complies with the criteria outlined in state statute as found in U.C.A. § 17-
27a-707:
   (C)   In determining whether or not enforcement of the zoning ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under this section, the Board of Adjustment
may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship:
      (1)   Is located on or associated with the property for which the
variance is sought; and
      (2)   Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from
conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
   (D)   In determining whether or not enforcement of this chapter would cause
unreasonable hardship under this section, the Board of Adjustment may not find
an unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or economic.
   (E)   The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the
conditions justifying a variance have been met.
   (F)   Variances run with the land, not with the land owner.
   (G)   The Board of Adjustment and any other body may not grant variances for
different uses.
   (H)   Act in a quasi-judicial manner.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.054 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   The Board of Adjustment shall have a set apart monthly meeting when
necessary for the hearing of the appeal and shall give public notice to the
adjoining property owners by mail at least 14 days prior to the date of
hearing.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.055 DECISION.
   The concurring vote of the majority of members of the Board shall be the
decision of the Board of Adjustments regarding any provision that comes before
it.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.056 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may have and
maintain a complete action for relief in any court of competent jurisdiction;
provided that petition for such relief is presented to the court within 45 days
after the filing of such decision in the Office of the Board of Adjustment
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
§ 154.070 ZONING ESTABLISHED.
   In accordance with the requirements of the U.C.A. § 17-27a-505 that zoning
within counties by districts, the county is divided into specific zones which
govern the use, intensity, area and other requirements for the use of land as
required by this chapter. The map accompanying this chapter and incorporated by
reference, the county zoning district map, identifies the location and
distribution of each zone within the county. All development, use, activity and
authorized permits and licenses shall adhere to all the provisions, standards
and requirements of the applicable zoning district. All contiguous property
held in common ownership shall, regardless of the use of separate legal
descriptions or parcel designations, be considered to be one undivided parcel
for zoning and subdivisions and no portion of such property shall be sold or
developed unless in conformity with the zoning and subdivision statutes and
ordinances.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.071 ZONES DESIGNATED.
   In order to accomplish more fully the objectives and purposes of this
chapter, the county is divided into the following zones:
   (A)   A - Agricultural Zone;
   (B)   RA - Residential-Agricultural Zone;
   (C)   GRF-20S - Grazing, Recreation and Forestry Seasonal Zone;
   (D)   GRF-20R - Grazing, Recreation and Forestry Residential Zone;
   (E)   PUD - Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone;
   (F)   C - Commercial Zone;
   (G)   I - Industrial Zone; and
   (H)   BZ - Brooklyn Zone.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2025-11-1, passed - -)
§ 154.072 ZONING PURPOSES.
   This will be on a case-by-case scenario. For uses allowed in each zone, see
§
154.141. Consistent with the goals and policies of the county’s General Plan,
the zoning districts are formulated to provide and achieve the following
purposes.
Land Use Purpose
Land Use     Purpose
             The primary use of land is for agricultural and livestock raising
A -          purposes. Agricultural lands should be left fundamentally intact,
Agricultural remain in agricultural production and continue to provide the open
Zone         space which is vital to the human environment. This zone is
             characterized by primarily agriculture uses as well as non-
             agriculture residential uses.
C -          Encourage commercial and retail development. It is to provide
Commercial   suitable areas for the location of the various types of commercial
Zone         activity needed to serve the people and commerce of unincorporated
             the county.
GRF-20R -
Grazing,     The primary use of the land for grazing, recreational, forestry
Recreation   and wildlife purposes. In general, this zone covers the open
and Forestry portion of the county which is occupied largely by grazing land,
Residential  mountains and canyons.
Zone
GRF-20S -    The primary use of the land for grazing, recreational, forestry
Grazing,     and wildlife purposes. This zone covers the open portion of the
Recreation   county which is occupied largely by grazing land, mountains and
and Forestry canyons. The intent of this zone is for seasonal use of the
Seasonal     property knowing that the county cannot provide governmental
Zone         services out of season.
I -          Land which is suited for industrial development where
Industrial   manufacturing, processing, warehousing and fabrication of goods
Zone         and material can be carried on with minimum conflict or
             deleterious effect upon the surrounding properties.
PUD -        This zone is to provide for uses not found in other zoning
Planned Unit districts within the county consistent with the county’s General
Development  Plan.
Zone
             The primary use of land is for dwelling purposes, by ensuring the
             orderly and timely conversion of certain open land areas within
RA -         the county into residential districts as the need for such land
Residential- occurs. Any permitted improvements will be required to request
Agricultural annexation from the nearest municipality. If the application is
Zone         denied by the nearest municipality and not allowed to connect to
             sewer and water from the municipality, standards outlined in
             Figure 1 in §
             154.073 must be met.
             The purpose of the Brooklyn Zone (BZ) classification is to
             establish a regulated area specifically designated for low-
BZ -         density, single-family residential use. The unincorporated area
Brooklyn     known as Brooklyn was originally approved for summer recreational
Zone         and equestrian purposes. As such, it lacked utilities for its lots
             and was not sanctioned for residential, commercial, or industrial
             uses. Consequently, the platted lots within Brooklyn are not
             considered residential non-conforming lots of record.
 
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024 ; Ord. 2025-11-1, passed - - )
§ 154.073 TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Zoning Districts
 A GRF-20S GRF-20R RA BZ C I
Zoning Districts
           A            GRF-20S      GRF-20R      RA       BZ      C       I
Animal     No
units (See restrictions No           No           4 per
§         if in a      restrictions restrictions acre     None    N/A     N/A
154.003)   subdivision:
           4 per acre
                                                  1 unit
                                                  per 1/   1 unit
Density    (See Figure  1 unit per   1 unit per   2 acre   per
minimum    1 below)     20 acres     20 acres     (see     10,000  N/A     N/A
                                                  division sq. ft.
                                                  (A)(5)
                                                  below)
Front      30 ft.       60 ft.       60 ft.       30 ft.   25 ft.  15 ft.  30 ft.
setback
Frontage   85 ft.       85 ft.       85 ft.       85 ft.   100 ft. 35 ft.  85 ft.
Height of
solid
fences or
other      3 ft.        3 ft.        3 ft.        3 ft.    3 ft.   6 ft.   6 ft.
solid      maximum      maximum      maximum      maximum  maximum maximum maximum
structures height       height       height       height   height  height  height
within
front
setback
Maximum    35 ft. or 2  35 ft. or 2  35 ft. or 2  35 ft.   35 ft.  35 ft.  35 ft.
height     stories      stories      stories      or 2     or 2    or 2    or 2
                                                  stories  stories stories stories
Private                                           25 ft.   25 ft.
access     25 ft. width 25 ft. width 25 ft. width width    width   N/A     N/A
two-way    18 ft. width 18 ft. width 18 ft. width 18 ft.   18 ft.
one-way                                           width    width
Rear       10 ft.       60 ft.       60 ft.       5 ft.    10 ft.  25 ft.  30 ft.
setback
Side       10 ft.       60 ft.       60 ft.       5 ft.    10 ft.  25 ft.  30 ft.
setback
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1413.jpg]
 
   (A)   Figure 1: Requirements for water and septic protection zones within
each zone.
      (1)   Water and septic protection zone requirements (see Figure 1 above)
must be met in order to develop a buildable lot in the A Zone.
      (2)   Central Utah Public Health must be consulted to ensure minimum
protection zone standards are met before the county can approve any
development.
      (3)   All protection zones shall be within the required setbacks for each
zone.
      (4)   Minimum lot sizes in all zones may need to be larger depending on
water and sewer requirements; this will be on a case-by-case scenario.
      (5)   Any permitted improvements in the Residential Agricultural Zone
will be required to request annexation from the nearest municipality. If the
application is denied by the nearest municipality and not allowed to connect to
sewer and water from the municipality, standards outlined in Figure 1 above
must be met.
   (B)   Clear View of Intersecting Streets.
      (1)   (a)   In all districts requiring a front yard, no obstruction to
view in excess of three feet high or 12 inches wide shall be placed on any
corner lot within the clear view area. Pole signs and a reasonable number of
trees pruned to at least ten feet clearance to grade to permit unobstructed
vision to automobile drivers and pedestrians are permitted.
         (b)   Signs or other advertising structures shall not be erected at
the intersection of any street or driveway in such a manner as to obstruct free
and clear vision. They shall not be erected at any location where by reason of
the position, shape or color, they may interfere with, obstruct the view of or
be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal device, or make use of the
words, "Stop," "Drive-in, "Danger," or any other words, phrases, symbols or
characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicle
operators.
      (2)   Corner Lots. Houses on corner lots may have open or solid fencing
along the rear, interior side, and exterior side property lines of the house up
to seven feet tall, which do not encroach closer to the street than the primary
front setback line or within the driveway and intersection Clearview Zones as
described herein. Those properties which adjoin a driveway of the adjacent
property must preserve a ten foot sight triangle to allow visibility to
pedestrians on the sidewalk for those backing out of the adjoining driveway.
(See Figure 2 below).
Figure 2: Fence Height Restrictions and Construction within Sight Triangles
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1415.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024 ; Ord. 2025-11-1, passed - - ) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.074 MAP.
   The location and boundaries of each of the zones are shown on the official
zone map of the county, and said map, with all boundaries, notations and other
data shown, is declared to be an official record is as much a part of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.075 REGULATIONS.
   Within each of the zones, the use, location, height and size of buildings
and structures; the use of the land; maintenance of premises; and size of lots,
yards, courts and other open spaces are regulated as set forth in this chapter.
No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage or other requirements
of this chapter for a lot or building may be sold or leased apart from such lot
or building unless other space so complying is provided.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.076 ANNEXATIONS.
   (A)   Annexation policy. The county policy is to encourage and/or require
development near existing municipalities, promoting annexation into areas with
available utility services. The county supports annexation to existing cities
and towns and advises incorporation for communities located away from such
areas. Plans for annexation should align with established policy, and
applicants must adhere to U.C.A. § 10-2-403 for annexation requirements and
procedures.
   (B)   Procedure for annexation. Upon receiving an annexation petition, the
applicant shall be directed to the nearest municipality if within 600 feet. The
petitioner must have the municipality complete the county’s “Municipal
Annexation/Service Request Form” for further development. The municipality
reviews the form within 60 days, with an optional 30-day extension if needed,
after which the petitioner can proceed with the county.
   (C)   Required coordination. In addition to standard subdivision application
information, lands contiguous to a municipality must notify the legislative
body of the adjacent municipality(ies). If the municipality indicates
willingness to consider annexation, the applicant must present an annexation
petition, and the county cannot consider subdivision approval until six months
after notification to allow for annexation petition filing. CONTIGUOUS is
defined as having a common property boundary of equal to or greater than 50
feet; properties separated by a right-of-way shall be construed to be
CONTIGUOUS.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.077 BOUNDARIES OF ZONES.
   (A)   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of zones, the
following rules shall apply.
      (1)   Where the indicated boundaries of the zone map are approximately
street or land survey lines, said street or land survey lines shall be
construed to be the zone boundaries. Where the indicated boundaries are
approximately canal, natural streams or watercourses, the center of said canal,
natural streams or watercourses shall be construed to be the zone boundaries.
      (2)   In the absence of any street, land survey, natural stream or
watercourse forming the boundaries of any zone, the scale of measurement shown
on the map shall be used to determine the zone boundary line.
   (B)   Where uncertainty exists, the Board of County Commissioners shall
interpret the map.
   (C)   The Residential Agricultural Zone will maintain a 600-foot wide zone
around the boundaries of cities and towns. When an annexation occurs within the
600-foot buffer into a city or town, the Residential Agricultural Zone will be
adjusted to reflect a constant 600-foot buffer.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.078 PURPOSE OF THE PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE.
   The Planned Unit Development Zone is available for one or more land use
developments. This zone is to provide for uses of land within the county
consistent with the county’s General Plan. A PUD Zone should rarely be used
except when identified as a needed use within the county and not found within a
previously established zone.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.079 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All development opting for the PUD Zone shall be of the minimum acreage
required by the existing zone, the entire property does not need to be included
in the proposed PUD Zone and required to go through the PUD review process
outlined in §
154.080. All land uses are conditional upon approval in the PUD review process.
Approval or denial of the zone change and the permit for the development shall
run concurrently. The zone change is conditional upon approval of the
development by grant of a planned unit development permit.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.080 PUD REVIEW PROCESS.
   The following steps must be completed before final approval is given by the
Board of County Commissioners.
   (A)   Concept review.
      (1)   Ten copies of all documents required for concept review and proof
of fees paid shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and obtain approval
from the departments deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Documents required for this review shall be:
         (a)   Signed documentation of the closest municipality showing the
municipalities’ rejection of an annexation request or a waiver of such a
requirement by the Board of County Commissioners;
         (b)   Sketch plan of the proposed development showing the entire area
to be developed and the entire area to be left in open space;
         (c)   Geographic locational references, such as, but not limited to:
section corners, surveyor markers and the like;
         (d)   Name and address of subdivider, designer, engineer and surveyor;
         (e)   Statement of existing underlying zoning;
         (f)   Notation on the plan of proposed site uses, including, but not
limited to, dwelling units, open space, recreation area, commercial area,
industrial area, parking and the like;
         (g)   The plan shall show general lot, street, park and open space
layouts;
         (h)   Location and source of required utilities, including, but not
limited to, power, water and wastewater disposal as required by §
154.216;
         (i)   A thorough statement documenting and identifying the specific
policies and policy recommendations in the General Plan that the proposed plan
encompasses and to what degree the proposed plan will accomplish those specific
policies and policy recommendations;
         (j)   Any other criteria the Development Review Committee deems
necessary to fulfill the objectives of the General Plan and this chapter;
         (k)   Approval shall be based on criteria outlined in §
154.081; and
         (l)   If denied concept review approval, the applicant must reapply
within six months of the date of denial without additional fees or PUD
application fee must be repaid.
   (B)   Preliminary review. Once the concept plan is reviewed, the applicant
shall then submit ten copies of the preliminary review documents to the Zoning
Administrator at least 21 days prior to placement on the agenda of the next
scheduled County Planning Commission. A public hearing shall then be scheduled
and noticed at the time and place of such hearing, and shall be posted at least
three public places, published online and published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the county at least 14 days before the date of the hearing.
Included in this application shall be:
      (1)   Engineered drawings including scaled dimensions of lot(s), street
(s), park(s), stormwater drainage, required utility easement(s) and open space
layouts;
      (2)   Approved location and source of required utilities, including, but
not limited to, power, water and wastewater disposal as required by §
154.216;
      (3)   Designation of major drainage ways and flood prone areas,
including, but not limited to, 100-year floodplain mapping;
      (4)   Statement of maintenance proposals for common facilities;
      (5)   Statement of approved access on all designated rights-of-way;
      (6)   Time schedule for development;
      (7)   Location and type of use designated for all areas in the PUD;
      (8)   Proposed plan for ownership and maintenance of open areas;
      (9)   A certified letter of notification sent by the applicant to all
adjoining property owners stating what is proposed;
      (10)   The applicant shall furnish the county with a performance bond or
other acceptable surety approved by the County Attorney in order to cover any
costs that may become necessary to complete necessary improvements in the PUD;
      (11)   Any additional information required as a result of Planning
Commission concept review;
      (12)   Approval shall be based on criteria outlined in §
154.081 and compliance with requested changes in the concept review;
      (13)   If preliminary approval is granted or granted with conditions, the
applicant shall then submit ten copies of the application in final form 21 days
in advance of the County Planning Commission meeting; and
      (14)   If denied preliminary approval, the applicant shall have 60 days
from the date of denial to resubmit without paying any further fees. If the
applicant does not resubmit within 60 days, the applicant will be required to
reapply for concept review by the Development Review Committee.
   (C)   Final approval - Planning Commission.
      (1)   Following preliminary approval or approval with conditions, the
applicant must submit all documents required in the preliminary review in final
form for consideration 21 days prior to the next Planning Commission meeting.
      (2)   If the County Planning Commission recommends final approval, all
documents shall be forwarded to the Board of County Commissioners for
consideration.
      (3)   If recommendation for final approval is denied, the applicant shall
have 90 days to resubmit to the County Planning Commission without paying
additional fees.
   (D)   Final approval - Board of County Commissioners.
      (1)   A public hearing following appropriate notice requirements shall be
scheduled within 45 days of receipt of the recommendation by the County
Planning Commission.
      (2)   If approval is granted, or granted with conditions, the developer
must begin construction of the development as soon as practicable. If half of
the road and utility improvements have not been made at the expiration of two
years, after final approval of the Board of County Commissioners. The Board of
County Commissioners may vacate the PUD development plan. Decisions of the
Board of County Commissioners are final.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1380.jpg]
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.081 CRITERIA FOR PUD APPROVAL.
   Criteria for PUD approval:
   (A)   All required documents submitted properly;
   (B)   Appropriate design of all buildings, land uses, street lighting and
outdoor equipment in conjunction with surrounding areas and the underlying
zone;
   (C)   Proposed signs in the development pursuant to county sign code (§§
150.35 through
150.47);
   (D)   All streets shall conform to standards set in the county subdivision
ordinance (
Chapter 153) and county code;
   (E)   All on-street and off-street parking shall conform with the parking
standards required for each land use as found in §
154.218;
   (F)   Fiscal impact identifying costs of development versus revenue
generated for all county services, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Police protection;
      (2)   Fire protection;
      (3)   Roads;
      (4)   Schools; and
      (5)   Other services deemed necessary to fulfill the objectives of the
General Plan and this chapter.
   (G)   Exceptions from density standards/percent built area/open space of the
underlying districts are wanted by the design;
   (H)   Open space location shall be in areas adjacent or in connection with
other areas identified for current use, future use or developments;
   (I)   Compatibility with the county’s General Plan as stated in the
statement required in this section;
    (J)   No on-site improvements may be made prior to final approval;
   (K)   Developers shall provide for and establish an organization, or option
approved by the Planning Commission which ensures the ownership and maintenance
of open space, parks, utility systems or other common facilities contained
within the PUD. Such an organization shall not dissolve nor shall it dispose of
any common facility by sale or otherwise unless to another such organization,
without first offering to dedicate the same to the county. If the developer
wishes to dedicate all or part of the common facilities, consideration must be
made in the fiscal impact requirement;
   (L)   Demand for and type of uses at the site; and
   (M)   Effect upon, and from, surrounding land use.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.082 BROOKLYN ZONE (BZ).
   (A)   BZ requirements. To qualify as a buildable lot within the Brooklyn
Zone, landowners must adhere to the standards outlined in this section. Prior
to any residential building being constructed within the Brooklyn Zone, a
property must undergo the prescribed subdivision process to attain the status
of a legal building lot. As a part of the approval process for each new
residential subdivision within the Brooklyn Zone, a development agreement is
mandatory. This agreement includes a commitment to provide garbage services for
the new residential lot. Any approval and development agreement runs with the
land. Before a residential subdivision plat can be approved, the property owner
must obtain the respective approvals of each applicable utility provider.
Installing the necessary provision of utilities may require a lot size or width
in excessive of the minimum requirements for the zone. Building placement shall
not encroach on property lines, public utilities easements, or rights of way.
Meeting the required setbacks of the zone may necessitate acquiring additional
acreage before a building permit can be issued. Fire hydrants shall be
installed to comply with the requirements of the Sevier County Fire Marshal and
shall ensure sufficient flow and distance. No trash, rubbish, weeds, or other
combustible material shall be allowed to remain on any lot outside of approved
containers in the Brooklyn Zone. No junk, debris, inoperable or dismantled
motor vehicle or similar material shall be stored or allowed to remain on any
lot in the Brooklyn Zone for longer than seven days.
   (B)   BZ permitted uses.
      (1)   Accessory building and use that is incidental to a dwelling on the
same lot or property and in compliance with all Sevier County ordinances that
regulate the use of accessory buildings.
      (2)   Agriculture, nurseries and greenhouses, provided the sale of goods
is limited to material produced on the premises.
      (3)   Church, synagogue or similar permanent building used for regular
religious worship.
      (4)   Daycare center.
      (5)   Educational institution, public schools, private with similar
curriculum, daycare/preschool centers.
      (6)   Home occupation.
      (7)   Household pets.
      (8)   Internal accessory dwelling unit.
      (9)   Parking lot accessory to uses permitted in this zone.
      (10)   Public building, public park, public recreation grounds and
associated buildings.
      (11)   Single-family dwellings.
      (12)   Temporary building for use incidental to construction work. Such
building shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
(Ord. 2025-11-1, passed - -)
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 154.095 NONCONFORMING USES.
   In view of the fact that new and additional buildings, structures and uses
of land must conform to the provisions of this chapter, no nonconforming use of
buildings, structures or land shall be extended or enlarged, except by special
permit by the Board of Adjustment as set forth in §
154.053. The nonconforming use of buildings, structures and land may be
continued to the same extent and character as that which existed on the
effective date of the resolution codified in this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.096 REPAIRS.
   Repairs may also be made to a nonconforming building or a building housing a
nonconforming use.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.097 DISCONTINUANCE.
   If a nonconforming use of land or use of a building is changed to a
conforming use or is abandoned for a period of one year, any further use of
said building or land or construction, alteration or repairs to building shall
be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.098 RECLASSIFICATION.
   The provisions pertaining to nonconforming uses of land and buildings shall
also apply to buildings, structures, land or uses which shall become
nonconforming due to any change in regulations or reclassification of land.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.099 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   In any zone, any lot of records at the effective date of this chapter or
amendment of this chapter, even though such lot fails to meet the requirements
for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district. Any
yard dimensions and requirements, except those mentioned previously, must
conform to the regulations for the zone in which the lot is located. Variance
of area, width and yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of
the Board of Adjustment as found in §§
154.050 through
154.056.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
TEMPORARY USES
§ 154.110 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide standards and a permitting
process for temporary uses not lasting more than 30 days in order to protect
public safety and general welfare and to avoid uses which will be detrimental
to adjacent properties.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.111 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Temporary activities shall be allowed upon the issuance of a temporary
use permit by the Zoning Administrator and Building Inspections Department.
   (B)   The applicant for a temporary use permit shall provide the following
information:
      (1)   A description of the proposed use, the proposed beginning and
ending dates and the proposed hours of operation;
      (2)   A description of the property to be used for the temporary use,
including the location of the use in relation to other buildings and the
location of streets to be used for access;
      (3)   Sufficient information to determine that adequate provisions for
trash disposal and sanitary facilities shall be provided; and
      (4)   Additional information may be required in order to ensure
surrounding land uses are not negatively impacted by the temporary use.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.112 CONSIDERATIONS.
   (A)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the considerations listed below
have been addressed.
   (B)   If an application is denied, the denial shall specify which of these
considerations, if any, were not addressed to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator and Building Inspection Department:
      (1)   Circulation: Location of access points to the property;
      (2)   Effect on adjacent property: Effects of the proposed use on nearby
property, including, but not limited to, the effects of noise, lighting and
glare, odor and traffic;
      (3)   Refuse and service areas: Location of refuse and service areas;
      (4)   Utilities: Location and availability of utilities, if any are
deemed necessary;
      (5)   Screening and landscaping: Installation of screening and fencing
where necessary to protect adjacent property;
      (6)   Compatibility: The level of general compatibility with nearby
properties and the appropriateness of the use in relation to other properties;
      (7)   Signage; and
      (8)   Any other review factors which the Zoning Administrator considers
to be appropriate to the property in question.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.113 CONDITIONS.
   The Zoning Administrator may place conditions on the use as part of the
approval to assure that adequate mitigation measures are associated with the
use. The conditions shall become a part of the temporary use permit approval.
Violations of any of the conditions shall be treated in the same manner as
other violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.114 RESUBMITTALS - APPEALS.
   An application for a temporary use which has been denied may be resubmitted
only if there has been a substantial change in circumstances as determined by
the Zoning Administrator. Appeals to all final Zoning Administrator decisions
may be made to the Board of County Commissioners after exhaustion of all other
administrative processes.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.115 TERMINATION.
   (A)   A use permit shall become null and void in the following cases:
      (1)   The use for which the permit was approved is terminated;
      (2)   The time granted for the use in the approved permit has expired;
and
      (3)   The Building Inspections Department or other county agent as
assigned finds that the terms of the permit have been violated or that there is
a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   The site shall be cleared of all debris at the end of the temporary
use. All temporary structures shall be cleared from the site within five days
after the use is terminated.
   (C)   Temporary use permits granted for on-site construction must remove the
mobile home or recreational vehicle from the premises and the utilities
disconnected within 30 days after the property owner receives a certificate of
occupancy for the permanent dwelling. Recreational vehicles may be properly
stored on the property.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.116 EXPIRATION - EXTENSIONS.
   Temporary use permits shall expire one year from the date of approval or
when the use for which the permit was issued has terminated, whichever is
sooner, unless otherwise stated in the conditions of the permit. At the end of
such time, the permittee must reapply for a new temporary use permit.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 154.130 PURPOSE.
   Uses designated in the land use matrix found in §
154.141 are conditional uses that require special consideration by the land use
authority designated. The purpose of this subchapter is to allow the applicable
level of land use authority to evaluate the appropriateness of the use on a
case-by-case situation. The conditional use permit process allows the Zoning
Administrator (ZA), the Planning Commission (PC) or County Commission (CC) to
approve, conditionally approve or deny requests for a conditional use permit.
All permits shall begin at Zoning Administrator, and progress to the level
listed in the land use matrix found in §
154.073 before the permit is issued.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.131 REQUIRED PERMIT.
   No person or entity shall conduct a use designated as a conditional use
within the applicable zone without first obtaining a permit from the county and
paying the conditional use permit fee.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.132 APPLICATION - REQUIRED DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   The conditional use permit application shall include, as applicable:
      (1)   Location;
      (2)   Proof of land ownership;
      (3)   A site plan;
      (4)   A vicinity plan; and
      (5)   A written narrative, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Type of use proposed;
         (b)   Days and times of operation;
         (c)   Square footage of the building(s) proposed;
         (d)   Square footage used by the conditional use;
         (e)   Expected hardship on surrounding uses;
         (f)   Number of users or employees; and
         (g)   Other information the land use authority deems necessary to
fulfill the purpose of this subchapter may be requested prior to approval.
   (B)   The applicant shall also pay the appropriate fee outlined in the fee
schedule before the county may review the application.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.133 APPLICATION - REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Submit completed application and all required documents to the Zoning
Administrator.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall then review the documents to ensure
compliance with the county’s General Plan, ordinances, resolutions and
policies.
   (C)   (1)   If the application complies, then the Zoning Administrator may
approve the conditional use permit or when required forward all documents to
the Planning Commission for its review based on the criteria outlined in §
154.135.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may then:
         (a)   Approve;
         (b)   Approve with conditions; or
         (c)   Denial of an application shall only be considered if there are
no conditions that can be imposed to mitigate the reasonably anticipated
detrimental effects.
      (4)   When applicable, forward the application with recommendations to
the County Commission for review.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.134 STANDARDS OF REVIEW.
   Decisions of approval, approval with conditions or denial of the conditional
use permit application is based on the following criteria:
   (A)   The safety of people and property:
      (1)   Size and location of the use;
      (2)   Prevent or minimize flood water damage where necessary;
      (3)   Relocation, covering or fencing of irrigation ditches, and drainage
channels;
      (4)   Location, dimensions of truck loading and unloading facilities; and
      (5)   Hazardous conditions to the public health or safety.
   (B)   Traffic considerations, including:
      (1)   Capacity of existing streets;
      (2)   Location and off-street parking; and
      (3)   Internal traffic circulation.
   (C)   Health and sanitation:
      (1)   Emergency vehicle access; and
      (2)   Screening of trash pick-up or waste storage areas.
   (D)   Environmental concerns:
      (1)   Utility capacity;
      (2)   Usable and permanent open space considerations;
      (3)   Signage and lighting;
      (4)   Noise, vibration, pollution, odors, stream or other factors that
might affect people and property off-site; and
      (5)   Potential discharge into the air, ground water, surface and
subsurface water or soil.
   (E)   The General Plan and permitted zoning conditions:
      (1)   Fencing, screening and landscaping to separate from adjoining uses;
      (2)   Design, architectural detail, building mass, bulk and orientation
to conform to the surrounding area; and
      (3)   Removal of structures, debris or plant materials incompatible with
characteristics of the underlying zone.
   (G)   Issuance of a conditional use permit for an electricity generating
plant, whose primary fuel source is coal, shall require approval of a majority
of registered voters within the county voting at a regularly scheduled
election.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.135 MODIFICATION - REVOCATION.
   (A)   The land use authority may hold a public meeting regarding
modification or revocation of the conditional use permit.
   (B)   The conditional use permit may be modified or revoked if any of the
conditions set forth apply:
      (1)   The use is determined to no longer comply with the criteria set in
§
154.133 or other provisions in this chapter;
      (2)   The permit was obtained by an inaccurate representation or in a
fraudulent manner;
      (3)   Any of the conditions set in the permit are not being complied
with;
      (4)   The conditional use has ceased or is no longer necessary; and
      (5)   The conditional use permit was issued after application for an
initiative petition had been filed with the County Clerk and before the vote
required.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.136 VIOLATION.
   Any person or entity that continues the use after the permit has been
revoked shall comply with §§
154.265 through
154.272.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.137 BUILDING PERMIT.
   Following receipt of the conditional use permit, the applicant shall take
such permit to the County Building Inspector to review the permit and
conditions attached. Based on this review and compliance with any other items
that might develop in performance of the Building Inspectors duties, the
Building Inspector may approve a building permit and ensure compliance with the
conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.138 APPEAL.
   The decision of the land use authority may be appealed to the Board of
Adjustments by filing such appeal with the County Clerk within 15 days after
the date of the decision. The Board of Adjustments may uphold or reverse the
decision of the land use authority.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.139 EXPIRATION - EXTENSIONS.
   The land use authority may set the expiration date or the date of renewal if
necessary for enforcement on all conditional use permits. If no action on a
conditional use permit is taken within a period of one year of the date it was
issued, the conditional use permit shall expire. The land use authority may
grant further extensions for a period of no longer than six months after proof
of extraordinary circumstances.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.140 RECORDING OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
   If the conditional use is of a permanent nature, the permit shall be
recorded with the property deed in the Office of the County Recorder, and all
associated fees shall be paid by the applicant.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.141 TABLE OF USES.
   Uses designated in the land use matrix as Zoning Administrator (ZA),
Planning Commission (PC) and County Commissioners (CC) are conditional uses
that require special consideration by the land use authority. The purpose of
this subchapter is to allow the most appropriate level of land use authority to
evaluate the reasonable conditions to mitigate potential negative effects of
the proposed use on a case-by-case situation. The conditional use permit
process allows the Zoning Administrator (ZA), the Planning Commission (PC) or
the County Commission (CC) to approve, conditionally approve or deny requests
for a conditional use permit. All permits shall begin with the Zoning
Administrator (ZA), and progress to the level listed below before the permit is
issued. If a use is permitted (P) within a certain zone, no approval is needed
from the county to carry out that use, excluding potential building inspection
or Health Department approvals and the like. Uses which are not specifically
permitted within a zone are prohibited (N).
Table of Uses
Uses    Zone Districts
     RA A GRF- 20S GRF- 20R C I IA
Table of Uses
Uses                                              Zone Districts
                                               RA A  GRF- 20S GRF- 20R C  I  IA
Accessory dwelling and structures              ZA ZA ZA       ZA       ZA ZA ZA
Adult-oriented businesses                      N  N  N        N        N  CC N
AG packaging and warehouse                     N  P  ZA       ZA       N  P  ZA
Agriculture processing                         N  ZA N        ZA       N  P  ZA
Airports/airstrips/heliport                    CC CC CC       P        N  P  ZA
Animal hospitals                               N  PC PC       CC       P  PC PC
Asphalt mixing/batching plants (temporary)     N  PC PC       PC       N  P  PC
Athletic clubs                                 N  N  N        N        P  PC N
Auction yards                                  N  N  N        PC       CC P  N
Auto/motorcycle/BMX/race tracks                N  N  PC       N        PC P  PC
Auto salvage/wrecking yards and allied         N  N  N        N        PC ZA N
operations
Auto/truck repair and services (home-based)    N  PC N        PC       P  P  N
Auto/truck repair, sales and services          N  N  N        N        P  P  N
Barns and other AG related structures          P  P  P        P        P  P  P
Bed and breakfast                              PC PC PC       PC       N  N  PC
Billboards                                     N  PC N        CC       P  P  N
Bowling alley                                  N  N  N        N        PC PC N
Broadcast studios                              N  ZA P        P        P  P  P
Car wash                                       N  N  N        N        P  P  N
Carpenter and cabinet shop                     N  PC PC       PC       PC P  PC
Cemeteries                                     N  N  PC       PC       N  PC PC
Churches                                       P  P  P        P        P  P  P
Clinics, medical or dental                     N  N  N        N        P  P  N
Coal yards                                     N  PC PC       PC       P  P  PC
Commercial dog kennels                         N  ZA ZA       ZA       P  P  ZA
Commercial feedlot (not including mink or      N  PC PC       PC       N  PC PC
swine operations)
Construction equipment yard                    N  ZA ZA       ZA       P  P  ZA
Corrals                                        N  P  P        P        P  P  P
Crematoriums                                   N  N  N        N        CC CC N
Dairies                                        N  PC PC       PC       N  PC PC
Day care center (non-commercial)               P  P  N        P        N  N  N
Department store                               N  N  CC       CC       P  P  CC
Domestic livestock (within AU limits)          P  P  P        P        P  P  P
Drilling oil/shaft mining                      N  ZA ZA       ZA       PC PC ZA
Drug store                                     N  N  N        N        P  P  N
Dry cleaners                                   N  N  N        N        P  P  N
Educational institution                        CC CC CC       CC       CC N  CC
Fabrication/welding                            ZA ZA ZA       ZA       P  P  ZA
Farm labor dwellings                           ZA ZA ZA       ZA       ZA ZA ZA
Farming and ranching                           P  P  P        P        P  P  P
Forest industries                              N  P  P        P        P  P  P
Forest production development                  N  P  P        P        P  P  P
Fruit and vegetable stands                     ZA P  P        P        P  P  P
Funeral homes and chapels                      PC PC N        PC       CC N  N
Golf courses/country clubs/riding clubs        P  P  P        P        P  P  P
Gravel pits, rock crushers, clay pits and rock
quarries asphalt mixing/batching plants/borrow N  N  N        N        N  P  ZA
pits
Greenhouse and nursery                         ZA ZA P        P        PC P  P
Grocery store                                  N  N  N        N        P  CC N
Hardware store                                 N  N  N        N        P  P  N
Home occupations                               P  P  P        P        PC PC P
Hospitals                                      PC PC N        N        P  N  N
Hotel/motel                                    N  N  N        N        P  PC N
Indoor recreation                              N  N  N        N        P  P  N
Manufactured homes detached which satisfy the
Department standards which are placed upon a
permanent foundation of reinforced concrete in P  P  P        P        P  P  P
accordance with IBC, International Building
Code, standards
Mining/mineral extraction                      N  CC CC       CC       CC CC CC
Mink/swine operations, 300 or more animals     N  N  N        N        N  N  CC
Mixed uses                                     N  N  N        N        P  CC N
Outdoor recreational vehicle storage (less     N  PC N        PC       P  P  N
than 15)
Outdoor recreational vehicle storage (more     N  N  N        N        P  P  N
than 15)
Outdoor shooting ranges/archery                N  PC PC       PC       N  N  PC
Post office                                    N  N  N        N        P  P  N
Professional office                            N  N  N        N        P  P  N
Radio/television/cellular towers               ZA ZA ZA       ZA       ZA ZA ZA
Railroad/terminal                              N  CC CC       CC       CC CC CC
Raising and keeping of limited animals (those  P  P  P        P        P  P  P
not defined in AUs)
Recreational vehicle park                      N  CC CC       CC       CC CC CC
Recycle centers                                N  N  N        N        PC P  N
Regional camps/resorts                         N  PC PC       PC       PC PC PC
Restaurants                                    N  N  N        N        P  PC N
Schools                                        P  P  N        P        P  N  N
Short-term rental                              ZA ZA ZA       ZA       ZA ZA ZA
Solar power plant                              N  N  N        N        N  CC N
Single-family dwelling                         P  P  P        P        P  P  P
Storage units                                  N  N  N        N        PC P  N
Slaughterhouses                                N  PC PC       PC       PC P  PC
Sporting good stores                           N  N  N        N        P  PC N
Theater                                        N  N  N        N        P  PC N
Truck wash                                     N  N  N        N        P  P  N
Trucking operation, parking, storage or        N  ZA ZA       ZA       P  P  ZA
maintenance
Trucking operation, parking, storage, owner/   P  P  P        P        P  P  P
operator, limit to 1 truck
Utility distribution facilities (major) water, N  CC CC       CC       CC CC CC
sewer, electric
Utility station (minor)                        P  P  P        P        P  P  P
Warehouse                                      N  N  N        N        PC P  N
 
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
RECREATIONAL DWELLINGS
§ 154.155 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to allow for recreational use of recreational
property in the GRF-20S Grazing, Recreation and Forestry Zones. Recreational
property shall be for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use only and not
for use as primary dwellings.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.156 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Recreational vehicles as defined in §
154.003 are permitted in the GRF-20S Grazing, Recreation and Forestry Zone
under the following conditions.
   (A)   No more than two recreational vehicles may be permanently placed on a
parcel of land.
   (B)   Temporary recreational vehicles must be currently licensed and ready
for highway use. If stored on the property, they must be winterized (holding
tanks emptied into the state approved system).
   (C)   The recreational vehicles(s) that are to be left permanently on the
property must be connected to a state approved septic system and be protected
from damage due to the weather. These vehicles will be taxed as real property
if left on property year-round.
   (D)   All recreational vehicles must have:
      (1)   Self contained sewage disposal and temporary water systems; or
      (2)   Be connected to water and sewage disposal systems as required by §
154.216(B) and (C).
   (E)   Recreational dwellings or recreational vehicles which have fallen into
disrepair, collapsed or are otherwise uninhabitable shall be removed from the
property within 60 days of notice by county officials. Failure to remove
recreational dwellings or vehicles deemed a nuisance after notice shall be a
violation of this code and prosecutable as a Class B misdemeanor; and
   (F)   Trash, refuse and waste generated must be contained and disposed off
property at all times.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.157 PERMANENT RECREATIONAL DWELLINGS.
   PERMANENT RECREATIONAL DWELLINGS, defined as “cabins and other permanent
structures built for recreational use only and not to be used as a primary
dwelling unit. Does not include travel trailers, trailer, recreational vehicles
and mobile homes, unless permitted and connected to an approved septic system,”
are permitted in the GRF-20S Grazing, Recreation and Forestry Zones under the
following conditions:
   (A)   All permanent recreational dwelling units must comply with all zoning
requirements of this subchapter as well as comply with the following:
      (1)   The permanent recreational dwelling must have:
         (a)   Temporary water or be connected to water; and
         (b)   Sewage disposal system as required by §
154.216(B) and (C);
      (2)   Trash, refuse and waste generated must be contained and disposed of
properly at all times.
   (B)   Habitation of the permanent recreational dwelling shall not exceed
nine consecutive months in any calendar year.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.158 VIOLATIONS.
   Any violations of this chapter and the conditions set by this chapter are
subject to §§
154.265 through
154.272.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREA
§ 154.170 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVISORY BOARD. The County Agriculture Protection Area Advisory Board.
   AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION. Production for commercial purposes of crops,
livestock and livestock products. AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION includes the
processing or retail marketing of any crops, livestock and livestock products
when more than 50% of the processed or merchandised products are produced by
the farm operator.
   AGRICULTURE PROTECTION AREA. A geographic area within the unincorporated
part of the county created under the authority of U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 41
and of this chapter, that is granted the specific legal protection contained in
U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 41.
   APPLICABLE LEGISLATIVE BODY.
      (1)   The county legislative body if the land included in or proposed to
be included in an agriculture protection area is within the unincorporated part
of the county; or
      (2)   The legislative body of the city or town if the land included in or
proposed to be included in an agriculture protection area is within the
boundaries of a city or town.
   CONTIGUOUS. Touching along a common side or so close in proximity as to be
separated only by the width of a road, canal, railroad track, easement or
similar right-of-way.
   CROPS, LIVESTOCK and LIVESTOCK PRODUCTS. Includes:
      (1)   Land devoted to the raising of useful plants and animals with a
reasonable expectation of profit, including:
         (a)   Forages and sod crops;
         (b)   Grains and feed crops;
         (c)   Livestock as defined in U.C.A. § 59-2-102(19)(d);
         (d)   Trees and fruits; or
         (e)   Vegetables, nursery, floral and ornamental stock.
      (2)   Land devoted to and meeting the requirements and qualifications for
payments or other compensation under a crop-land retirement program with an
agency of the state or federal government.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The County Planning Commission, a township planning
commission or a planning commission of a city or town.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. A county, city, town, school district, local district
or special service district.
   PROPOSAL SPONSORS. The owners of land in agricultural production who are
sponsoring the proposal for creating an agriculture protection area.
   REGULATION. A law, ordinance or regulation.
   STATE AGENCY. Each department, commission, board, council, agency,
institution, officer, corporation, fund, division, office, committee,
authority, laboratory, library, unit, bureau, panel or other administrative
unit of the state.
   UNINCORPORATED. Not within a city or town.
   ZONING DESIGNATION.
      (1)   Local laws, ordinances or regulations that govern how real property
can and cannot be used in a certain zoning designation.
      (2)   The designation of zoning for land, as indicated on the zoning map.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2024-5-4, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.171 PROPOSAL FOR CREATION OF AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREA.
   (A)   (1)   A proposal to create an agriculture protection area or an
amendment to an existing agriculture protection area within the unincorporated
part of the county may be filed by completing the standard forms created by the
County Planning and Zoning Department and by filing said forms in the Office of
the County Planning and Zoning Department.
      (2)   The written petition shall:
         (a)   Contain a legal description, including acreage, of the land
proposed to be considered as an agriculture protection area;
         (b)   The names of the owners of record of the land proposed to be
included within the agriculture protection area;
         (c)   For each parcel of land, or any portion thereof:
            1.   The tax parcel number or account number identifying each
parcel; and
            2.   The number of acres of each parcel.
         (d)   Addressed, stamped envelopes for each owner of land within 1,000
feet of the land proposed to be included in an agriculture protection area;
         (e)   Contain a notarized declaration signed by the property owner(s);
         (f)   Contain a description of the agricultural pursuits on the
property;
         (g)   Contain any proposed limits on the types of agriculture
production to be allowed within the agriculture protection area;
         (h)   Contain a site plan showing structures, uses and acreages of
agricultural production on the property; and
         (i)   Contain any other information reasonably requested by the County
Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   (1)   To be accepted for processing by the County Planning and Zoning
Department, a proposal under division (A)(1)(a) above shall be signed by a
majority number of all owners of real property and the owners of a majority of
the land area in agricultural production within the proposed agriculture
protection area.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (B), the owners of real property
shall be determined by the records of the County Recorder.
   (C)   The County Planning and Zoning Department shall accept and process
such forms only if they are properly completed and accompanied by the filing
fee. The filing fee is set forth in the adopted county fee schedule.
   (D)   An agriculture protection area may include, within its boundaries,
land used for a roadway, dwelling site, park or other non-agricultural use, if
that land constitutes less than 10% of the total acreage within the agriculture
protection area.
   (E)   Any property or parcel proposed to be included in an agriculture
protection area must be in the A Zone.
   (F)   Parcels that include property that is not eligible under this section
may still be eligible for inclusion in an agriculture protection area, though
the agriculture protection area will not include those parts that are not
eligible.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2024-5-4, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.172 AREA REQUIREMENTS.
   In accordance with U.C.A. § 17-41-301 the minimum number of contiguous acres
that must be included in an agriculture protection area within the
unincorporated part of the county is hereby established as five acres. Creation
of an agriculture protection area shall not impair the ability of land within
the area to obtain the benefits of U.C.A. Title 59, Chapter 2, Part 5, Farmland
Assessment Act. The eligibility of land for the benefits of U.C.A. Title 59,
Chapter 2, Part 5, Farmland Assessment Act, shall be determined exclusively by
the provisions of that Act, notwithstanding the land’s location within an
agriculture protection area.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2024-5-4, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see
§
154.999
§ 154.173 NOTICE AND PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS FOR PLANNING COMMISSION,
ADVISORY BOARD AND COUNTY COMMISSION.
   (A)   The County Planning and Zoning Department shall provide notice of the
proposal for an agriculture protection area within the unincorporated part of
the county by:
      (1)   Posting notice on the Utah Public Notice Website created in U.C.A.
§ 63A-16-601;
      (2)   Mailing written notice to each owner of land within 1,000 feet of
the land; proposed for inclusion within an agriculture protection area; and
      (3)   Posting notice at three public places within or near the proposed
agriculture protection area. The county legislative body hereby authorizes the
County Planning and Zoning Department to designate the location of these three
public places within or near the proposed agriculture protection area.
   (B)   The notice shall contain:
      (1)   A statement that a proposal for the creation of an agriculture
protection area has been filed with the county;
      (2)   A statement that the proposal will be open to public inspection in
the Office of the County Planning and Zoning Department;
      (3)   A statement that any person or entity affected by establishment of
the area may, within 15 days of the date on the notice, file with the County
Planning and Zoning Department written objections to the proposal or a written
request to modify the proposal to exclude land from or add land to the proposed
agriculture protection area;
      (4)   A statement that the county will submit the proposal to the
Planning Commission and Advisory Board for review and recommendations and the
proposed dates; and
      (5)   A statement that the county legislative body will hold a public
hearing on a specified date to discuss and hear public comment on:
         (a)   The proposal to create the agriculture protection area;
         (b)   The recommendations of the Advisory Board and Planning
Commission; and
         (c)   Any requests for modification of the proposal and any objections
to the proposal.
   (C)   Any person wishing to modify the proposal for the creation of the
agriculture protection area shall, within 15 days after the date of the notice,
file a written request for modification of the proposal, which identifies
specifically the land that should be added to or removed from the agriculture
protection area.
   (D)   A person wishing to object to the proposal for the creation of the
agriculture protection area shall, within 15 days after the date of the notice,
file a written objection to the creation of the agriculture protection area
with the County Planning and Zoning Department.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2024-5-4, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.174 REVIEW OF PROPOSAL.
   (A)   After 15 days from the date of the notice, the County Planning and
Zoning Department shall refer the proposal and any objections and proposed
modifications to the proposal to the Planning Commission and Advisory Board for
their review, comments and recommendations.
   (B)   Within 45 days after receipt of the proposal, the Planning Commission
shall submit a report of action to the county legislative body that:
      (1)   Analyzes and evaluates the effect of the creation of the proposed
area on the county’s planning policies and objectives;
      (2)   Analyzes and evaluates the proposal by applying the criteria
contained in §
154.177;
      (3)   Recommends any modifications to the land to be included in the
proposed agricultural protection area;
      (4)   Analyzes and evaluates any objections to the proposal; and
      (5)   Includes a recommendation to the county legislative body either to
accept, accept and modify or reject the proposal.
   (C)   Within 45 days after receipt of the proposal, the Advisory Board shall
submit a report of action to the county legislative body that:
      (1)   Analyzes and evaluates the effect of the creation of the proposed
area on the county’s planning policies and objectives;
      (2)   Recommends any modifications to the land to be included in the
proposed agriculture protection area;
      (3)   Analyzes and evaluates the proposal by applying the criteria
contained in §
154.177;
      (4)   Analyzes and evaluates any objections to the proposal; and
      (5)   Includes a recommendation to the county legislative body either to
accept, accept and modify or reject the proposal.
   (D)   The county legislative body shall consider a failure of the Planning
Commission or Advisory Board to submit a written report within the 45 days
under divisions (B) and (C) above as a recommendation of that body to approve
the proposal as submitted.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2024-5-4, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.175 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   After receipt of the written reports from the Advisory Board and
Planning Commission, or after the 45 days has expired, whichever is earlier,
the County Clerk, in coordination with the County Planning and Zoning
Department, shall:
      (1)   Schedule a public hearing;
      (2)   Provide notice of the public hearing by:
         (a)   Posting notice on the Utah Public Notice Website created in
U.C.A. § 63A-16-601;
         (b)   Posting mailing written notice to each owner of land within
1,000 feet of the land proposed for inclusion within an agriculture protection
area, industrial protection area or critical infrastructure materials
protection area; and
         (c)   Posting notice at three public places within or near the
proposed agriculture protection area; and
      (3)   Ensure that the notice includes:
         (a)   The time, date and place of the public hearing on the proposal;
         (b)   A description of the proposed agriculture protection area;
         (c)   Any proposed modifications to the proposed agriculture
protection area;
         (d)   A summary of the recommendations of the Advisory Board and
Planning Commission; and
         (e)   A statement that interested persons may appear at the public
hearing and speak in favor of or against the proposal, any proposed
modifications to the proposal or the recommendations of the Advisory Board and
Planning Commission.
      (4)   Nothing herein shall preclude the ability of the Planning and
Zoning Department to include all public hearings being placed on the same
notice for convenience in advertising.
   (B)   The county legislative body shall:
      (1)   Convene the public hearing at the time, date and place specified in
the notice; and
      (2)   Take verbal or written testimony from interested persons.
   (C)   Within 120 days of the submission of the proposal, the county
legislative body shall approve, modify and approve or reject the proposal.
Failure to approve the proposal within 120 days shall be deemed a denial by the
county legislative body, unless the county legislative body continues the
proposal to a date certain.
   (D)   The creation of an agriculture protection area is effective at the
county legislative body’s approval of a proposal or modified proposal.
   (E)   In order to give constructive notice of the existence of the
agriculture protection area to all persons who have, may acquire or may seek to
acquire an interest in land in or adjacent to the agriculture protection area,
within ten days of the creation of an agriculture protection area, the County
Planning and Zoning Department shall file an executed document containing a
legal description of the agriculture protection area with:
         (1)   The County Recorder; and
         (2)   The Planning Commission.
   (F)   Within ten days of the recording of the agriculture protection area,
the county legislative body shall: send written notification to the
Commissioner of Agriculture and Food that the agriculture protection area has
been created, and include in said notification the following:
      (1)   The number of landowners owning land within the agriculture
protection area;
      (2)   The total acreage of the area;
      (3)   The date of approval of the area; and
      (4)   The date of recording.
   (G)   Failure by the county to record the notice required under division (E)
above does not invalidate the creation of an agriculture protection area.
   (H)   Land in an agriculture protection area shall be designated on the
county zoning map.
   (I)   The county legislative body may consider the cost of recording notice
under division (E) above and the cost of sending notification under division
(F) above in establishing a fee.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2024-5-4, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.176 EVALUATION CRITERIA.
   In evaluating a proposal and in determining whether or not to create or
recommend the creation of an agriculture protection area, the Advisory Board,
Planning Commission and county legislative body shall apply the following
criteria:
   (A)   Whether or not the land is currently being used for agriculture
production;
   (B)   Whether or not the land is zoned for agriculture use;
   (C)   What the General Plan land use recommendation is for the land;
   (D)   Compatibility of uses of neighboring properties for agricultural
production;
   (E)   Whether or not the land is viable for agricultural production;
   (F)   The extent and nature of existing or proposed farm improvements;
   (G)   Anticipated trends in agricultural and technological conditions; and
   (H)   Any other criteria to be considered under this chapter, or related to
the criteria of this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2024-5-4, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.177 ADDING LAND TO AN AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREA.
   (A)   Any owner may add land to an existing agriculture protection area
within the unincorporated part of the county by:
      (1)   Filing a proposal with the County Planning and Zoning Department;
and
      (2)   Obtaining the approval of the county legislative body for the
addition of the land to the area.
   (B)   The county legislative body and other applicable persons shall comply
with the provisions for creating an agriculture protection area in determining
whether or not to accept the proposal.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2024-5-4, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see
§
154.999
§ 154.178 REMOVING LAND FROM AN AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREA.
   (A)   (1)   Any owner may remove land from an agriculture protection area
within the unincorporated part of the county by filing a petition for removal
of the land from the agriculture protection area with the County Planning and
Zoning Department.
      (2)   The written petition shall be on a form provided by the County
Planning and Zoning Department, which shall:
         (a)   Contain a legal description of the land proposed to be removed
from the agriculture protection area;
         (b)   Contain a notarized declaration signed by the property owner(s);
and
         (c)   Contain any other information reasonably requested by the
Planning and Zoning Department.
   (B)   (1)   The county legislative body hereby designates the County
Planning and Zoning Department as the Department who processes applications to
remove land from an existing agriculture protection area.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Department shall:
         (a)   Grant the petition for removal of land from an agriculture
protection area even if removal of the land would result in an agriculture
protection area of less than the minimum number of acres for the establishment
of an agricultural protection area; and
         (b)   In order to give constructive notice of the removal to all
persons who have, may acquire or may seek to acquire an interest in land in or
adjacent to the agriculture protection area and the land removed from the
agriculture protection area, file a legal description of the revised boundaries
of the agriculture protection area with the County Recorder and the Planning
Commission.
   (C)   The remaining land in the agriculture protection area is still an
agriculture protection area.
   (D)   When a municipality annexes any land that is part of an agriculture
protection area, the county legislative body shall, within 30 days after the
land is annexed, review the feasibility of that land remaining in the
agriculture protection area according to the procedures and requirements of §
154.180. The Planning and Zoning Department, in coordination with the County
Clerk, shall facilitate the county legislative body conducting its review by
noticing any required public meetings, and preparing necessary staff reports to
evaluate the feasibility.
      (1)   If appropriate, the County Planning and Zoning Department shall
remove the annexed land from the agriculture protection area.
      (2)   Appeals of actions of the Planning and Zoning Department applying
this section shall be made to the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2024-5-4, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see
§
154.999
§ 154.179 REVIEW OF AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREAS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the term CALENDAR YEAR means the
period from January 1 to December 31 inclusive.
   (B)   The county legislative body shall perform an initial review of any
agriculture protection area created under the authority of this chapter in the
twentieth calendar year after it is created to determine whether the
agriculture protection area should be continued, modified or terminated.
   (C)   If the County Planning and Zoning Department receives five written
complaints from different aggrieved persons within three calendar years
immediately preceding the twentieth calendar year after an agriculture
protection area or any portion thereof is created or reauthorized, or
alternatively the county legislative body determines that after the initial
review that the agriculture protection area should be modified or terminated,
or within 30 days of land in an agriculture protection area being annexed, then
the County Planning and Zoning Department shall, for that agriculture
protection area:
      (1)   Request the Planning Commission and Advisory Board to submit
recommendations about whether the agriculture protection area should be
continued, modified or terminated;
      (2)   Schedule the county legislative body to, at least 120 days before
the end of the twentieth calendar year, or within 120 days of the applicable
annexation, hold a public hearing to discuss whether the agriculture protection
area should be continued, modified or terminated;
      (3)   Give notice of the hearing using the same procedure required by §
154.173;
      (4)   After the public hearing, the county legislative body shall
continue, modify or terminate the agriculture protection area; and
      (5)   If the county legislative body modifies or terminates the
agriculture protection area, the County Planning and Zoning Department shall
file an executed document containing the legal description of the agriculture
protection area with the County Recorder.
   (D)   If the county legislative body determines after that initial review
that the agricultural protection area should be continued or otherwise fails to
affirmatively continue, modify or terminate the agriculture protection area in
the twentieth calendar year, within 120 days of an applicable annexation, then
the agriculture protection area is considered to be reauthorized for another 20
years. The time required for action is continued provided the county
legislative body continues the matter to a date certain, and the legislative
body takes action on the matter in the subsequent meeting.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2024-5-4, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.180 PROTECTION OF LAND IN AGRICULTURAL PROTECTION AREA.
   (A)   Land in an agriculture protection area shall be protected as provided
in U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 41, Part 4.
   (B)   Local regulations of general applicability, enacted after land is
added to an agricultural protection area, shall apply to land in an agriculture
protection area, and shall be presumed to bear a direct relationship to public
health or safety, and to not unreasonably restrict farm structures or farm
practices. If a property owner seeks to be exempt from local regulations of
general applicability, the property owner shall bear the burden of proving
beyond a reasonable doubt that the regulation does not bear a direct
relationship to public health or safety, and that it unreasonably restricts
farm structures or farm practices, using the statement outlined in division (E)
below.
   (C)   Local regulations, including zoning regulations, that only effect the
A Zone or land in agriculture protection areas, which are enacted after land is
added to an agricultural protection area, are presumed to be applicable to land
in agriculture protection areas. If a property owner seeks to be exempt from
such local land use regulations, including zoning regulations, the property
owner shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that
they are exempt from the regulation under U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 41, Part 4,
using the statement outlined in division (E) below.
   (D)   Land within an agriculture protection area that is changed from A-1 to
another zoning designation shall be presumed to remain subject to the zoning
designation in effect when the land was added to an agriculture protection
area. The property owner shall follow the statement outlined in division (E)
below to let the land use authority know of the exemption, and then the land
use authority shall bear the burden of proving by the preponderance of the
evidence that the land is subject to the new zoning designation at issue. If
the A Zone is dissolved or called by another name, the land shall be considered
part of the zoning designation which is functionally the closest to the A Zone,
and the property owner may seek exemption from individual local regulations,
including zoning regulations, using the procedure outlined in division (E)
below.
   (E)   If a property owner desires to have a local law, ordinance or
regulation, including a zoning regulation or zoning designation, not apply to
land in the agricultural protection area because its applicability is limited
by U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 41, Part 4, the property owner shall submit a
statement with any applicable land use application indicating:
      (1)   What regulation is not applicable to the land;
      (2)   When the regulation was enacted;
      (3)   What alternative regulation is applicable, if any;
      (4)   When the land was added to an agriculture protection area, and a
statement that the land is still in an agriculture protection area;
      (5)   How the enactment or application of the land use regulation to the
land is prohibited by U.C.A. Title 17, Chapter 41, Part 4; and
      (6)   Any other information reasonably requested by the Planning and
Zoning Department or the legislative body.
   (F)   The applicability of the local land use regulations, laws, ordinances
or regulations shall be determined by the land use authority as part of the
approval or denial of the associated land use application. Any appeals shall be
made using the processes for an appeal of the associated land use decision.
Determinations shall be made on an individual land use application basis, and
determinations shall not be applicable to other land use applications.
   (G)   Any complaints of violations of the land use and development code for
property in an agriculture protection area may be required by the Planning and
Zoning Department to demonstrate that the alleged violation would not be
afforded protection due to the property’s status in an agriculture protection
area in order to be considered for an enforcement action. Nevertheless, the
Planning and Zoning Department retains sole discretion on whether or not to
bring an enforcement action by the Planning and Zoning Department.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024; Ord. 2024-5-4, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see
§
154.999
WILDLAND FIRE PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 154.195 OBJECTIVE.
   These provisions are intended to establish minimum regulations consistent
with nationally recognized good practice in areas adjacent to structures to
create a defensible space for the safeguarding of life and property associated
with wildland-urban fire interface in GRF-5, GRF-20R and GRF-20S Zones.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.196 FUEL MODIFICATION.
   (A)   Fuel modification shall be provided within a distance from buildings
or structures as specified in §
154.197. Distances specified in §
154.197 shall be measured along the grade from the perimeter or projection of
the building or structure as shown in §
154.197.
   (B)   Trees and/or small clumps of trees/brush are allowed within the
defensible space, provided the horizontal distance between crowns of adjacent
trees/brush and structures, overhead electrical facilities or unmodified fuel
is greater than ten feet. Deadwood and litter shall be regularly removed from
trees.
   (C)   Where ornamental vegetative fuels or cultivated ground cover, such as
green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants, are used as ground cover, they
are allowed to be within the designated defensible space, provided they do not
form a means of transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.197 REQUIRED DEFENSIBLE SPACE.
   The required defensible space is at least 30 feet from the structure.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.198 SPARK ARRESTERS.
   Chimneys serving fireplaces, barbeques, incinerators or decorative heating
appliances in which solid or liquid fuel is used shall be provided with a spark
arrestor. Spark arresters shall be constructed of woven or welded wire
screening of 12 USA standard gage wire having openings not exceeding one-half
inch.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.199 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS INSTALLATIONS.
   The storage of LP gas and the installation and maintenance of pertinent
equipment shall be located in accordance with the International Fire Code.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.200 STORAGE OF FIREWOOD AND COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL.
   Firewood and combustible material shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from
structures and separated from the crown of trees by a minimum horizontal
distance of 15 feet.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
§ 154.215 EFFECT OF CHAPTER.
   The regulations set forth in this subchapter qualify or supplement, as the
case may be, the zone regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.216 REQUIRED UTILITIES.
   The following are required in zones A, RA, GRF-20R, C and I and are not
required in the GRF-20S Zone:
   (A)   Power: All development for human habitation requires a commercial or
alternative source of power;
   (B)   Water:
      (1)   All development for human habitation requires documentation
certifying available culinary water;
      (2)   Shall obtain approval on public water systems from the State
Department of Environmental Quality, Central Utah District represented by a
letter; and
      (3)   All development within 300 feet measured from the property line of
existing public culinary water lines shall be required to request for hookup.
If approval is granted from any conservation district, special service district
or municipal culinary water systems within 300 feet, all development of lines
and all appropriate fees determined by the culinary water system shall be paid.
If denied hookup, appropriate documentation of the request and denial is
required before a building permit shall be issued.
   (C)   Wastewater:
      (1)   All development for human habitation requires an approval from the
Board of Health before any permit shall be issued;
      (2)   Shall obtain approval from the Central Utah Public Health
Department represented by a letter; and
      (3)   All development within 300 feet measured from the property line of
existing public wastewater lines shall be required to request for hookup. If
approval is granted from any wastewater systems within 300 feet, all
development of lines and all appropriate fees determined by the wastewater
system shall be paid. If denied hookup, appropriate documentation of the
request and denial is required before a building permit shall be issued.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c940d9f0c5827b7964edd79826e4b3f9daf59201/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1382.jpg]
Figure 1: Requirements for water and septic protection zones within each zone.
   (D)   Water and septic protection zone requirements (see Figure 1 above)
must be met in order to develop a buildable lot in the A Zone;
   (E)   Central Utah Public Health must be consulted to ensure minimum
protection zone standards are met; and
   (F)   All protection zones shall be within the required setbacks for each
zone.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.217 WATER IN SUFFICIENT QUANTITY.
   Required for each dwelling unit is water in sufficient quantity according to
the following requirements.
   (A)   If connected to a public or private water company that provides
culinary water, a letter from the water company stating it will provide the
necessary culinary water connection for the dwelling unit is required to obtain
a building permit.
   (B)   If culinary water is to be provided from a well, one acre foot
(.0037cfs) of water is required for each dwelling unit. This water right must
be in the name of the building permit applicant and assigned by the State
Division of Water Rights to the building lot.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.218 PARKING.
   Off-street parking where required shall meet the following criteria:
   (A)   A garage, carport or parking area for the off-street parking of at
least two cars per dwelling unit;
   (B)   Location of off-street parking spaces for all uses shall not be
located within the required perimeter setback;
   (C)   Screening and landscaping off-street parking areas for five or more
vehicles and off-street loading areas shall be effectively screened, and shall
not be closer than seven feet from a traveled right-of-way;
   (D)   All off-street parking shall be graded and drained so as not to
negatively affect surrounding uses; and
   (E)   Surfacing of parking areas shall be as required for the adjacent
street.
Use Parking Standards
Use                                   Parking Standards
                                      Probable estimates of need determined by
All other land uses                   the Board of County Commissioners or by
                                      its designated representative
Churches and auditoriums              One space per three seats
                                      One space per every two beds, plus five
Hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums additional spaces for each 25 beds or
or convalescent homes                 fraction thereof over a minimum of 25
                                      beds
Hotels, motels, boarding and rooming  One space per unit
houses
Manufacturing, assembly, packing,     One space for every 350 feet of gross
preparation, research facilities or   floor area
similar uses
Offices                               One space per 200 square feet of
                                      building
                                      One space for every 5 people up to the
Recreational and amusement uses       maximum number of people to be
                                      accommodated by the facility
Restaurants                           One space per 100 square feet of
                                      building
Retail sales                          One space per 200 square feet of
                                      building
                                      - Schools serving ages 15 and below
                                      require two spaces per classroom
Schools                               - Schools serving ages 16 and above
                                      require ten spaces per classroom
                                      - Auditoriums require one space per
                                      three seats
                                      One space per 200 square feet of
Warehouses and wholesale              building office space, plus one space
                                      per 1,000 square feet of additional
                                      gross floor area
 
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.219 COMMERCIAL TRUCK PARKING.
   Commercial trucks (any combination of vehicles over 26,000 pounds GVWR)
shall not be allowed to park or idle in any public road or right away. Idling
time shall be limited for commercial trucks and subsequent trailers to no
longer than 30 minutes.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.220 MOBILE HOMES.
   (A)   Mobile homes and recreational vehicles intended for long term
residence must be located in approved mobile home parks or recreational vehicle
parks.
   (B)   Temporary location of mobile homes and recreational vehicles will be
permitted outside mobile home parks or recreational vehicle parks following the
property owner obtaining a temporary use permit as required by §§
154.110 through
154.116.
   (C)   Mobile homes that are built prior to June 15, 1976: A label certifying
compliance with the Standard for Mobile Homes, NFPA 501, ANSI 119.1, in effect
at the time of manufacture, is required.
   (D)   For the purpose of these provisions, a mobile home shall be considered
a manufactured home. Mobile homes that do not meet these requirements are not
allowed.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.221 MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   All manufactured homes must be attached to a permanent foundation in
accordance with plans providing for vertical loads, uplift and lateral forces
and frost protection in compliance with the International Building Code. All
appendages, including carports, garages, storage buildings, additions or
alterations, must be built in compliance with the International Building Code.
   (B)   A manufactured home may be located in all areas in which a single-
family residence is permitted
by the title, provided the manufactured home complies with all zoning, building
code and subdivision requirements, including restrictive covenants, applicable
to single-family residence within that zone.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.222 ACCESSORY AND INTERNAL DWELLING UNITS OR STRUCTURES.
   Accessory dwelling units and internal accessory dwelling units shall be
allowed as a conditional use following procedures outlined in §§
154.130 through
154.141 and under the following additional conditions:
   (A)   Only one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per lot or parcel and
limited to a single-family occupancy at a time;
   (B)   No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot
prior to the time of construction of the principal structure to which it is
accessory, unless the existing structure is to become an accessory dwelling to
a new primary dwelling, and it meets the remaining requirements;
   (C)   All required setbacks are maintained;
   (D)   The accessory dwelling unit shall be within 75 feet of the primary
dwelling;
   (E)   Site plan for the accessory unit must be submitted with the
application;
   (F)   The primary or accessory unit must be owner occupied, no roomers or
boarders shall be permitted in either the primary unit or the accessory unit
without having first obtained a business license from the county and not more
than three unrelated persons shall live in the dwelling unit at a time;
   (G)   The accessory dwelling unit may not exceed 1,000 square feet and shall
be similar architectural
style as the primary dwelling unit;
   (H)   Access to accessory dwelling unit is restricted to the existing
driveway;
   (I)   Permitted source of water and permitted wastewater disposal following
requirements of §
154.216. If a septic system and/or water are required, the applicant cannot
claim the agriculture exemption;
   (J)   Sale of the accessory unit separate from the primary dwelling is
prohibited;
   (K)   Accessory dwelling units are required to have separate electrical and
gas utility meters as well as addresses compared to the main dwelling on the
property;
   (L)   RV campers as defined in §
154.003 are not considered an accessory dwelling unit; and
   (M)   If a conditional use permit is approved, it shall be recorded as
required in §
154.140. A building permit issued by the county is required for any accessory
dwelling units and the property shall be neatly maintained and shall meet all
current codes regarding property maintenance and public health standards.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.223 FARM LABOR DWELLINGS.
   All farm labor dwellings shall be allowed if able to meet the following
standards: Farm labor dwelling units shall be located on a parcel being farmed
and occupied by the owner, operator or employee of the farming operation
provided that the following apply.
   (A)   The dwellings are not rented to other person(s) than an operator,
manager or employee of the farming operation or held out for lease or sale.
   (B)   The dwellings are located within the required setback of the
applicable zone.
   (C)   The arrangement of the dwellings, sanitary facilities and utilities
conforms with all of the requirements of §
154.216, the Building Inspection Department and this chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.224 SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for the use of
privately owned residential dwellings as short-term rentals that ensure basic
health and safety to renters and neighbors and minimize the negative secondary
effects of such use on surrounding residential neighborhoods and/or
governmental services.
   (A)   Short-term rental business license - required. The owner or his or her
authorized agent is required to obtain a short-term rental business license
from the county, pursuant to the provisions of this section and §§
114.15 through
114.18, respectively, before renting any privately owned residential dwelling
to any transient for a period less than a monthly basis. A short-term rental
business license shall be required to be renewed yearly and due before January
1 each year in order to remain valid.
   (B)   Application. An application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The location of the short-term rental;
      (2)   The number of rooms within the dwelling;
      (3)   The number of persons the short-term rental will accommodate;
      (4)   The name of a property manager;
      (5)   The name, address and telephone number of a local responsible party
who is available by telephone 24 hours per day;
      (6)   A sales tax collection and accounting number;
      (7)   The application shall include a statement by the applicant
affirming that the applicant is currently in compliance with all legal
requirements and has paid all applicable taxes, fees and other charges; and
      (8)   Completed application from the county for a short-term business
license, signed by the owner or his or her authorized agent. All fees
associated with short-term business licenses are paid.
   (C)   Short-term rental standards. Short-term rentals are subject to the
following standards:
      (1)   One operable fire extinguisher;
      (2)   One operable smoke detector in each bedroom, in the major living
areas and on each floor (the major living area can count for the detector on
that floor);
      (3)   An operable carbon monoxide detector on each floor installed per
the manufacturer’s specifications, when gas appliances are utilized in the
structure;
      (4)   A posted map showing property boundaries, parking spaces, emergency
exits and local emergency contact numbers; and
      (5)   Parking associated with a short-term rental shall be provided on
the subject property. Street parking immediately in front of the short-term
rental property may be considered on the subject property.
   (D)   Additional requirements.
      (1)   General practice. The operator shall ensure that the short-term
rental is used in a manner that complies with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject short-term
rental unit and business regulations generally.
      (2)   Noises and nuisances. Occupants of the short-term rental shall
comply with the standards and regulations of the county code related to noises
and nuisances.
      (3)   Renter notification. The operator shall provide the occupant(s) of
the short-term rental with the following information prior to occupancy of the
rental and shall post such information in a prominent location within the
rental unit:
         (a)   Operator name and local emergency contact information;
         (b)   Trash pick-up day and applicable rules and regulations
pertaining to leaving or storing trash on the exterior of the property; and
         (c)   Notification that the occupant and/or owner may be cited or
fined by the county if in violation with this chapter.
      (4)   Operator availability. While a short-term rental unit is rented,
the operator shall be available within an hour, in person or electronically,
for the purpose of responding to complaints regarding the condition, operation
or conduct of occupants of the short-term rental or their guests.
      (5)   Operator responsibility for guest’s conduct. The operator and/or
the designated local contact person shall ensure that the occupants and/or
guests of the short-term rental do not create unreasonable noise or
disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct or violate any applicable law, rule
or regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject short-term
rental.
      (6)   Operator response to complaint. The operator and/or the designated
local contact person shall, upon notification that any occupant and/or guest of
the short-term rental has created unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged
in disorderly conduct or committed violations of any applicable law, rule or
regulation pertaining to the use and occupancy of the subject short-term unit,
promptly respond to, immediately halt or prevent a recurrence of such conduct
by the occupant(s) and/or guest(s). Failure of the owner and/or operator to
respond to calls or complaints within an hour regarding the condition,
operation or conduct of occupants and/or guests of the short-term rental, the
owner and/or operator may be subject to all administrative, legal and equitable
remedies available to the county.
      (7)   Trash and refuse. Trash and refuse shall not be left stored within
public view, except in proper containers for the purpose of collection by the
county’s authorized waste hauler on scheduled trash collection days.
      (8)   License posted. The operator shall post a copy of the short-term
rental business license in a conspicuous place within the short-term rental.
   (E)   Violations/enforcement. Any violation of this chapter shall be
referred to §§
154.265 through
154.272.
   (F)   Appeals. Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision in the
enforcement and/or administration of this section shall have the right to
appeal such decision to the Board of Adjustments, if a written request for an
appeal is filed with the Zoning Administrator within 30 days of verification
that the aggrieved person or entity has been made aware of the decision.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.225 ALL EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   The banks of all gravel, sand, clay and topsoil pits and similar
excavations located within 500 feet from any street or dwelling shall be
smoothed and reconditioned so as not to be hazardous or unsightly at the
termination of operation or use.
   (B)   Before a permit for gravel, sand, clay or topsoil pit or similar
excavation shall be issued, a bond or other assurance shall be furnished to the
county in the amount set in the fee schedule for each acre from which such
material is taken as a guarantee that the reconditioning will be done in a
manner and to such an extent that the pit will not depreciate the surrounding
property for its primary use or impair the beauty of the landscape.
   (C)   Upon the completion of the reconditioning, as approved by the Board of
County Commissioners, the bond or other assurance shall be returned to the
owner; provided that in the event the reconditioning has not been completed
within one year from the date of abandonment of said pit, the Board of County
Commissioners may declare the bond or other assurance forfeited and may do the
required reconditioning with proceeds from the sale of said bonds or
assurances.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
GROUP HOMES
§ 154.240 YOUTH HOME DEFINED.
   YOUTH HOME is defined as any residence, dwelling or other structure utilized
for the domicile, residence or sleeping accommodation of four or more children
of the age of 18 years or less for more than one week where such children are
not related within three degrees of consanguinity to the adult persons
occupying the same residence or premises.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.241 AUTHORIZATION.
   Youth homes will be permitted only on granting of a conditional use permit
after application to the Planning Commission and approval of the Board of
Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners, prior to acting on the application,
will receive a recommendation from the Planning Commission and entertain public
comment at a duly noticed public hearing.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.242 APPLICATION - CONTENTS.
   The application must contain the following information, and no application
shall be heard which does not contain this information:
   (A)   Name and address of applicant;
   (B)   Statement of ownership of the subject property executed by the owner
or his or her agent under penalty of perjury;
   (C)   Description of the property, including legal description and address,
and common means of identification;
   (D)   Map of the boundaries of the parcel and each separate lot or parcel
within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries thereof; together with a list of the
names and addresses of the last known owners or public record of each parcel;
   (E)   A statement indicating the precise manner of compliance with each of
the applicable provisions of this chapter, together with any other information
pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a use permit,
prescribed in this chapter;
   (F)   A statement from the appropriate regulatory agency concerning
availability of public utilities, including culinary and irrigation water,
power, sewer disposal and refuse disposal;
   (G)   A statement from the county school district indicating the
availability of educational instruction and the impact of the location of the
proposed facility at the proposed location or, in the alternative, that
education will be handled privately and designating the number of employees to
be involved in education and the mandatory credentials required of such
employees;
   (H)   A detailed written description of the anticipated ages and total
number of occupants of the facility together with a diagram of the facility
including all separate rooms and the intended use of each room;
   (I)   A detailed description of number of intended staff and job
descriptions for such staff; and
   (J)   A statement demonstrating the capability of the applicant, through
insurance bonds, financial reserves or immediately available line of credit to
ensure timely restitution to any member of the public suffering damage as a
result of intentional or negligent conduct by members of the staff or residents
of the facility.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.243 APPLICATION - FEE.
   The application must be accompanied by a receipt showing that the
application fee stated in the fee schedule has been paid; provided that up to
two-thirds of such fee may be returned upon demonstration that compliance with
state licensing has negated the necessity of more thorough screening of the
application and provided further that the fee for foster care homes duly
licensed by the state, and authorizing four or less clients at a time, the fee
shall be in an amount determined by the Board of County Commissioners.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.244 APPLICATION - PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW - RECOMMENDATION.
   The Planning Commission will review the application and, if deemed
appropriate, request comment from potentially impacted public and private
agencies and parties. The Planning Commission will, within 60 days of receipt
of the application, submit a recommendation with appropriate conditions as part
of the conditional use process to the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.245 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing within 45 days
of receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Notice of the time, place and purpose of such public hearing shall be
given as follows: At least 14 days prior to the date set for the hearing, and
not more than 45 days prior to that date, the County Clerk shall see that a
notice is mailed to each property owner identified on the list accompanying the
application as required by §
154.242(D). The notice shall give the date, time and place of the hearing; the
name of the applicant; the requested use; the identification of the property;
and such other information as may be prescribed by the Board of Commissioners
in any individual case. The Clerk shall also cause such notice to be mailed to
all governmental entities providing services to the subject property and all
municipalities with boundaries located within five miles of the proposed
development and shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general local
circulation twice within the above-described notice period.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.246 USE PERMIT.
   The Board of Commissioners may grant the use permit; provided that it is
established that the proposed use is in accordance with the provisions of the
General Plan, this chapter and that the following qualifications have been met.
   (A)   The location of the proposed use is compatible with other land uses in
the general neighborhood area and does not place an undue burden on existing
transportation, utilities and service facilities in the vicinity.
   (B)   The site is of sufficient size to accommodate the proposed use
together with all yards, open spaces, walls and fences, parking and loading
facilities, landscaping and such other provisions required by this chapter.
   (C)   The site will be served by streets of sufficient capacity to carry the
traffic generated by the proposed use.
   (D)   The proposed use, if it complies with all conditions on which approval
is made contingent, will not adversely affect other property in the vicinity or
the general welfare of the county.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.247 CONDITIONS.
   In approving any application for a use permit, the Board of Commissioners
may require specific standards of site development and may make approval
contingent on the acceptance and observance by the applicant of specified
conditions relating to, but not limited to, the following considerations:
   (A)   Conformity to plans and drawings submitted with the application;
   (B)   The provision of open spaces, buffer strips, screen walls, fences,
hedges and landscaping;
   (C)   The volume of traffic generated, vehicular movements within the site
and points of vehicular ingress and egress;
   (D)   Performance characteristics related to the emission of noise,
vibration and other potentially dangerous or objectionable elements;
   (E)   Limits on time of day for the conduct of specified activities; and
   (F)   Guarantees compliance with the terms of the approval.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.248 CONTINUATION OF USE.
   Approved conditional use permits will be reviewed on a yearly basis at which
time the user, in addition to delivering a business license fee, will supply a
written confirmation that all conditions required by the initial approval of
the use continue to be satisfied and honored and will itemize in writing the
date, time and status of persons, e.g., staff or resident, who have engaged in
any criminal misconduct or in the damaging or destruction of private property
during the previous year and will confirm that restitution has been made to all
victims of such occurrences. In the event that a court has not made a
determination as to the amount of restitution owed, the Board will entertain
evidence in that regard and order immediate payment of restitution as the Board
determines reasonable.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.249 VIOLATIONS.
   On violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other
applicable ordinances by a holder of a use permit, or on failure of the holder
to comply with the conditions of a use permit granted on conditions, the use
permit shall be suspended unless the permit holder, at a hearing held within 15
days, satisfies the Board of Commissioners that either the violation has been
discontinued or the conditions met; otherwise, the permit will be revoked.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.250 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS.
   (A)   A residential facility for elderly persons may not operate as a
business.
   (B)   A residential facility for elderly persons shall:
      (1)   Be owned by one of the residents or by an immediate family member
of one of the residents or be a facility for which the title has been placed in
trust for a resident;
      (2)   Be consistent with existing zoning of the desired location; and
      (3)   Be occupied on a 24-hour-per-day basis by eight or fewer elderly
persons in a family-type arrangement.
   (C)   A residential facility for elderly persons may not be considered a
business because a fee is charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of
operation and maintenance of the facility.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.251 PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   A residential facility for elderly persons shall be allowed as a
conditional use following procedures outlined in §§
154.130 through
154.141 under the following conditions:
      (1)   The facility meet all applicable building, safety, zoning and
health ordinances applicable to similar dwellings;
      (2)   Provide for adequate off-street parking;
      (3)   The facility is capable of use as a residential facility for
elderly persons without structural or landscaping alterations that would change
the structure’s residential character;
      (4)   Residential facilities for elderly persons can be dispersed
throughout the county;
      (5)   No person being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse is placed in a
residential facility for elderly persons; and
      (6)   Placement in a residential facility for elderly persons is on a
strictly voluntary basis and not a part of, or in lieu of, confinement,
rehabilitation or treatment in a correctional facility.
   (B)   Decisions regarding the application for a conditional use permit by a
residential facility for elderly persons must be based on legitimate land use
criteria and may not be based on the age of the facility’s residents.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.252 TERMINATION OF PERMIT.
   The use granted and permitted by §§
154.240 through
154.254 is nontransferable and terminates if the structure is devoted to a use
other than a residential facility for elderly persons or if the structure fails
to comply with the ordinances adopted under this subchapter or if the structure
fails to comply with applicable health, safety and building codes.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.253 DEFINITIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY.
   (A)   For the purposes of this subchapter, DISABILITY is defined in U.C.A. §
17-27a-103(13)(a)(b).
   (B)   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY means a residence:
      (1)   In which more than one person with a disability resides; and
      (2)   Is licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under
the current Utah Code Annotated or is licensed or certified by the Department
of Health.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.254 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Residential facilities for persons with a disability may be dispersed
throughout the county.
   (B)   A residential facility for persons with a disability is a permitted
use in all zones and only requires that the applicant verify compliance with
the building, safety, zoning and health regulations that are required in
obtaining a building permit applicable to similar structures.
   (C)   The responsibility to license programs or entities that operate
facilities for persons with a disability, as well as to require and monitor the
provision of adequate services to persons residing in those facilities, shall
rest with:
      (1)   Programs or entities licensed or certified by the Department of
Human Services as provided in U.C.A. § 62A-2-109 and Title 62A, Chapter 5; and
      (2)   Programs or entities licensed or certified by the Department of
Health under U.C.A. Title 26, Chapter 21, Health Care Facility Licensing and
Inspection Act.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.265 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct a building in
the unincorporated territory of the county shall first apply for a permit to
the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat
showing the size and location of the existing buildings and buildings to be
erected. The plat shall also show the zone in which the lot or parcel of land
is located.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.266 POWERS AND DUTIES OF AN ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator and other county staff shall enforce all the
provisions of this chapter, entering actions in the courts when necessary, and
their failure to do so shall not legalize any violation of such provisions.
   (B)   Upon appeal to the Board of Adjustment of any matter on which said
Board is required to pass, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit all papers,
records and other pertinent data pertaining to the appeal to said Board.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall also refer matters to the Health
Department, Board of County Commissioners and other agencies as required by
this chapter when applicable.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.267 CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.
   Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by the county, in law or in
equity to prevent any violation of this chapter; to prevent unlawful
construction; to recover damages; to restrain, correct or decrease a violation;
and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.268 STAY ORDER.
   In order to maintain the status quo pending the appeal of any decision, the
county may issue a stop-work order mandating that all development activities
cease in accordance with the terms of the order. Said order may be appealed to
the Board of County Commissioners within five days of the receipt by any
aggrieved person.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.269 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or
structure located on a lot subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, nor shall the county have any obligation to issue certificates of
occupancy or extend utility service to any parcel created in violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.270 RECONSIDERATION/REVOCATION OF APPROVAL, PERMITS AND LICENSES.
   (A)   An approved development application, permit or license may be
reconsidered and revoked by the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission
or the Board of County Commissioners upon recommendation of the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with the procedures set forth in if it is
determined that the application, decision, permit or license was based on
materially inaccurate or incomplete information.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall inform the Planning Commission and
Board of County Commissioners when an application, permit or license has been
revoked.
      (1)   Required findings. The approving body may revoke the development
approval, permit or license upon making one or more of the following findings:
         (a)   That the development permit was issued on the basis of erroneous
or misleading information or misrepresentation provided by the applicant; and
         (b)   That the terms or conditions of approval of the permit relating
to establishment or operation of the use, building or structure have been
violated or that other laws or regulations of the county, state, federal or
regional agencies applicable to the development have been violated.
      (2)   Decision and notice. Within ten days of the decision, the approving
body shall notify the holder of the permit or license of the decision, and any
other person who has filed a written request for such notice.
      (3)   Effect. A decision to revoke a development permit or license shall
become final at the determination of the Zoning Administrator up to five days
after the date notice of the decision was given. After the effective date, all
activities pursuant to such permit shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.271 VIOLATION - NOTICE TO CORRECT.
   Whenever the Zoning Administrator shall observe any apparent violation or
infraction of this chapter, he or she shall inform and notice the property
owner on whose land the apparent violation occurs, setting forth the nature of
the alleged violation, together with a statement of what must be done to
correct said alleged violation and a statement of the time in which said
alleged violation must be corrected. Failure to notify, however, shall not be
deemed approval of any violation.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.272 APPEAL.
   (A)   No person may challenge, in District Court, a county’s land use
decisions made under this chapter or under the regulation made under authority
of this chapter until that person has gone through the administrative remedies
as outlined in this subchapter.
   (B)   Any person adversely affected by any decision made in the exercise of
the provisions of this subchapter may file a petition for review of the
decision with the District Court within 30 days after the local decision is
rendered.
   (C)   The courts shall:
      (1)   Presume that land use decisions and regulations are valid; and
      (2)   Determine only whether or not the decision is arbitrary, capricious
or illegal.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT
§ 154.285 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the internal accessory dwelling unit:
   (A)   Allow opportunities for property owners to provide social or personal
support for family members where independent living is desirable;
   (B)   Provide for affordable housing opportunities;
   (C)   Make housing units available to moderate-income people who might
otherwise have difficulty finding housing in the county;
   (D)   Provide opportunities for additional income to off-set rising housing
costs;
   (E)   Preserve the character of residential zones by providing standards
governing development of internal accessory dwelling units; and
   (F)   Ensure that internal accessory dwelling units are properly regulated
by requiring property owners to obtain a conditional use permit and a building
permit for an internal accessory dwelling unit prior to renting the IADU.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.286 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (IADU). A unit created:
      (1)   Within a primary dwelling;
      (2)   Within the footprint of the primary dwelling at the time the IADU
is created; and
      (3)   For the purpose of offering a long-term rental of 30 consecutive
days or longer.
   OWNER OCCUPANCY. A property where the property owner, as reflected in title
records, makes his or her legal residence at the site.
   PRIMARY DWELLING. A single-family dwelling that is occupied as the primary
residence of the owner of record.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.287 ALLOWED ZONES.
   (A)   IADU incorporated within a single-family residence shall be a
permitted use on residential lots in residential zones that require 21,780
square foot (one-half acre) minimum lot size or greater.
   (B)   IADU shall not be permitted in Commercial, Industrial or GRF20S Zones.
   (C)   In no case shall an IADU be permitted in a detached dwelling that is
accessory to the primary dwelling.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.288 NUMBER OF RESIDENCE.
   IADU shall not be occupied by more than four persons.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.289 SETBACKS.
   Setbacks on all IADUs shall be consistent with setbacks for a single-family
dwelling in each zone.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.290 PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the required parking for the existing home, the property
owner must demonstrate that one on-site parking space is available for an IADU.
In cases where garage conversions are done to create an IADU, a replacement on-
site parking space is required for the primary dwelling in a number equal to
the parking spaces eliminated by the IADU.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.291 OWNER OCCUPANCY.
   The primary dwelling or the IADU must have owner occupancy. An application
for an IADU shall include evidence of owner occupancy. Only one IADU is allowed
per lot.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.292 IADU DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   An approved building permit is required for all IADUs before an IADU
is constructed, and all other applicable provisions of this chapter and the
county code must be met before an IADU can be rented.
   (B)   The design and size of an IADU shall conform to all applicable
building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical and health codes, including
applicable water requirements.
   (C)   Conversions of an existing space to an IADU will require compliance
with safety requirements per the building code, including, but not limited to,
egress windows with window wells, if needed; sufficient HVAC and climate
control for the IADU; hard-wired smoke detectors in each bedroom and hallway;
and a working fire extinguisher located in a central location.
   (D)   The owner shall provide a separate address marking for emergency
services and mailing services.
   (E)   Single-family residences with an IADU shall retain the same appearance
as a single-family residence.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.293 AFFIDAVIT AND NOTICE OF INTERNAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT.
   Applicants for IADU shall provide an affidavit stating that the owner of the
property will live in either the primary or IADU as his or her permanent
residence. Upon approval of the IADU by the Building and Zoning Official, a
notice of IADU, including the affidavit, shall be recorded against the property
to provide notice to a future owner of the owner occupancy requirement for the
IADU. Upon sale of the property, the new owner shall be required to sign and
record a new affidavit and secure reauthorization of the IADU by the Building
and Zoning Official.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
§ 154.294 VARIANCES.
   The Zoning Administrator may grant variances to the standard of this chapter
but may not grant a variance from building code requirements, owner occupancy
provisions, lot square footage requirements or the number of units allowed per
lot.
(Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATIONS (LOCATED IN I-A ZONES)
§ 154.305 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (AFO). A lot or facility where the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   Animals have been, are or will be stabled or confined and fed or
maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period; and
      (2)   Crops, vegetation, forage growth or post-harvest residues are not
sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility.
   COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE.
      (1)   Means a building:
         (a)   Used as a part of a business that manufactures goods, delivers
services or sells goods or services;
         (b)   Customarily and regularly used by the general public during the
entire calendar year; and
         (c)   Connected to electric or water systems.
      (2)   A COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE does not include an agriculture operation.
   COMPREHENSIVE NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLAN (CNMP). The objective of a CNMP is to
provide AFO owners/operators with a plan to manage manure and organic by-
products by combining conservation practices and management activities into a
conservation system that, when implemented, will control soil erosion.
   EDUCATION INSTITUTION. A building in which any part is used:
      (1)   For more than three hours each weekday during a school year as a
public or private:
         (a)   Elementary school;
         (b)   Secondary school; or
         (c)   Kindergarten.
      (2)   A state institution of higher education as defined in U.C.A. § 53B-
3-102; or
      (3)   A private institution of higher education in the state accredited
by a regional or national accrediting agency recognized by the U.S. Department
of Education.
   EXISTING DWELLING. A single- or multi-family dwelling that was previously
constructed or under construction prior to the submission of an application for
a CAFO.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. The same as that term is defined in U.C.A. § 26-21-2.
   LARGE CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (CAFO). An animal feeding
operation that stables or confines as many as or more than the numbers of
animals specified in any of the following categories:
      (1)   Seven hundred mature dairy cows, whether milked or dry;
      (2)   One thousand veal calves;
      (3)   One thousand cattle, other than mature dairy cows or veal calves,
with “cattle” including heifers, steers, bulls and cow calf pairs;
      (4)   Two thousand five hundred swine, each weighing 55 pounds or more;
      (5)   Ten thousand swine, each weighing less than 55 pounds;
      (6)   Five hundred horses;
      (7)   Ten thousand sheep or lambs;
      (8)   Fifty-five thousand turkeys;
      (9)   Thirty thousand laying hens or broilers, if the animal feeding
operation uses a liquid manure handling system;
      (10)   One hundred twenty-five thousand chickens, other than laying hens,
if the animal feeding operation uses other than a liquid manure handling
system;
      (11)   Eighty-two thousand laying hens, if the animal feeding operation
uses other than a liquid manure handling system;
      (12)   Thirty thousand ducks, if the animal feeding operation uses other
than a liquid manure handling system; or
      (13)   Five thousand ducks, if the animal feeding operation uses a liquid
manure handling system.
   MANURE. Includes manure, bedding, compost, a raw material or other material
commingled with manure or set aside for disposal.
   PUBLIC AREA. Land that:
      (1)   Is owned by the federal government, the state or a political
subdivision with facilities that attract the public to congregate and remain in
the area for significant periods of time;
      (2)   (a)   Is part of a public park, preserve or recreation area that is
owned or managed by the federal government, the state, a political subdivision
or a non-governmental entity; and
         (b)    Has a cultural, archaeological, scientific or historic
significance or contains a rare or valuable ecological system, including a site
recognized as a national historic landmark or site; or
      (3)   Is a cemetery.
   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A building and grounds used at least monthly for
religious services or ceremonies.
(Ord. 2022, passed - -)
§ 154.306 COMPREHENSIVE NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   A CNMP is a conservation plan for any AFO or CAFO which:
   (A)   Must include the following:
      (1)   The production area, including the animal confinement, feed and
other raw materials storage areas, animal mortality facilities and the manure
handling containment or storage areas;
      (2)   The land treatment area, including any land under control of the
AFO owner or operator, whether it is owned, rented or leased, and to which
manure or processed wastewater is, or might be, applied for crop, hay, pasture
production or other uses; and
      (3)   An explanation for prevailing winds and topography of the area.
   (B)   Meets Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) FOTG § III quality
criteria for Water Quality (nutrients, organics and sediments in surface and
groundwater) and Soil Erosion (sheet and rill, wind, ephemeral gully, classic
gully and irrigation induced natural resource concerns on the production area
and land treatment area);
   (C)   Mitigates, if feasible, any excessive air emissions and/or negative
impacts to air quality resource concerns that may result from practices
identified in the CNMP or from existing on-farm areas/activities;
   (D)   Complies with federal, state, tribal and local laws, regulations and
permit requirements; and
   (E)   Satisfies the owner/operator’s production objectives.
(Ord. 2022, passed - -)
§ 154.307 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Large concentrated animal feeding operations as defined by the Large
CAFO Act may be approved as a conditional use in the Intensive Agricultural (I-
A) Zone Districts within the unincorporated areas of the county.
   (B)   Applications for conditional use permits to operate such facilities in
the Intensive Agricultural (I-A) Zoning Districts shall proceed using the
processes, application fees and administrative remedies established in this
chapter.
(Ord. 2022, passed - -)
§ 154.308 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Unless specifically permitted by the County Commission, a CAFO or AFO
as outlined in division (A)(2) below shall not be approved in the
unincorporated areas of the county unless said operations comply with the
following.
      (1)   No CAFO shall be constructed within:
         (a)   Five miles or 26,400 feet of any municipal boundary;
         (b)   Three miles or 15,840 feet from any:
            1.   Existing dwelling;
            2.   Residential, residential estates or forest recreation area;
            3.   Health care facility;
            4.   Public area;
            5.   Education institution;
            6.   Religious institution; and
            7.   Commercial enterprise.
         (c)   One mile or 5,280 feet from any state highway or County Class B
Paved Road.
      (2)   AFOs consisting of dead animals, manure storage or other operations
with excessive air emissions and/or negative impacts to air and water quality
resource concerns shall be subject to the requirements of division (A)(1)
above.
      (3)   (a)   1.   Any CAFO or AFO as outlined in division (A)(2) above
shall satisfy the requirements of the county CAFO application prior to approval
of the County Planning Commission and County Commission.
            2.   The application shall consist of an overall development plan
including:
               a.   The distance from existing dwellings and municipal
boundaries;
               b.   The number and type of animal units;
               c.   A completed CNMP; and
               d.   A mitigation plan addressing negative impacts to adjacent
property values, local residents’ quality of life and how the CAFO plans to
mitigate said impacts.
         (b)   If a CAFO consists of multiple individuals and/or entities, all
individuals and/or entities shall be included in one CAFO Application and
divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3) and (A)(4) shall include the entire operation.
      (4)   CAFO and AFO operations must comply with divisions (A)(1), (A)(2)
and (A)(3) above and the following.
         (a)   Prevailing wind provision. Upon showing by a conditional use
permit applicant, the Planning Commission, by convincing evidence that there is
a historical prevailing wind, may off-set the separation distance sphere by as
much as 50%. However, the off-sets shall not decrease the area within the
separation distance. The shape and size of the separation area shall remain
constant. This provision allows only for the shifting of the separation area
sphere to the downwind direction by as much as 50%.
         (b)   Public health, safety, welfare and water/air quality. CAFO
operation owners must take actions to minimize water/air pollution and public
health and safety impacts from confinement and waste treatment facilities. To
accomplish this goal and as part of the conditional use permit required by all
CAFO and AFO operations, the CAFO operation owner shall be required to develop
and implement technically sound, economically feasible and site-specific
comprehensive nutrient management plans (CNMPs) in accordance with the latest
technical guidance of the natural resources conservation service. Additionally,
CAFO operations shall be required to obtain a state pollutant discharge
elimination system (UPDES) general approval for concentrated animal feeding
operations (Permit No. UTG080000), issued by the State Department of
Environmental Quality (DEQ). In the event that the State Department of
Environmental Quality is unable or unwilling to accept a UPDES permit
application, the County Planning Commission shall require as a condition of the
conditional use permit, standards equal to that required by UPDES Permit No.
UTG080000 and reviewed by an engineer selected and agreed upon mutually by the
applicant and the County Planning Commission, and paid for by the applicant.
All CAFO operations shall prepare a “Best Management Plan for Odor Control,”
required by this chapter, as part of the CUP application process. All CAFO
operations must use the best wastewater treatment technology available at the
time of permitting to protect the public health, safety, welfare and water/air
quality. Best wastewater treatment technology puts primary emphasis on the
prevention of groundwater contamination, control of air contaminants and odors.
The county recognizes that the swine industry, government and society are
taking steps to develop and implement new technology that will protect the
environment and the economy. The county has determined that open-air anaerobic
lagoons are not considered adequate wastewater treatment technology for large
swine operations. The intent of this provision is to require superior waste
disposal technologies to be described as “best available technology” as
accepted by the State Department of Environmental Quality.
   (B)   The County Planning Commission and County Commission shall approve a
CAFO application if said application satisfies all the requirements of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2022, passed - -)
§ 154.309 APPEALS.
   Any person with standing aggrieved by any decision of the Planning
Commission shall have the right to make such appeals as provided by the county
zoning ordinance or state law. Such appeals shall be based on the record.
Appeal of Planning Commission decisions shall be to the Board of County
Commissioners. Appeals shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Clerk’s
Office not more than 30 days after the decision by the Planning Commission. The
County Commission may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Planning
Commission. Appeal review by the Board of County Commissioners shall be
recorded in an open public meeting. County Commission decisions shall be final.
(Ord. 2022, passed - -)
§ 154.310 PERMITS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permits. From the effective date of this subchapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall not grant a permit, nor shall any officer of the county
grant any license or permit for the use of any land or the construction or
alteration of any building or structure on a parcel which would be in violation
of any provisions of this subchapter, or this chapter until the CAFO
application has been approved as required by this subchapter. Any license or
permit issued in conflict with such provisions shall be null and void.
   (B)   Fees. At the time of filing, a non-refundable fee shall be submitted,
payable to the county, in accordance with the currently adopted fee schedule as
adopted by the County Commission by resolution. Outside of any cost or fee
resulting from a CAFO application, including, but not limited to, inspections,
surveys, studies and the like, shall be the responsibility of the CAFO
applicant.
(Ord. 2022, passed - -)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee
or otherwise, who shall erect, construct or reconstruct or alter any building
or structure in any zone of the unincorporated area of the county without first
obtaining the appropriate permit from the County Building Inspector shall be
guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, and any person, firm or corporation, whether
as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who shall change the use of any
building or other structure or the use of any land within the unincorporated
territory of the county in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished and
fined pursuant to the provisions of the Utah Code Annotated. Such person, firm
or corporation violating this chapter or any portion thereof shall be deemed to
be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which such
violation is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or
corporation and shall be punishable as provided by law as a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person who is found guilty of violating any of §§
154.305 through
154.310, either by failing to do those acts required herein or by doing a
prohibited act, is guilty of an infraction. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 2022, passed - -; Ord. 2024-5-3, passed 5-13-2024)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   VACATIONS
      
II.   FRANCHISES
      
III.   PLANS
      
IV.   FUNDS
      
V.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: VACATIONS
 
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
2024-1-1  - -         Vacates roadways in the Henries Hollow area
1995-3-1  3-20-1995   Vacates roadway in Section 36, Township 26 South, Range
                      4.5 West, Salt Lake Base and Meridian
1997-7-1  7-7-1997    Vacates roadway in Section 21, Township 23 South, Range 4
                      East, Salt Lake Base and Meridian
1999-4-1  4-5-1999    Vacates roadway in Section 35, Township 26 South, Range 1
                      West, Salt Lake Base and Meridian
2013-11-1 11-12-2013  Vacates roadways for construction of the Richfield
                      Airport
                     
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No.  Date Passed  Description
                         Grants a telephone system, lines, stations and
96-9-16   9-16-1996      accessories franchise to South Central Utah Telephone
                         Association, Inc., for 15 years
2016-10-1 10-24-2016     Grants an electric light, heat and power franchise to
                         Garkane Energy Cooperative, Inc., for 50 years
                        
 
TABLE III: PLANS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed  Description
2022-9-1 - -            Adopts additional chapters of the Sevier County
                        Resource Management Plan
2019-6-1 6-24-2019      Adopts the Sigurd Solar Community Reinvestment Project
                        Area Plan
                       
 
TABLE IV: FUNDS
 
Ord. No.  Date Passed  Description
2018-12-1 12-10-2018     Establishes the Sevier County Public Land Corner
                         Preservation Fund
                        
 
TABLE V: ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed  Description
2024-5-1 5-13-2024      Zone change from A-1 to Industrial on parcels 4-187-19,
                        4-187-14, 4-126-6 and 4-126-5
                       
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Utah Code Annotated
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO UTAH CODE ANNOTATED
U.C.A. Cite Code Section
U.C.A. Cite                   Code Section
4-17-109                      91.01
4-25-205                      90.134
9-7-502                       31.15
9-7-509                       31.19
10-2-403                      154.076
10-9a-604                     153.021;
                              153.093
11-46-103(3)                  90.008;
                              90.046
15a-1-204(8)                  154.003
17-16-3                       30.060
17-16-11                      30.063
17-23-17                      153.095
Title 17, Chapter 27a         153.026
17-27a-103(13)(a)(b)          154.253
Title 17, Chapter 27a, Part 2 154.017
17-27a-505                    154.070
17-27a-507                    153.033
17-27a-605                    153.032
17-27a-605(4)                 153.003
17-27a-701                    154.016
17-27a-707                    154.052;
                              154.053
                              33.056;
Title 17, Chapter 31          33.057;
                              33.059
17-31-2(3)                    33.059
17-36-43                      33.125
Title 17, Chapter 41          154.170
17-41-301                     154.172
Title 17, Chapter 41, Part 4  154.180
17-50-340                     34.01
17C-1-201.5(1)                31.45
19-6-102                      50.23
23A-5-302                     90.009
23A-5-309                     90.009
23A-5-311                     90.009
Title 26, Chapter 21          154.254
26-21-2                       154.305
                              110.02;
                              112.01;
Title 32B                     112.15;
                              112.21;
                              112.23
41-6a-102                     90.110
41-6a-401                     90.005;
                              90.034
41-6a-407                     90.136
41-6a-1406                    70.14
Title 52, Chapter 4           31.18
52-4-1 et seq.                31.18
53-7-204                      113.03
53B-3-102                     154.305
Title 54                      33.004
54-3-27                       152.52
57-13b-102                    90.133;
                              90.134
Title 58, Chapter 22          153.095
Title 59                      33.100
59-1-401                      33.066
59-1-402                      33.066
59-2-102                      33.040
59-2-102(19)(d)               154.170
59-2-102(34)                  33.035;
                              33.036
59-2-103                      33.036;
                              33.040
59-2-103(3)                   33.035
59-2-103.5                    33.035
59-2-103.5(3)                 35.01
Title 59, Chapter 2, Part 5   153.003;
                              154.172
59-2-501—59-2-515           33.112
Title 59, Chapter 12          33.002;
                              33.004
                              33.019;
Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 1  33.059;
                              33.085
59-12-101                     33.019
59-12-101 et al               33.004
59-12-103(1)                  33.018
59-12-103(1)(i)               33.059
59-12-104                     33.018;
                              33.021
59-12-106                     33.059;
                              33.085
Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 2  33.059;
                              33.085
59-12-201 et seq.             33.020
59-12-205(2)                  33.020;
                              33.085
59-12-206                     33.020
                              33.056;
Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 3  33.057;
                              33.059
59-12-301(1)(a)(ii)           33.059
59-12-601 et seq.             33.081
Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 9  33.016
59-12-901                     33.016
59-12-902                     33.016
                              33.016;
Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 11 33.019;
                              33.020
59-12-1102                    33.020
59-28-103                     33.059
62A-2-109                     154.254
Title 62A, Chapter 5          154.254
                              152.50;
63A-16-601                    154.173;
                              154.175
Title 63C, Chapter 30         34.01
Title 63G, Chapter 2          31.18
63G-2-101 et seq.             31.18
67-1a-6.5                     31.45
72-3-108                      153.113
72-5-105(1)                   153.113
72-5-105(3)—(7)             153.113
72-7-501 et seq.              150.44
72-7-104                      152.99
72-7-303                      152.99
76-3-205                      10.99
76-3-301(1)(d)                10.99
76-3-301(1)(e)                10.99
76-3-302(3)                   10.99
76-3-302(4)                   10.99
76-10-803                     152.99
76-10-806                     152.99
78A-7-206                     30.045
78B-22-102                    10.99
78B-22-301                    10.99
                              
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2023 Code
Prior Code 2023 Code
2.04.010   30.015
2.08.060   30.030
2.12.010   30.045
2.12.020   30.046
2.12.030   30.999
2.16.010   31.01
2.16.020   31.02
2.16.030   31.03
2.16.040   31.04
2.20.010   31.30
2.20.020   31.31
2.20.030   31.32
2.20.040   31.33
3.04.010   33.001
3.04.020   33.002
3.04.030   33.003
3.04.040   33.004
3.04.050   33.999
3.16.010   33.125
8.04.010   50.40
8.04.020   50.41
8.04.030   50.42
8.04.040   50.99
8.16.010   50.01
8.16.020   50.02
8.16.030   50.03
8.16.040   50.99
8.20.010   91.01
10.08.010  70.01
10.08.020  70.02
10.08.030  70.03
10.08.040  70.04
10.08.050  70.05
10.08.060  70.06
10.08.070  70.07
10.08.080  70.08
10.08.090  70.09
10.08.100  70.10
10.08.110  70.11
10.08.120  70.12
10.08.130  70.13
10.08.140  70.14
           
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed  Code Section
Res. No.  Date Passed  Code Section
2004-4-1  - -            30.017
2007-12-1 12-2-2007      50.27
2009-3-1  3-2-2009       150.22
2010-12-1 12-8-2010      30.016
2014-7-1  7-14-2014      50.20—
                         50.26
2018-7-1  7-23-2018      71.01;
                         Chapter 71, Appendix A
                        
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed  Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed  Code Section
7-89-1    - -            31.01—
                         31.04
                         50.40—
10-88     - -            50.42;
                         50.99
                         33.001—
1990-1    - -            33.004;
                         33.999
1994-9-2  - -            30.045;
                         33.003
                         154.305—
2022      - -            154.310;
                         154.999
2022-9-1  - -            TSO, Table III
2024-1-1  - -            TSO, Table I
2024-10-1 - -            72.01
-         10-21-1985     33.125
-         11-18-1985     30.030
1995-2-1  2-21-1995      34.15—
                         34.20
1995-3-1  3-20-1995      TSO, Table I
                         130.01—
1996-5-1  5-5-1996       130.04;
                         130.99
96-9-16   9-16-1996      TSO, Table II
97-6-1    6-16-1997      33.015—
                         33.021
1997-7-1  7-7-1997       TSO, Table I
1999-4-1  4-5-1999       TSO, Table I
2000-3-1  3-20-2000      91.35—
                         91.48
2003-3-1  3-3-2002       33.035—
                         33.040
                         90.001—
                         90.015;
                         90.030—
                         90.046;
                         90.060;
2002-11-1 11-4-2002      90.061;
                         90.075—
                         90.078;
                         90.090—
                         90.095;
                         90.999
03-7-7    7-7-2003       33.080—
                         33.086
2004-5-1  5-17-2004      33.055—
                         33.066
2004-6-1  6-7-2004       31.15—
                         31.19
2008-4-1  4-21-2008      32.01—
                         32.05
2008-8-1  8-18-2008      150.21
2010-9-1  9-8-2010       33.056;
                         33.059
                         71.01—
2011-7-1  7-26-2011      71.04;
                         71.99;
                         Chapter 71, Appendix A
                         90.110—
2012-5-1  5-14-2012      90.115;
                         90.999
2012-5-2  5-14-2012      35.01—
                         35.04
2013-11-1 11-12-2013     TSO, Table I
2014-2-1  2-24-2014      150.20
2014-7-1  7-14-2014      50.15—
                         50.19
2016-3-1  3-28-2016      31.45—
                         31.48
2016-8-8  7-26-2016      150.08
2016-10-1 10-24-2016     TSO, Table II
2017-7-2  7-10-2017      30.001
2018-12-1 12-10-2018     TSO, Table IV
                         30.031;
2019-2-1  2-25-2019      30.060—
                         30.063
2019-6-1  6-24-2019      TSO, Table III
2020-9-1  9-14-2020      150.35—
                         150.47
                         110.01—
                         110.06;
                         110.20—
                         110.32;
                         110.45—
                         110.47;
                         110.99;
                         Chapter 110, Appendix A;
                         111.01—
                         111.06;
                         111.99;
                         112.01;
                         112.15—
2020-11-1 11-23-2020     112.23;
                         112.99;
                         113.01—
                         113.05;
                         113.99;
                         114.01;
                         114.02;
                         114.15—
                         114.18;
                         114.30—
                         114.34;
                         114.99;
                         115.01—
                         115.07;
                         115.99
                         151.01—
                         151.15;
                         151.30—
2020-12-1 12-14-2020     151.35;
                         151.50—
                         151.62;
                         151.99
2022-2-1  2-28-2022      150.01
2022-2-2  2-28-2022      150.02
2022-2-3  2-28-2022      150.03
2022-2-4  2-28-2022      150.04
2022-2-5  2-28-2022      150.05
2022-2-6  2-28-2022      150.06
2022-2-7  2-28-2022      150.07
2022-2-8  2-28-2022      33.100—
                         33.112
                         91.15—
2022-10-1 10-24-2022     91.24;
                         91.99
                         152.01—
2023-4-1  4-10-2023      152.30;
                         152.99
2023-4-2  4-24-2023      152.45—
                         152.52
2023-11-1 11-13-2023     34.01
2024-5-1  5-13-2024      TSO, Table V
                         153.001—
                         153.006;
                         153.020—
                         153.036;
                         153.050;
                         153.051;
                         153.065—
                         153.070;
2024-5-2  5-13-2024      153.085—
                         153.097;
                         153.110—
                         153.134;
                         153.145—
                         153.151;
                         153.165—
                         153.167;
                         153.999
                         154.001—
                         153.003;
                         154.015—
                         154.019;
                         154.030—
                         154.038;
                         154.050—
                         154.056;
                         154.070—
                         154.081;
                         154.095—
                         154.099;
                         154.110—
                         154.116;
2024-5-3  5-13-2024      154.130—
                         154.141;
                         154.155—
                         154.158;
                         154.170—
                         154.180;
                         154.195—
                         154.200;
                         154.215—
                         154.225;
                         154.240—
                         154.254;
                         154.265—254.272;
                         154.285—
                         154.294;
                         154.999
2024-5-4  5-13-2024      154.170—
                         154.180
                         90.130—
2024-6-1  5-13-2024      90.137;
                         90.999
2024-11-1 11-25-2024     Adopting Ordinance
2025-6-1  6-23-2025      33.059
                         154.071—
2025-11-1 - -            154.073,
                         154.082
                        
 
